<doc id="6675" wikidata="Q7169" url="?curid=6675" title="Conservatism">
<text>Conservatism is a cultural, social, and political philosophy and ideology that seeks to promote and preserve traditional institutions, customs, and values. The central tenets of conservatism may vary in relation to the culture and civilization in which it appears. In Western culture, depending on the particular nation, conservatives seek to promote and preserve a range of institutions, such as the nuclear family, organized religion, the military, the nation-state, property rights, rule of law, aristocracy, and monarchy. Conservatives tend to favor institutions and practices that enhance social order and historical continuity.

The 18th-century Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke, who opposed the French Revolution but supported the American Revolution, is credited as one of the forefathers of conservative thought in the 1790s along with Savoyard statesman Joseph de Maistre. The first established use of the term in a political context originated in 1818 with François-René de Chateaubriand during the period of Bourbon Restoration that sought to roll back the policies of the French Revolution and establish social order.

Conservatism has varied considerably as it has adapted itself to existing traditions and national cultures. Thus, conservatives from different parts of the world, each upholding their respective traditions, may disagree on a wide range of issues. One of the three major ideologies along with liberalism and socialism, conservatism is the dominant ideology in many nations across the world, including Hungary, India, Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Poland, Russia, Singapore, and South Korea. Historically associated with right-wing politics, the term has been used to describe a wide range of views. Conservatism may be either libertarian or authoritarian, populist or elitist, progressive or reactionary, moderate or extreme.

==Beliefs and principles==
Scholars have tried to define conservatism as a set of beliefs or principles. Political scientist Andrew Heywood argues that the five central beliefs of conservatism are tradition, human imperfection, organic society, authority/hierarchy, and property. Historian Russell Kirk developed five canons of conservatism in &quot;The Conservative Mind&quot; (1953):
* A belief in a transcendent order, which Kirk described variously as based in tradition, divine revelation, or natural law;
* An affection for the &quot;variety and mystery&quot; of human existence;
* A conviction that society requires orders and classes that emphasize natural distinctions;
* A belief that property and freedom are closely linked;
* A faith in custom, convention, and prescription, and a recognition that innovation must be tied to existing traditions and customs, which entails a respect for the political value of prudence.

Some political scientists, such as Samuel P. Huntington, have seen conservatism as situational. Under this definition, conservatives are seen as defending the established institutions of their time. According to Quintin Hogg, the chairman of the British Conservative Party in 1959: &quot;Conservatism is not so much a philosophy as an attitude, a constant force, performing a timeless function in the development of a free society, and corresponding to a deep and permanent requirement of human nature itself.&quot; Conservatism is often used as a generic term to describe a &quot;right-wing viewpoint occupying the political spectrum between [classical] liberalism and fascism&quot;.

Conservatism has been called a &quot;philosophy of human imperfection&quot; by political scientist Noël O&#x27;Sullivan, reflecting among its adherents a negative view of human nature and pessimism of the potential to improve it through &#x27;utopian&#x27; schemes. Thomas Hobbes, the &quot;intellectual godfather of the realist right&quot;, argued that the state of nature for humans was &quot;poor, nasty, brutish, and short&quot;, requiring centralized authority with royal sovereignty to guarantee law and order. Edmund Burke, often called the father of modern conservatism, believed that human beings are steeped in original sin and that society therefore needs traditional institutions, such as an established church and a landed aristocracy, in order to function.

===Tradition===
Despite the lack of a universal definition, certain themes can be recognized as common across conservative thought. According to Michael Oakeshott:

Such traditionalism may be a reflection of trust in time-tested methods of social organization, giving &#x27;votes to the dead&#x27;. Traditions may also be steeped in a sense of identity.

=== Hierarchy===
In contrast to the tradition-based definition of conservatism, some left-wing political theorists like Corey Robin define conservatism primarily in terms of a general defense of social and economic inequality. From this perspective, conservatism is less an attempt to uphold old institutions and more &quot;a meditation on—and theoretical rendition of—the felt experience of having power, seeing it threatened, and trying to win it back&quot;. On another occasion, Robin argues for a more complex relation:

In &quot;&quot; (2022), political philosopher Yoram Hazony argues that, in a traditional conservative community, members have importance and influence to the degree they are honored within the social hierarchy, which includes factors such as age, experience, and wisdom. Conservatives often glorify hierarchies, as demonstrated in an aphorism by conservative philosopher Nicolás Gómez Dávila: &quot;Hierarchies are celestial. In hell all are equal.&quot; The word hierarchy has religious roots and translates to &#x27;rule of a high priest.&#x27;

=== Authority ===
Authority is a core tenet of conservatism. More specifically, conservatives tend to believe in traditional authority. According to sociologist Max Weber, this form of authority is &quot;resting on an established belief in the sanctity of immemorial traditions and the legitimacy of those exercising authority under them&quot;. Philosopher Alexandre Kojève distinguishes between two different forms of traditional authority:

* The Authority of the Father—represented by actual fathers as well as conceptual fathers such as priests and monarchs.
* The Authority of the Master—represented by aristocrats and military commanders.

Sociologist Robert Nisbet acknowledges that the decline of traditional authority in the modern world is partly linked with the retreat of old institutions such as guild, order, parish, and family—institutions that formerly acted as intermediaries between the state and the individual. Philosopher Hannah Arendt argues that the modern world suffers an existential crisis with a &quot;dramatic breakdown of all traditional authorities,&quot; which are needed for the continuity of an established civilization.

== Historical background ==
Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke has been widely regarded as the philosophical founder of modern conservatism. He served as the private secretary to the Marquis of Rockingham and as official pamphleteer to the Rockingham branch of the Whig party. Together with the Tories, they were the conservatives in the late 18th century United Kingdom.

Burke&#x27;s views were a mixture of conservatism and republicanism. He supported the American Revolution of 1775–1783 but abhorred the violence of the French Revolution of 1789–1799. He accepted the conservative ideals of private property and the economics of Adam Smith, but he thought that capitalism should remain subordinate to the conservative social ethic and that the business class should be subordinate to aristocracy. He insisted on standards of honor derived from the medieval aristocratic tradition and saw the aristocracy as the nation&#x27;s natural leaders. That meant limits on the powers of the Crown, since he found the institutions of Parliament to be better informed than commissions appointed by the executive. He favored an established church, but allowed for a degree of religious toleration. Burke ultimately justified the social order on the basis of tradition: tradition represented the wisdom of the species, and he valued community and social harmony over social reforms.

Another form of conservatism developed in France in parallel to conservatism in Britain. It was influenced by Counter-Enlightenment works by philosophers such as Joseph de Maistre and Louis de Bonald. Many continental conservatives do not support separation of church and state, with most supporting state cooperation with the Catholic Church, such as had existed in France before the Revolution. Conservatives were also early to embrace nationalism, which was previously associated with liberalism and the Revolution in France. Another early French conservative, François-René de Chateaubriand, espoused a romantic opposition to modernity, contrasting its emptiness with the &#x27;full heart&#x27; of traditional faith and loyalty. Elsewhere on the continent, German thinkers Justus Möser and Friedrich von Gentz criticized the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen that came of the Revolution. Opposition was also expressed by German idealists such as Adam Müller and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, the latter inspiring both leftist and rightist followers.

Both Burke and Maistre were critical of democracy in general, though their reasons differed. Maistre was pessimistic about humans being able to follow rules, while Burke was skeptical about humans&#x27; innate ability to make rules. For Maistre, rules had a divine origin, while Burke believed they arose from custom. The lack of custom for Burke, and the lack of divine guidance for Maistre, meant that people would act in terrible ways. Both also believed that liberty of the wrong kind led to bewilderment and political breakdown. Their ideas would together flow into a stream of anti-rationalist, romantic conservatism, but would still stay separate. Whereas Burke was more open to argumentation and disagreement, Maistre wanted faith and authority, leading to a more illiberal strain of thought.

== Ideological variants ==
=== Authoritarian conservatism ===
Authoritarian conservatism refers to autocratic regimes that portray authority as absolute and unquestionable. Authoritarian conservative movements show strong devotion towards religion, tradition, and culture while also expressing fervent nationalism akin to other far-right nationalist movements. Examples of authoritarian conservative dictators include Marshal Philippe Pétain in France, Regent Miklós Horthy in Hungary, General Ioannis Metaxas in Greece, King Alexander I in Yugoslavia, Prime Minister António de Oliveira Salazar in Portugal, Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss in Austria, &quot;Generalissimo&quot; Francisco Franco in Spain, King Carol II in Romania, and Tsar Boris III in Bulgaria.

Authoritarian conservative movements were prominent in the same era as fascism, with which they sometimes clashed. Although both ideologies shared core values such as nationalism and had common enemies such as communism, there was nonetheless a contrast between the traditionalist and elitist nature of authoritarian conservatism and the revolutionary and populist nature of fascism—thus it was common for authoritarian conservative regimes to suppress rising fascist and Nazi movements. The hostility between the two ideologies is highlighted by the struggle for power in Austria, which was marked by the assassination of the ultra-Catholic dictator Engelbert Dollfuss by Austrian Nazis. Likewise, Croatian fascists assassinated King Alexander I of Yugoslavia. In Romania, as the fascist Iron Guard was gaining popularity and Nazi Germany was making advances on the European political stage, King Carol II ordered the execution of Corneliu Zelea Codreanu and other top-ranking Romanian fascists. The exiled German Emperor Wilhelm II was an enemy of Adolf Hitler and stated that Nazism made him ashamed to be a German for the first time in his life. The Catholic seminarian António de Oliveira Salazar, who was Portugal&#x27;s dictator for 40 years, denounced fascism and Nazism as a &quot;pagan Caesarism&quot; that did not recognize legal, religious, or moral limits.

Political scientist Seymour Martin Lipset has examined the class basis of right-wing extremist politics in the 1920–1960 era. He reports:
Edmund Fawcett states that fascism is totalitarian, populist, and anti-pluralist, whereas authoritarian conservatism is somewhat pluralist but most of all elitist and anti-populist. He concludes: &quot;The fascist is a nonconservative who takes anti-liberalism to extremes. The right-wing authoritarian is a conservative who takes fear of democracy to extremes.&quot;

During the Cold War, right-wing military dictatorships were prominent in Latin America, with most nations being under military rule by the middle of the 1970s. One example of this was General Augusto Pinochet, who ruled over Chile from 1973 to 1990. According to Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, military dictatorships arise in democratic systems in order to stop leftist parties from becoming totalitarian. The most recent instance occurred in Bolivia in 2024, when General Juan José Zúñiga staged a coup in order to overthrow the far-left president Luis Arce.

In the 21st century, the authoritarian style of government experienced a worldwide renaissance with conservative statesmen such as President Vladimir Putin in Russia, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in Turkey, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán in Hungary, Prime Minister Narendra Modi in India, and President Donald Trump in the United States.

=== Liberal conservatism ===
Liberal conservatism is a variant of conservatism that is strongly influenced by liberal stances. It incorporates the classical liberal view of minimal economic interventionism, meaning that individuals should be free to participate in the market and generate wealth without government interference. However, individuals cannot be thoroughly depended on to act responsibly in other spheres of life; therefore, liberal conservatives believe that a strong state is necessary to ensure law and order, and social institutions are needed to nurture a sense of duty and responsibility to the nation. Originally opposed to capitalism and the industrial revolution, the conservative ideology in many countries adopted economic liberalism, especially in the United States where this ideology is known as fiscal conservatism.

=== National conservatism ===
National conservatism prioritizes the defense of national and cultural identity, often based on a theory of the family as a model for the state. National conservatism is oriented towards upholding national sovereignty, which includes limited immigration and a strong national defense. In Europe, national conservatives are usually eurosceptics. Political philosopher Yoram Hazony has argued for national conservatism in his work &quot;The Virtue of Nationalism&quot; (2018).

=== Paternalistic conservatism ===

Paternalistic conservatism is a strand in conservatism which reflects the belief that societies exist and develop organically and that members within them have obligations towards each other. There is particular emphasis on the paternalistic obligation () of those who are privileged and wealthy to the poorer parts of society, which is consistent with principles such as duty, organicism, and hierarchy. Its proponents often stress the importance of a social safety net to deal with poverty, supporting limited redistribution of wealth along with government regulation of markets in the interests of both consumers and producers.
Paternalistic conservatism first arose as a distinct ideology in the United Kingdom under Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli&#x27;s &quot;One Nation&quot; Toryism. There have been a variety of one-nation conservative governments in the United Kingdom with exponents such as Prime Ministers Disraeli, Stanley Baldwin, Neville Chamberlain, Winston Churchill, and Harold Macmillan.

In 19th-century Germany, Chancellor Otto von Bismarck adopted a set of social programs, known as state socialism, which included insurance for workers against sickness, accident, incapacity, and old age. The goal of this conservative state-building strategy was to make ordinary Germans, not just the Junker aristocracy, more loyal to state and Emperor. Chancellor Leo von Caprivi promoted a conservative agenda called the &quot;New Course&quot;.

=== Progressive conservatism ===

In the United States, President Theodore Roosevelt has been identified as the main exponent of progressive conservatism. Roosevelt stated that he had &quot;always believed that wise progressivism and wise conservatism go hand in hand&quot;. The Republican administration of President William Howard Taft was progressive conservative, and he described himself as a believer in progressive conservatism. President Dwight D. Eisenhower also declared himself an advocate of progressive conservatism.

In Canada, a variety of conservative governments have been part of the Red Tory tradition, with Canada&#x27;s former major conservative party being named the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada from 1942 to 2003. Prime Ministers Arthur Meighen, R. B. Bennett, John Diefenbaker, Joe Clark, Brian Mulroney, and Kim Campbell led Red Tory federal governments.

=== Reactionary conservatism ===
Reactionary conservatism, also known as reactionism, opposes policies for the social transformation of society. In popular usage, reactionism refers to a staunch traditionalist conservative political perspective of a person who supports the status quo and opposes social, political, and economic change. Some adherents of conservatism, rather than opposing change, seek to return to the and tend to view the modern world in a negative light, especially concerning mass culture and secularism, although different groups of reactionaries may choose different traditional values to revive.

Some political scientists, such as Corey Robin, treat the words reactionary and conservative as synonyms. Others, such as Mark Lilla, argue that reactionism and conservatism are distinct worldviews. Francis Wilson defines conservatism as &quot;a philosophy of social evolution, in which certain lasting values are defended within the framework of the tension of political conflict&quot;.

Some reactionaries favor a return to the &quot;status quo ante&quot;, the previous political state of society, which that person believes possessed positive characteristics absent from contemporary society. An early example of a powerful reactionary movement was German Romanticism, which centred around concepts of organicism, medievalism, and traditionalism against the forces of rationalism, secularism, and individualism that were unleashed in the French Revolution.

In political discourse, being a reactionary is generally regarded as negative; Peter King observed that it is &quot;an unsought-for label, used as a torment rather than a badge of honor&quot;. Despite this, the descriptor has been adopted by intellectuals such as Italian esoteric traditionalist Julius Evola, Austrian monarchist Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Colombian political theologian Nicolás Gómez Dávila, and American historian John Lukacs.

=== Religious conservatism ===

Religious conservatism principally applies the teachings of particular religions to politics—sometimes by merely proclaiming the value of those teachings, at other times by having those teachings influence laws. In most democracies, political conservatism seeks to uphold traditional family structures and social values. Religious conservatives typically oppose abortion, LGBT behavior (or, in certain cases, identity), drug use, and sexual activity outside of marriage. In some cases, conservative values are grounded in religious beliefs, and conservatives seek to increase the role of religion in public life.

Christian democracy is a moderately conservative center-right ideology inspired by Christian social teaching. It originated as a reaction against the industrialization and urbanization associated with &quot;laissez-faire&quot;-capitalism. In post-war Europe, Christian-democratic parties dominated politics in several nations—the Christian People&#x27;s Party in Belgium, CDU and CSU in Germany, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil in Ireland, and Christian Democracy in Italy. Many post-war Europeans saw Christian democracy as a moderate alternative to the extremes of right-wing nationalism and left-wing communism. Christian-democratic parties were especially popular among European women, who often voted for these parties to a large extent due to their pro-family policies.

=== Social conservatism ===
Social conservatives believe that society is built upon a fragile network of relationships which need to be upheld through duty, traditional values, and established institutions; and that the government has a role in encouraging or enforcing traditional values or practices. A social conservative wants to preserve traditional morality and social mores, often by opposing what they consider radical policies or social engineering. Some social-conservative stances are the following:
* Support of a culture of life and opposition to the destruction of human life at any stage, including abortion, embryonic stem cells research, and euthanasia.
* Support of bioconservatism and opposition to both eugenics and transhumanism.
* Support of traditional family values, viewing the nuclear family model as society&#x27;s foundational unit.
* Support of a traditional definition of marriage as being one man and one woman, and opposition to expansion of civil marriage and child adoption to couples in same-sex relationships.
* Support of public morality with prohibition of drugs and prostitution and censorship of pornography.
* Support of organized religion and opposition to atheism and secularism, especially when militant.

=== Traditionalist conservatism ===

Traditionalist conservatism, also known as classical conservatism, emphasises the need for the principles of natural law, transcendent moral order, tradition, hierarchy, organicism, agrarianism, classicism, and high culture as well as the intersecting spheres of loyalty. Some traditionalists have embraced the labels reactionary and counter-revolutionary, defying the stigma that has attached to these terms since the Enlightenment. Having a hierarchical view of society, many traditionalist conservatives, including a few notable Americans such as Ralph Adams Cram, William S. Lind, and Charles A. Coulombe, defend the monarchical political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement.

== National variants ==
Conservative parties vary widely from country to country in the goals they wish to achieve. Both conservative and classical liberal parties tend to favor private ownership of property, in opposition to communist, socialist, and green parties, which favor communal ownership or laws regulating responsibility on the part of property owners. Where conservatives and liberals differ is primarily on social issues, where conservatives tend to reject behavior that does not conform to some social norm. Modern conservative parties often define themselves by their opposition to liberal or socialist parties. The United States usage of the term conservative is unique to that country, where its first modern usage was for pro-free enterprise opponents of the New Deal.

=== Asia ===
==== China ====
Chinese conservatism can be traced back to Confucius, whose philosophy is based on the values of loyalty, duty, and respect. He believed in a hierarchically organized society, modeled after the patriarchal family and headed by an absolute sovereign. However, Confucius also believed that the state should employ a meritocratic class of administrators and advisers, recruited by civil service exams. An alternative school of thought called Legalism argued that administrative discipline, not Confucian virtue, was crucial for the governance of the state.

For thousands of years, China was ruled by monarchs of various imperial dynasties. The Mandate of Heaven theory was invoked in order to legitimize the absolute authority of the Emperor. The Xinhai Revolution of 1911 overthrew Puyi, the last Chinese Emperor, and ushered in the Republic of China. Between 1927 and 1949, China was ruled by the nationalist party Kuomintang, which became right-wing after General Chiang Kai-shek purged communists from his party. Following his defeat in the Chinese Civil War by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), Chiang continued ruling the island of Taiwan until his death in 1975.

On the mainland, Chinese conservatism was vehemently opposed and suppressed by the CCP, especially during the Cultural Revolution. Members of the &quot;Five Black Categories&quot;—landlords, rich farmers, counter-revolutionaries, bad influencers, and right-wingers—were violently persecuted. Young people formed cadres of Red Guards throughout the country and sought to destroy the Four Olds: old ideas, old culture, old customs, and old habits—leading to the destruction of a large part of China&#x27;s cultural heritage, including historical artifacts and religious sites. Among them, some Red Guards who embraced local officials were pejoratively called &quot;conservatives&quot;.

In recent decades, Chinese conservatism has experienced a national revival. The ancient schools of Confucianism and Legalism have made a return into mainstream Chinese thought. Wang Huning, widely regarded as the grey eminence and chief ideologue of the CCP, has criticized aspects of Marxism and recommended that China combine its historical and modern values. General Secretary Xi Jinping has called traditional Chinese culture the &quot;soul&quot; of the nation and the &quot;foundation&quot; of the CCP. China has also developed a form of authoritarian capitalism in recent years, further breaking with the orthodox communism of its past. Neoauthoritarianism is a current of political thought that advocates a powerful state to facilitate market reforms. A major concern of modern Chinese conservatism is the preservation of traditional culture.

==== India ====

Indian politics has long been dominated by aristocratic and religious elites in one of the most hierarchically stratified nations in the world. In modern times, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by Narendra Modi, represents conservative politics. With over 170 million members as of October 2022, the BJP is by far the world&#x27;s largest political party. It promotes Hindu nationalism, quasi-fascist Hindutva, a hostile foreign policy against Pakistan, and a conservative social and fiscal policy. The BJP movement is both elitist and populist, attracting privileged groups that fear encroachment on their dominant positions as well as &quot;plebeian&quot; groups that seek recognition around a majoritarian rhetoric of cultural pride, social order, and national strength.

==== Iran ====

The Pahlavi dynasty replaced the Qajar dynasty in 1925 after a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot;, ruling Iran as a constitutional monarchy from 1925 until 1953 and then as an autocratic monarchy from the U.S.-instigated 1953 &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; until 1979. In an attempt to introduce reform from above while preserving traditional relations of hierarchy, the Shah, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi, launched the White Revolution in 1963 as a series of reforms of aggressive modernization, resulting in a great redistribution of wealth from the aristocratic landlord class to Iran&#x27;s working class and explosive economic growth in subsequent decades. The Iranian Revolution of 1979, supported by the clergy and the aristocracy, overthrew the monarchy and transformed the Imperial State of Iran to the Islamic Republic of Iran, thus replacing the progressive conservatism of the Shah monarchy with the reactionary conservatism of Islamic theocracy. The two main political camps in today&#x27;s Iran are the Principlists and the Reformists.
==== Israel ====
After the declaration of the State of Israel, politics was initially dominated by left-wing parties, but overtime right-wing parties became increasingly powerful with conservatism now being the dominant ideology. In the 2022 election, right-wing parties received 75 percent of the popular vote, a centrist party 17 percent and left-wing parties 7 percent, and the subsequent government has been variously described as the most right-wing, as well as the most religious, in Israeli history.

Israeli conservatism is based around upholding Jewish culture, promotion of forms of Zionism that tend to be more irredentist in nature (i.e. Revisionist and Neo-Zionism, which promote the idea of Greater Israel, as compared to Liberal or Labor Zionism, which are supportive of a two-state solution), promoting Israeli national security, maintaining the role of religion and the Rabbinate in the public sphere, support for the free market, and closer ties with the United States.
==== Japan ====
Conservatism has been the dominant political ideology throughout modern Japanese history. The right-wing conservative Liberal Democratic Party has been the dominant ruling party since 1955, often referred to as the 1955 System. Therefore, some experts consider Japan a democratically elected one-party state since the populace always votes for the same conservative party.

Up until 1868, Japan was largely a feudal state ruled by members of the aristocratic Samurai order with its &quot;bushido&quot; code of honor. In the Meiji era, a process of modernization, industrialization, and nationalization was initiated. Power struggles between the old decentralized Samurai aristocracy and the new centralized imperial monarchy culminated in the Satsuma Rebellion in 1877 with imperial victory. During the era of World War II, Japan was transformed into an ultranationalist, imperialist state that conquered much of east and southeast Asia. Contemporary conservatives, notably during the second premiership of Shinzo Abe from 2012 to 2020, advocate for revising the country&#x27;s constitution, particularly Article 9 which renounces war and prohibits Japan from maintaining a military.

Japan is the oldest continuing monarchy in the history of mankind, with Naruhito currently serving as Emperor of Japan. In accordance with the principle of monarchy, Japanese society has an authoritarian family structure with a traditionalist fatherly authority that is primarily transferred to the oldest son.

Anti-communist and anti-Chinese sentiment is widespread in Japan. In 1925 the Peace Preservation Law was enacted with the aim of allowing the Special Higher Police to suppress socialists and communists more effectively. In 1936 the Empire of Japan and Nazi Germany opposed the Communist International by signing the Anti-Comintern Pact—a pact later joined by the Kingdom of Italy, Francoist Spain, and the Kingdom of Hungary. The Japanese term &quot;tenkō&quot; refers to the coerced ideological conversions of Japanese socialists who were induced to renounce leftist ideology and enthusiastically embrace the monarchist, capitalist, and imperialist ideology favored by the state. In the late 1940s and early 1950s, during the Red Purge, tens of thousands of supporters of left-wing groups, especially those affiliated with the Japanese Communist Party, were removed from their jobs in government, schools, and universities.

&quot;Nippon Kaigi&quot; is an ultraconservative and ultranationalist organization that exerts a significant influence over contemporary Japanese politics. In 2014, a majority of National Diet members were part of the group. Many ministers and a few prime ministers, including Fumio Kishida, Tarō Asō, Shinzō Abe, and Yoshihide Suga, have been members.

A highly developed and industrialized nation, Japan is more capitalistic and Western-oriented than other Asian nations. Therefore, some experts consider Japan part of the Western world. In 1960 a treaty was signed that established a military alliance between the United States and Japan. However, the ultraconservative reactionary traditionalist Yukio Mishima feared that his fellow Japanese were too enamored of modernization and Western-style capitalism to protect traditional Japanese culture.
==== Singapore ====

Singapore&#x27;s conservative party is the People&#x27;s Action Party (PAP), which promotes conservative values in the form of Asian democracy and Asian values. These values include: nation before community and society above self; family as the basic unit of society; regard and community support for the individual; consensus instead of contention, and racial and religious harmony. They are a contrast against the &quot;more Westernised, individualistic, and self-centred outlook on life&quot; and uphold the &quot;traditional Asian ideas of morality, duty and society&quot;.

The PAP is currently in government and has been since independence in 1965. Having governed for over six decades, the PAP is the longest uninterrupted governing party among modern multiparty parliamentary democracies. Singapore is a city state and has a reputation as a nanny state, owing to the considerable number of government regulations and restrictions on its citizens&#x27; lives. Former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew, the architect of the modern Singapore, observed: &quot;If Singapore is a nanny state, then I am proud to have fostered one&quot;. In an interview in the &quot;Straits Times&quot; in 1987, Lee said:

I am often accused of interfering in the private lives of citizens. Yes, if I did not, had I not done that, we wouldn&#x27;t be here today. And I say without the slightest remorse, that we wouldn&#x27;t be here, we would not have made economic progress, if we had not intervened on very personal matters–who your neighbour is, how you live, the noise you make, how you spit, or what language you use. We decide what is right. Never mind what the people think.
==== South Korea ====
South Korean army general Park Chung Hee seized power in the May 16 coup of 1961, after which he was elected as the third President of South Korea. He introduced the highly authoritarian Yushin Constitution, ushering in the Fourth Republic. He ruled the country as a dictator until his assassination by a fellow army general in 1979.

Right-wing conservative parties have dominated South Korean politics for most of its modern history, while the main opposition parties have been moderate centrist and not left-wing. South Korea&#x27;s major conservative party, the People Power Party, has changed its form throughout its history. First it was the Democratic-Liberal Party and its first head was Roh Tae-woo, who was the first President of the Sixth Republic of South Korea. Democratic-Liberal Party was founded by the merging of Roh Tae-woo&#x27;s Democratic Justice Party, Kim Young Sam&#x27;s Reunification Democratic Party and Kim Jong-pil&#x27;s New Democratic Republican Party. Kim Young-sam became the fourteenth President of Korea.

When the conservative party was beaten by the opposition party in the general election, it changed its form again to follow the party members&#x27; demand for reforms. It became the New Korea Party, but it changed again one year later since the President Kim Young-sam was blamed by the citizen for the International Monetary Fund. It changed its name to Grand National Party (GNP). Since the late Kim Dae-jung assumed the presidency in 1998, GNP had been the opposition party until Lee Myung-bak won the presidential election of 2007.
=== Europe===

European conservatism has taken many different expressions. Early forms were often reactionary and romantic, idealizing the Middle Ages and its feudal social order with aristocratic rule and an established church. In the late 19th century, conservatism became increasingly progressive, adopting capitalism and espousing nationalism—which up until now had been anti-traditionalist and anti-imperialist forces. During the first half of the 20th century, as socialist movements were becoming more powerful and the Tsarist regime was overthrown in the Russian Revolution, conservatism in Austria, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Romania transformed into the far-right, becoming more authoritarian and extreme. In the post-war era, conservatism assumed a more moderate form with center-right Christian-democratic parties dominating politics across Western Europe throughout the rest of the century, although the authoritarian regimes of Francoist Spain and Salazarian Portugal survived for a few more decades. Towards the end of the century, after the collapse of the Soviet Union, conservatism took on a more liberal form. In recent decades, nationalist parties have been on the rise across Europe in opposition to globalism.

European nations, with the exception of Switzerland, have had a long monarchical tradition throughout history. Today, existing monarchies are Andorra, Belgium, Denmark, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. Some reactionary movements in republican nations, such as in France, the Monarchist National Party in Italy, and the Black-Yellow Alliance in Austria, have advocated a restoration of the monarchy.
==== Austria ====

Austrian conservatism originated with Prince Klemens von Metternich, who was the architect behind the monarchist and imperialist Conservative Order that was enacted at the Congress of Vienna in the aftermath of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars. The goal was to establish a European balance of power that could guarantee peace and suppress republican and nationalist movements. During its existence, the Austrian Empire was the third most populous monarchy in Europe after the Russian Empire and the United Kingdom. Following its defeat in the Austro-Prussian War, it transformed into the Austro-Hungarian Empire, which was the most diverse state in Europe with twelve nationalities living under a unifying monarch. The Empire was fragmented in the aftermath of World War I, ushering in the democratic First Austrian Republic.

The Austrian Civil War in 1934 saw a series of skirmishes between the right-wing government and socialist forces. When the insurgents were defeated, the government declared martial law and held mass trials, forcing leading socialist politicians, such as Otto Bauer, into exile. The conservatives banned the Social Democratic Party and replaced parliamentary democracy with a corporatist and clerical constitution. The Patriotic Front, into which the paramilitary  and the Christian Social Party were merged, became the only legal political party in the resulting authoritarian regime, the Federal State of Austria.

While having close ties to Fascist Italy, which was still a monarchy as well as a fellow Catholic nation, Austrian conservatives harbored strong anti-Prussian and anti-Nazi sentiment. Austria&#x27;s most prominent conservative intellectual, the Catholic aristocrat Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, published several books in which he interpreted Nazism as a leftist, ochlocratic, and demagogic ideology opposed to the traditional rightist ideals of aristocracy, monarchy, and Christianity. Austria&#x27;s dictator Engelbert Dollfuss saw Nazism as another form of totalitarian communism, and he saw Adolf Hitler as the German version of Joseph Stalin. The conservatives banned the Austrian Nazi Party and arrested many of its activists, causing tens of thousands of Nazi sympathisers to flee to Nazi Germany in order to avoid persecution. A few months later, Nazi forces initiated the July Putsch and managed to assassinate Chancellor Dollfuss in an attempt to overthrow the conservative government. In response, Benito Mussolini mobilized a part of the Italian army on the Austrian border and threatened Hitler with war in the event of a German invasion of Austria. In 1938, when Nazi Germany annexed Austria in the , conservative groups were suppressed: members of the Austrian nobility and the Catholic clergy were arrested and their properties were confiscated. Otto von Hapsburg, the last Crown Prince of Austria-Hungary, was a fervent anti-Nazi, for which reason the Nazi regime ordered that he was to be executed immediately if caught.

Following World War II and the return to democracy, Austrian conservatives and socialists alike abandoned their extremism, believing in political compromise and seeking consensus in the middle. The conservatives formed the Austrian People&#x27;s Party, which has been the major conservative party in Austria ever since. In contemporary politics, the party was led by Sebastian Kurz, whom the nicknamed the &quot;young Metternich&quot;.

==== Belgium ====
Having its roots in the conservative Catholic Party, the Christian People&#x27;s Party retained a conservative edge through the 20th century, supporting the King in the Royal Question, supporting nuclear family as the cornerstone of society, defending Christian education, and opposing euthanasia. The Christian People&#x27;s Party dominated politics in post-war Belgium. In 1999, the party&#x27;s support collapsed, and it became the country&#x27;s fifth-largest party. Since 2014, the Flemish nationalist and conservative New Flemish Alliance is the largest party in Belgium.

==== Denmark ====

Danish conservatism emerged with the political grouping &quot;Højre&quot; (literally &quot;Right&quot;), which due to its alliance with King Christian IX of Denmark dominated Danish politics and formed all governments from 1865 to 1901. When a constitutional reform in 1915 stripped the landed gentry of political power, Højre was succeeded by the Conservative People&#x27;s Party of Denmark, which has since then been the main Danish conservative party. Another Danish conservative party was the Free Conservatives, who were active between 1902 and 1920. Traditionally and historically, conservatism in Denmark has been more populist and agrarian than in Sweden and Norway, where conservatism has been more elitist and urban.

The Conservative People&#x27;s Party led the government coalition from 1982 to 1993. The party had previously been member of various governments from 1916 to 1917, 1940 to 1945, 1950 to 1953, and 1968 to 1971. The party was a junior partner in governments led by the Liberals from 2001 to 2011 and again from 2016 to 2019. The party is preceded by 11 years by the Young Conservatives (KU), today the youth movement of the party.

The Conservative People&#x27;s Party had a stable electoral support close to 15 to 20% at almost all general elections from 1918 to 1971. In the 1970s it declined to around 5%, but then under the leadership of Poul Schlüter reached its highest popularity level ever in 1984, receiving 23% of the votes. Since the late 1990s the party has obtained around 5 to 10% of the vote. In 2022, the party received 5.5% of the vote.

Conservative thinking has also influenced other Danish political parties. In 1995, the Danish People&#x27;s Party was founded, based on a mixture of conservative, nationalist, and social-democratic ideas. In 2015, the party New Right was established, professing a national-conservative attitude.

The conservative parties in Denmark have always considered the monarchy a central institution in Denmark.

==== Finland ====
The conservative party in Finland is the National Coalition Party. The party was founded in 1918, when several monarchist parties united. Although right-wing in the past, today it is a moderate liberal-conservative party. While advocating economic liberalism, it is committed to the social market economy.

There has been strong anti-Russian and anti-communist sentiment in Finland due to its long history of being invaded and conquered by Russia and the Soviet Union. In the Finnish Civil War of 1918, White Finland defeated the leftist Red Finland. The Finnish Defence Forces and the paramilitary White Guard, led by Baron Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim, were assisted by the German Imperial Army at the request of the Finnish civil government. The far-right Lapua movement continued to terrorize communists in post-war Finland, but it was banned after a failed &quot;coup d&#x27;etat&quot; attempt in 1932.

==== France ====
Early conservatism in France focused on the rejection of the secularism of the French Revolution, support for the role of the Catholic Church, and the restoration of the monarchy. After the first fall of Napoleon in 1814, the House of Bourbon returned to power in the Bourbon Restoration. Louis XVIII and Charles X, brothers of the executed King Louis XVI, successively mounted the throne and instituted a conservative government intended to restore the proprieties, if not all the institutions, of the .

After the July Revolution of 1830, Louis Philippe I, a member of the more liberal Orléans branch of the House of Bourbon, proclaimed himself as King of the French. The Second French Empire saw an Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 1852 to 1870. The Bourbon monarchist cause was on the verge of victory in the 1870s, but then collapsed because the proposed king, Henri, Count of Chambord, refused to fly the tri-colored flag. The turn of the century saw the rise of —an ultraconservative, reactionary, nationalist, and royalist movement that advocated a restoration of the monarchy.

Tensions between Christian rightists and secular leftists heightened in the 1890–1910 era, but moderated after the spirit of unity in fighting World War I. An authoritarian form of conservatism characterized the Vichy regime of 1940–1944 under Marshal Philippe Pétain with heightened antisemitism, opposition to individualism, emphasis on family life, and national direction of the economy.

Conservatism has been the major political force in France since World War II, although the number of conservative groups and their lack of stability defy simple categorization. Following the war, conservatives supported Gaullist groups and parties, espoused nationalism, and emphasised tradition, social order, and the regeneration of France. Unusually, post-war conservatism in France was formed around the personality of a leader—army general and aristocrat Charles de Gaulle who led the Free French Forces against Nazi Germany—and it did not draw on traditional French conservatism, but on the Bonapartist tradition. Gaullism in France continues under The Republicans (formerly Union for a Popular Movement), a party previously led by Nicolas Sarkozy, who served as President of France from 2007 to 2012 and whose ideology is known as Sarkozysm.

In 2021, the French intellectual Éric Zemmour founded the nationalist party Reconquête, which has been described as a more rightist version of Marine Le Pen&#x27;s National Rally.

==== Germany ====
Germany was the heart of the reactionary Romantic movement that swept Europe in the aftermath of the progressive Age of Enlightenment and its culmination in the anti-conservative French Revolution. German Romanticism was deeply organicist and medievalist, finding expression philosophically among the Old Hegelians and judicially in the German historical school. Prominent conservative exponents were Friedrich Schlegel, Novalis, Wilhelm Heinrich Wackenroder, Friedrich Carl von Savigny, and Adam Müller.

During the second half of the 19th century, German conservatism developed alongside nationalism, culminating in Germany&#x27;s victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War, the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871, and the simultaneous rise of ”Iron Chancellor” Otto von Bismarck on the European political stage. Bismarck&#x27;s balance of power model maintained peace in Europe for decades at the end of the 19th century. His &quot;revolutionary conservatism&quot; was a conservative state-building strategy, based on class collaboration and designed to make ordinary Germans—not just the Junker aristocracy—more loyal to state and Emperor. He created the modern welfare state in Germany in the 1880s. According to scholars, his strategy was: 

Bismarck also enacted universal manhood suffrage in the new German Empire in 1871. He became a great hero to German conservatives, who erected many monuments to his memory after he left office in 1890.

During the interwar period—after Germany&#x27;s defeat in World War I, the abdication of Emperor Wilhelm II, and the introduction of parliamentary democracy—German conservatives experienced a cultural crisis and felt uprooted by a progressively modernist world. This angst was expressed philosophically in the Conservative Revolution movement with prominent exponents such as historian Oswald Spengler, jurist Carl Schmitt, and author Ernst Jünger. The major conservative party of this era was the reactionary German National People&#x27;s Party, who advocated a restored monarchy.

With the rise of Nazism in 1933, traditional agrarian movements faded and were supplanted by a more command-based economy and forced social integration. Adolf Hitler succeeded in garnering the support of many German industrialists; but prominent traditionalists, including military officers Claus von Stauffenberg and Henning von Tresckow, pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer, Bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen, and monarchist Carl Friedrich Goerdeler, openly and secretly opposed his policies of euthanasia, genocide, and attacks on organized religion. The former German Emperor Wilhelm II was highly critical of Hitler, writing in 1938:

Post-World War II Germany developed a special form of conservatism called ordoliberalism, which is centred around the concept of ordered liberty. Neither socialist nor capitalist, it promotes a compromise between state and market, and argues that the national culture of a country must be taken into account when implementing economic policies. Alexander Rüstow and Wilhelm Röpke were two prominent exponents of this economic theory, and its implementation is largely credited as a reason behind the German miracle—the rapid reconstruction and development of the war-wrecked economies of West Germany and Austria after World War II.

More recently, the work of conservative Christian Democratic Union leader and Chancellor Helmut Kohl helped bring about German reunification, along with the closer European integration in the form of the Maastricht Treaty. Today, German conservatism is often associated with politicians such as Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose tenure was marked by attempts to save the common European currency (Euro) from demise. The German conservatives were divided under Merkel due to the refugee crisis in Germany, and many conservatives in the CDU/CSU opposed the immigration policies developed under Merkel. The 2020s also saw the rise of the right-wing populist Alternative for Germany.

==== Greece ====

The main inter-war conservative party was called the People&#x27;s Party (PP), which supported constitutional monarchy and opposed the republican Liberal Party. Both parties were suppressed by the authoritarian, arch-conservative, and royalist 4th of August Regime of General Ioannis Metaxas in 1936–1941. The PP was able to re-group after World War II as part of a United Nationalist Front which achieved power campaigning on a simple anti-communist, nationalist platform during the Greek Civil War in 1946–1949. However, the vote received by the PP declined during the so-called &quot;Centrist Interlude&quot; in 1950–1952.

In 1952, Marshal Alexandros Papagos created the Greek Rally as an umbrella for the right-wing forces. The Greek Rally came to power in 1952 and remained the leading party in Greece until 1963. After Papagos&#x27; death in 1955, it was reformed as the National Radical Union under Konstantinos Karamanlis. Right-wing governments backed by the palace and the army overthrew the Centre Union government in 1965 and governed the country until the establishment of the far-right Greek junta (1967–1974). After the regime&#x27;s collapse in August 1974, Karamanlis returned from exile to lead the government and founded the New Democracy party. The new conservative party had four objectives: to confront Turkish expansionism in Cyprus, to reestablish and solidify democratic rule, to give the country a strong government, and to make a powerful moderate party a force in Greek politics.

The Independent Greeks, a newly formed political party in Greece, has also supported conservatism, particularly national and religious conservatism. The Founding Declaration of the Independent Greeks strongly emphasises the preservation of the Greek state and its sovereignty, the Greek people, and the Greek Orthodox Church.

====Hungary====

The dominance of the political right of inter-war Hungary, after the collapse of a short-lived communist regime, was described by historian István Deák:

Horthy&#x27;s authoritarian conservative regime suppressed communists and fascists alike, banning the Hungarian Communist Party as well as the fascist Arrow Cross Party. The fascist leader Ferenc Szálasi was repeatedly imprisoned at Horthy&#x27;s command.

Since 2010, Viktor Orbán of the Fidesz party has been Prime Minister of Hungary. Orbán&#x27;s positions are a blend of soft Euroscepticism, right-wing populism, and national conservatism.

==== Iceland ====
Founded in 1924 as the Conservative Party, Iceland&#x27;s Independence Party adopted its current name in 1929 after the merger with the Liberal Party. From the beginning, they have been the largest vote-winning party, averaging around 40%. They combined liberalism and conservatism, supported nationalization of infrastructure, and advocated class collaboration. While mostly in opposition during the 1930s, they embraced economic liberalism, but accepted the welfare state after the war and participated in governments supportive of state intervention and protectionism. Unlike other Scandanivian conservative (and liberal) parties, it has always had a large working-class following. After the financial crisis in 2008, the support level has dropped to 20–25%.

==== Ireland ====
Conservatism in Ireland historically revolved around social policies relating to the Catholic Church as well as a commitment to Irish republicanism, Irish neutrality, anti-abortion, anti-communism, pro-Europeanism, and, more recently, anti-immigration.

During the presidency of Éamon de Valera, a broad array of Catholic social policies were enacted, mostly with the goals of winning devout, rural, conservative voters, most of whom welocmed these policies. Such policies included writing into the Constitution of Ireland that a woman&#x27;s place was in the home, prohibiting the importation or sale of contraceptives, and enactment of strict censorship laws.

Fianna Fáil and its historic rival, Fine Gael, are both considered historically to be conservative parties. However, there are some differences: mainly, Fianna Fáil is usually considered more republican, while Fine Gael tends to be more classically-liberal.

Starting in 2022, a series of protests calling for a reduction in illegal immigration have become more commonplace in Ireland, mostly over the status of temporary asylum seeker shelters were unable to accommodate the more than 65,000 refugees.

==== Italy ====
After the unification of Italy, the country was governed successively by the Historical Right, which represented conservative, liberal-conservative, and conservative-liberal positions, and the Historical Left. After World War I, the country saw the emergence of its first mass parties, notably including the Italian People&#x27;s Party (PPI), a Christian-democratic party that sought to represent the Catholic majority, which had long refrained from politics. The PPI and the Italian Socialist Party decisively contributed to the loss of strength and authority of the old liberal ruling class, which had not been able to structure itself into a proper party: the Liberal Union was not coherent and the Italian Liberal Party came too late.

In 1921, Benito Mussolini founded the National Fascist Party (PNF), and the next year, through the March on Rome, he was appointed Prime Minister by King Victor Emmanuel III. Fascism originated as a populist, revolutionary, anti-royalist, anti-clerical, anti-capitalist, and anti-conservative ideology, viewed by many socialists as a leftist heresy rather than a rightist opponent, but it transformed and became distinctly right-wing when it made compromises with the conservative establishment in order to consolidate authority and suppress communist movements. Mussolini commented on the dynamic pragmatism of fascism:

In 1926, all parties were dissolved except the PNF, which remained the only legal party in the Kingdom of Italy until the fall of the regime in July 1943. By 1945, fascists were discredited, disbanded, and outlawed, while Mussolini was executed in April that year. The 1946 Italian institutional referendum concerned the fate of the monarchy. While southern Italy and parts of northern Italy were royalist, other parts, especially in central Italy, were predominantly republican. The outcome was 54–46% in favor of a republic, leading to a collapse of the monarchy.

After World War II, the center-right was dominated by the centrist party Christian Democracy (DC), which included both conservative and center-left elements. With its landslide victory over the Italian Socialist Party and the Italian Communist Party in 1948, the political center was in power. In Denis Mack Smith&#x27;s words, it was &quot;moderately conservative, reasonably tolerant of everything which did not touch religion or property, but above all Catholic and sometimes clerical&quot;. DC dominated politics until its dissolution in 1994, having governed for 47 out of 52 years. Among DC&#x27;s frequent allies there was the conservative-liberal Italian Liberal Party. At the right of DC stood parties like the royalist Monarchist National Party and the post-fascist Italian Social Movement.

In 1994, entrepreneur and media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi founded the liberal-conservative party (FI). He won three elections in 1994, 2001, and 2008, governing the country for almost ten years as prime minister. FI formed a coalitions with several parties, including the national-conservative National Alliance (AN), heir of the MSI, and the regionalist Lega Nord (LN). FI was briefly incorporated, along with AN, in The People of Freedom party and later revived in the new Forza Italia. After the 2018 general election, the LN and the Five Star Movement formed a populist government, which lasted about a year. In the 2022 general election, a center-right coalition came to power, this time dominated by Brothers of Italy (FdI), a new national-conservative party born on the ashes of AN. Consequently, FdI, the re-branded Lega, and FI formed a government under FdI leader Giorgia Meloni.

==== Luxembourg ====
Luxembourg&#x27;s major conservative party, the Christian Social People&#x27;s Party, was formed as the Party of the Right in 1914 and adopted its present name in 1945. It was consistently the largest political party in Luxembourg and dominated politics throughout the 20th century.

==== Netherlands ====
Liberalism has been strong in the Netherlands. Therefore, rightist parties are often liberal-conservative or conservative-liberal. One example is the People&#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy. Even the right-wing populist and far-right Party for Freedom, which dominated the 2023 election, supports liberal positions such as gay rights, abortion, and euthanasia.

==== Norway ====
The Conservative Party of Norway (Norwegian: , literally &quot;Right&quot;) was formed by the old upper-class of state officials and wealthy merchants to fight the populist democracy of the Liberal Party, but it lost power in 1884, when parliamentarian government was first practiced. It formed its first government under parliamentarism in 1889 and continued to alternate in power with the Liberals until the 1930s, when Labour became the dominant party. It has elements both of paternalism, stressing the responsibilities of the state, and of economic liberalism. It first returned to power in the 1960s. During Kåre Willoch&#x27;s premiership in the 1980s, much emphasis was laid on liberalizing the credit and housing market and abolishing the NRK TV and radio monopoly, while supporting law and order in criminal justice and traditional norms in education.

==== Poland ====

The dominant conservative party in Poland is Law and Justice (PiS). Polish conservatism is characterized by social and cultural conservatism, patriotism, adherence to Catholic social teaching, and cooperation with the Catholic Church. Contemporary Polish conservatives believe in Atlanticism and strong relations with the United States, meanwhile taking a stand against Russia.

PiS has taken a populist and statist approach to economics, expanding regulations, state control over industries and media, greatly expanding social welfare and applying Keynesian-esque &quot;anti-crisis shields&quot;, differentiating itself from previous conservative political parties and movements like AWS or Endecja which believed in economic liberalism. Another difference to AWS is PiS&#x27; euroscepticism. Though not opposing European Union membership, PiS pursues an assertive policy of conflict with the European Commission, which, in reaction, took a hostile stance against PiS. In the European Parliament, PiS belongs to the European Conservatives and Reformists group. Liberal media in Poland is vehemently biased against PiS and opposed to its rule, often calling it authoritarian. Liberal scholar Antoni Dudek rejects giving PiS the authoritarian label, suggesting that PiS rejects the ideals of liberal democracy and instead embraces a &quot;national democratic&quot; or illiberal democratic form of governance.

In the preceding interwar period, Poland&#x27;s conservative movement was split between the &quot;Old&quot; Galician and Kresy conservatives, usually landowners, which formed minor parties like the State Unity in the Kresy, and the &quot;New Conservative&quot; movement of National Democracy (Endecja) under Roman Dmowski, which was oriented around the urban intelligentsia and petite bourgeoise. The latter sometimes cooperated with the right-wing factions of the Polish peasant movement, affiliated under the PSL &quot;Piast&quot; that cooperated with Endecja, creating a common government under the Lanckorona Pact, although the peasant movement was still not a part of the conservative movement. Endecja espoused Russophilia and believed in cooperation with the Russian Empire and later the White Army. They also advocated maintenance of democracy, civic nationalism, and parliamentarism, opposing Józef Piłsudski&#x27;s BBWR&#x27;s attempts at empowering the presidency and later its absolute seizure of power. In contrast, many Old Conservatives, such as Stanisław Cat-Mackiewicz, found themselves as allies of Marshal Piłsudski. Endecja rejected Romanticism and Messianism, concepts which were important to the Old Conservatives.

==== Russia ====
Russian conservatism has experienced a revival in recent decades. Under Vladimir Putin, the dominant leader since 1999, Russia has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural, and political matters, both at home and abroad. Putin has criticized globalism and economic liberalism, claiming that &quot;liberalism has become obsolete&quot; and that the vast majority of people in the world oppose multiculturalism, free immigration, and rights for LGBT people. Russian conservatism is special in some respects as it supports a mixed economy with economic intervention, combined with a strong nationalist sentiment and social conservatism which is largely populist. As a result, Russian conservatism opposes right-libertarian ideals such as the aforementioned concept of economic liberalism found in other conservative movements around the world.

Putin has also promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers. For example, the Izborsky Club, founded in 2012 by Alexander Prokhanov, stresses Russian nationalism, the restoration of Russia&#x27;s historical greatness, and systematic opposition to liberal ideas and policies. Vladislav Surkov, a senior government official, has been one of the key ideologues during Putin&#x27;s presidency.

In cultural and social affairs, Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church. Under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, the Church has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine. More broadly, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reports in September 2016 how the Church&#x27;s policy prescriptions support the Kremlin&#x27;s appeal to social conservatives:

==== Sweden ====
In the early 19th century, Swedish conservatism developed alongside Swedish Romanticism. The historian Erik Gustaf Geijer, an exponent of Gothicism, glorified the Viking Age and the Swedish Empire, and the idealist philosopher Christopher Jacob Boström became the chief ideologue of the official state doctrine, which dominated Swedish politics for almost a century. Other influential Swedish conservative Romantics were Esaias Tegnér and Per Daniel Amadeus Atterbom.

Early parliamentary conservatism in Sweden was explicitly elitist. The Conservative Party was formed in 1904 with one major goal in mind: to stop the advent of universal suffrage, which they feared would result in socialism. Yet, it was a Swedish admiral, the conservative politician Arvid Lindman, who first extended democracy by enacting male suffrage, despite the protests of more traditionalist voices, such as the later prime minister, the arch-conservative and authoritarian statesman Ernst Trygger, who railed at progressive policies such as the abolition of the death penalty.

Once a democratic system was in place, Swedish conservatives sought to combine traditional elitism with modern populism. Sweden&#x27;s most renowned political scientist, the conservative politician Rudolf Kjellén, coined the terms geopolitics and biopolitics in relation to his organic theory of the state. He also developed the corporatist-nationalist concept of (&#x27;the people&#x27;s home&#x27;), which became the single most powerful political concept in Sweden throughout the 20th century, although it was adopted by the Social Democratic Party who gave it a more socialist interpretation.

After a brief grand coalition between Left and Right during World War II, the center-right parties struggled to cooperate due to their ideological differences: the agrarian populism of the Centre Party, the urban liberalism of the Liberal People&#x27;s Party, and the liberal-conservative elitism of the Moderate Party (the old Conservative Party). However, in 1976 and in 1979, the three parties managed to form a government under Thorbjörn Fälldin—and again in 1991 under aristocrat Carl Bildt and with support from the newly founded Christian Democrats, the most conservative party in contemporary Sweden.

In modern times, mass immigration from distant cultures caused a large populist dissatisfaction, which was not channeled through any of the established parties, who generally espoused multiculturalism. Instead, the 2010s saw the rise of the right-wing populist Sweden Democrats, who were surging as the largest party in the polls on several occasions. Due to its fascist roots, the party was ostracized by the other parties until 2019 when Christian Democrat leader Ebba Busch reached out for collaboration, after which the Moderate Party followed suit. In 2022, the center-right parties formed a government with support from the Sweden Democrats as the largest party. The subsequent Tidö Agreement, negotiated in Tidö Castle, incorporated authoritarian policies such as a stricter stance on immigration and a harsher stance on law and order.

==== Switzerland ====

In some aspects, Swiss conservatism is unique, as Switzerland is an old federal republic born from historically sovereign cantons, comprising three major nationalities and adhering to the principle of Swiss neutrality.

There are a number of conservative parties in Switzerland&#x27;s parliament, the Federal Assembly. These include the largest ones: the Swiss People&#x27;s Party (SVP), the Christian Democratic People&#x27;s Party (CVP), and the Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland (BDP), which is a splinter of the SVP created in the aftermath to the election of Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf as Federal Council.

The SVP was formed from the 1971 merger of the Party of Farmers, Traders and Citizens, formed in 1917, and the smaller Democratic Party, formed in 1942. The SVP emphasised agricultural policy and was strong among farmers in German-speaking Protestant areas. As Switzerland considered closer relations with the European Union in the 1990s, the SVP adopted a more militant protectionist and isolationist stance. This stance has allowed it to expand into German-speaking Catholic mountainous areas. The Anti-Defamation League, a non-Swiss lobby group based in the United States has accused them of manipulating issues such as immigration, Swiss neutrality, and welfare benefits, awakening antisemitism and racism. The Council of Europe has called the SVP &quot;extreme right&quot;, although some scholars dispute this classification. For instance, Hans-Georg Betz describes it as &quot;populist radical right&quot;. The SVP has been the largest party since 2003.

==== Ukraine ====
The authoritarian Ukrainian State was headed by Cossack aristocrat Pavlo Skoropadskyi and represented the conservative movement. The 1918 Hetman government, which appealed to the tradition of the 17th–18th century Cossack Hetman state, represented the conservative strand in Ukraine&#x27;s struggle for independence. It had the support of the proprietary classes and of conservative and moderate political groups. Vyacheslav Lypynsky was a main ideologue of Ukrainian conservatism.

==== United Kingdom ====

Modern English conservatives celebrate Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke as their intellectual father. Burke was affiliated with the Whig Party, which eventually split among the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party, but the modern Conservative Party is generally thought to derive primarily from the Tories, and the MPs of the modern conservative party are still frequently referred to as Tories.

Shortly after Burke&#x27;s death in 1797, conservatism was revived as a mainstream political force as the Whigs suffered a series of internal divisions. This new generation of conservatives derived their politics not from Burke, but from his predecessor, the Viscount Bolingbroke, who was a Jacobite and traditional Tory, lacking Burke&#x27;s sympathies for Whiggish policies such as Catholic emancipation and American independence (famously attacked by Samuel Johnson in &quot;Taxation No Tyranny&quot;).

In the first half of the 19th century, many newspapers, magazines, and journals promoted loyalist or right-wing attitudes in religion, politics, and international affairs. Burke was seldom mentioned, but William Pitt the Younger became a conspicuous hero. The most prominent journals included &quot;The Quarterly Review&quot;, founded in 1809 as a counterweight to the Whigs&#x27; &quot;Edinburgh Review&quot;, and the even more conservative &quot;Blackwood&#x27;s Magazine&quot;. The &quot;Quarterly Review&quot; promoted a balanced Canningite Toryism, as it was neutral on Catholic emancipation and only mildly critical of Nonconformist dissent; it opposed slavery and supported the current poor laws; and it was &quot;aggressively imperialist&quot;. The high-church clergy of the Church of England read the &quot;Orthodox Churchman&#x27;s Magazine&quot;, which was equally hostile to Jewish, Catholic, Jacobin, Methodist and Unitarian spokesmen. Anchoring the ultra-Tories, &quot;Blackwood&#x27;s Edinburgh Magazine&quot; stood firmly against Catholic emancipation and favored slavery, cheap money, mercantilism, the Navigation Acts, and the Holy Alliance.

Conservatism evolved after 1820, embracing free trade in 1846 and a commitment to democracy, especially under Benjamin Disraeli. The effect was to significantly strengthen conservatism as a grassroots political force. Conservatism no longer was the philosophical defense of the landed aristocracy, but had been refreshed into redefining its commitment to the ideals of order, both secular and religious, expanding imperialism, strengthened monarchy, and a more generous vision of the welfare state as opposed to the punitive vision of the Whigs and liberals. As early as 1835, Disraeli attacked the Whigs and utilitarians as slavishly devoted to an industrial oligarchy, while he described his fellow Tories as the only &quot;really democratic party of England&quot;, devoted to the interests of the whole people. Nevertheless, inside the party there was a tension between the growing numbers of wealthy businessmen on the one side and the aristocracy and rural gentry on the other. The aristocracy gained strength as businessmen discovered they could use their wealth to buy a peerage and a country estate.

Some conservatives lamented the passing of a pastoral world where the ethos of had promoted respect from the lower classes. They saw the Anglican Church and the aristocracy as balances against commercial wealth. They worked toward legislation for improved working conditions and urban housing. This viewpoint would later be called Tory democracy. However, since Burke, there has always been tension between traditional aristocratic conservatism and the wealthy liberal business class.

In 1834, Tory Prime Minister Robert Peel issued the &quot;Tamworth Manifesto&quot;, in which he pledged to endorse moderate political reform. This marked the beginning of the transformation from High Tory reactionism towards a more modern form of conservatism. As a result, the party became known as the Conservative Party—a name it has retained to this day. However, Peel would also be the root of a split in the party between the traditional Tories (by the Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli) and the &quot;Peelites&quot; (led first by Peel himself, then by the Earl of Aberdeen). The split occurred in 1846 over the issue of free trade, which Peel supported, versus protectionism, supported by Derby. The majority of the party sided with Derby while about a third split away, eventually merging with the Whigs and the radicals to form the Liberal Party. Despite the split, the mainstream Conservative Party accepted the doctrine of free trade in 1852.

In the second half of the 19th century, the Liberal Party faced political schisms, especially over Irish Home Rule. Leader William Gladstone (himself a former Peelite) sought to give Ireland a degree of autonomy, a move that elements in both the left and right-wings of his party opposed. These split off to become the Liberal Unionists (led by Joseph Chamberlain), forming a coalition with the Conservatives before merging with them in 1912. The Liberal Unionist influence dragged the Conservative Party towards the left as Conservative governments passed a number of progressive reforms at the turn of the 20th century. By the late 19th century, the traditional business supporters of the Liberal Party had joined the Conservatives, making them the party of business and commerce as well.

After a period of Liberal dominance before World War I, the Conservatives gradually became more influential in government, regaining full control of the cabinet in 1922. In the inter-war period, conservatism was the major ideology in Britain as the Liberal Party vied with the Labour Party for control of the left. After World War II, the first Labour government (1945–1951) under Clement Attlee embarked on a program of nationalization of industry and the promotion of social welfare. The Conservatives generally accepted those policies until the 1980s.

In the 1980s, the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher, guided by neoliberal economics, reversed many of Labour&#x27;s social programmes, privatized large parts of the UK economy, and sold state-owned assets. The Conservative Party also adopted soft eurosceptic politics and opposed Federal Europe. Other conservative political parties, such as the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP, founded in 1971), and the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP, founded in 1993), began to appear, although they have yet to make any significant impact at Westminster. As of 2014, the DUP is the largest political party in the ruling coalition in the Northern Ireland Assembly, and from 2017 to 2019 the DUP provided support for the Conservative minority government under a confidence-and-supply arrangement.

=== Latin America ===

Conservative elites have long dominated Latin American nations. Mostly, this has been achieved through control of civil institutions, the Catholic Church, and the military, rather than through party politics. Typically, the Church was exempt from taxes and its employees immune from civil prosecution. Where conservative parties were weak or non-existent, conservatives were more likely to rely on military dictatorship as a preferred form of government.

However, in some nations where the elites were able to mobilize popular support for conservative parties, longer periods of political stability were achieved. Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela are examples of nations that developed strong conservative parties. Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador, and Peru are examples of nations where this did not occur.

Political scientist Louis Hartz explained conservatism in Latin American nations as a result of their settlement as feudal societies.

==== Brazil ====
Conservatism in Brazil originates from the cultural and historical tradition of Brazil, whose cultural roots are Luso-Iberian and Roman Catholic. More traditional conservative historical views and features include belief in political federalism and monarchism. Brazil is the only Latin American nation with a relatively strong royalist sentiment, and throughout modern history a significant minority of the population has always supported a monarchical restoration.

The military dictatorship in Brazil was established on April 1, 1964, after a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; by the Brazilian Army with support from the United States government, and it lasted for 21 years, until March 15, 1985. The coup received support from almost all high-ranking members of the military along with conservative sectors in society, such as the Catholic Church and anti-communist civilian movements among the Brazilian middle and upper classes. The dictatorship reached the height of its popularity in the 1970s with the so-called Brazilian Miracle. Brazil&#x27;s military government provided a model for other military regimes throughout Latin America, being systematized by the &quot;National Security Doctrine&quot;, which was used to justify the military&#x27;s actions as operating in the interest of national security in a time of crisis.

In contemporary politics, a conservative wave began roughly around the 2014 Brazilian presidential election. According to commentators, the National Congress of Brazil elected in 2014 may be considered the most conservative since the re-democratisation movement, citing an increase in the number of parliamentarians linked to more conservative segments, such as ruralists, the military, the police, and religious conservatives. The subsequent economic crisis of 2015 and investigations of corruption scandals led to a right-wing movement that sought to rescue ideas from capitalism in opposition to socialism. At the same time, fiscal conservatives such as those that make up the Free Brazil Movement emerged among many others. Military officer Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party was the winner of the 2018 Brazilian presidential election.

==== Chile ====
Chile&#x27;s conservative party, the National Party, disbanded in 1973 following a military coup and did not re-emerge as a political force after the return to democracy. During the military dictatorship of Chile, the country was ruled by a military junta headed by General Augusto Pinochet. His ideology, known as Pinochetism, was anti-communist, militaristic, nationalistic, and &quot;laissez-faire&quot; capitalistic. Under Pinochet, Chile&#x27;s economy was placed under the control of a group of economists known collectively as the Chicago Boys, whose liberalizing policies have been described as neoliberal.

==== Colombia ====

The Colombian Conservative Party, founded in 1849, traces its origins to opponents of General Francisco de Paula Santander&#x27;s 1833–1837 administration. While the term &quot;liberal&quot; had been used to describe all political forces in Colombia, the conservatives began describing themselves as &quot;conservative liberals&quot; and their opponents as &quot;red liberals&quot;. From the 1860s until the present, the party has supported strong central government and the Catholic Church, especially its role as protector of the sanctity of the family, and opposed separation of church and state. Its policies include the legal equality of all men, the citizen&#x27;s right to own property, and opposition to dictatorship. It has usually been Colombia&#x27;s second largest party, with the Colombian Liberal Party being the largest.

=== North America ===

North American conservatism, combining traditionalist conservatism, economic liberalism, and right-wing populism, is different from European conservatism and can be traced back to the classical liberalism of the 18th and 19th centuries, although Canada developed an American-style conservatism that competed with the older Tory conservatism. According to political scientist Louis Hartz, French Canada is a fragment of feudal Europe, whereas the United States and English Canada are liberal fragments. Sociologist Reginald Bibby asserts that conservatism has been strong and enduring throughout North America because of the propagation of religious values from generation to generation.

==== Canada ====
Canada&#x27;s conservatives had their roots in the Tory loyalists who left America after the American Revolution. They developed in the socio-economic and political cleavages that existed during the first three decades of the 19th century and had the support of the mercantile, professional, and religious elites in Ontario and to a lesser extent in Quebec. Holding a monopoly over administrative and judicial offices, they were called the Family Compact in Ontario and the in Quebec. John A. Macdonald&#x27;s successful leadership of the movement to confederate the provinces, and his subsequent tenure as prime minister for most of the late 19th century, rested on his ability to bring together the English-speaking Protestant aristocracy and the ultramontane Catholic hierarchy of Quebec and to keep them united in a conservative coalition.

The conservatives combined Toryism and pro-market liberalism. They generally supported an activist government and state intervention in the marketplace, and their policies were marked by —a paternalistic responsibility of the elites for the less well-off. The party was known as the Progressive Conservatives from 1942 until 2003, when the party merged with the Canadian Alliance to form the Conservative Party of Canada.

The conservative and autonomist Union Nationale, led by Maurice Duplessis, governed the province of Quebec in periods from 1936 to 1960 and in a close alliance with the Catholic Church, small rural elites, farmers, and business elites. This period, known by liberals as the Great Darkness, ended with the Quiet Revolution and the party went into terminal decline.

By the end of the 1960s, the political debate in Quebec centred around the question of independence, opposing the social democratic and sovereignist Parti Québécois and the centrist and federalist Quebec Liberal Party, therefore marginalizing the conservative movement. Most French Canadian conservatives rallied either the Quebec Liberal Party or the Parti Québécois, while some of them still tried to offer an autonomist third-way with what was left of the Union Nationale or the more populists Ralliement créditiste du Québec and Parti national populaire, but by the 1981 provincial election politically organized conservatism had been obliterated in Quebec. It slowly started to revive at the 1994 provincial election with the Action démocratique du Québec, who served as Official opposition in the National Assembly from 2007 to 2008, before merging in 2012 with François Legault&#x27;s Coalition Avenir Québec, which took power in 2018. The modern Conservative Party of Canada has rebranded conservatism and, under the leadership of Stephen Harper, added more conservative policies.

Yoram Hazony, a scholar on the history and ideology of conservatism, identified Canadian psychologist Jordan Peterson as the most significant conservative thinker to appear in the English-speaking world in a generation.

==== United States ====
The meaning of conservatism in the United States is different from the way the word is used elsewhere. Following the American Revolution, Americans rejected the core ideals of European conservatism, which were based on landed nobility, hereditary monarchy, established churches, and powerful armies. However, the prominent American conservative historian Russell Kirk argued, in his influential work &quot;The Conservative Mind&quot; (1953), that conservatism had been brought to the United States and he interpreted the American Revolution as a &quot;conservative revolution&quot; against royal innovation. The revolution was also supported by Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke, widely known as the father of conservatism, although Burke and a few Founding Fathers, most notably John Adams, were highly critical of the French Revolution.

American conservatism is a broad system of political beliefs in the United States, which is characterized by respect for American traditions, support for Judeo-Christian values, economic liberalism, anti-communism, and a defense of Western culture. Liberty within the bounds of conformity to conservatism is a core value, with a particular emphasis on strengthening the free market, limiting the size and scope of government, and opposing high taxes as well as government or labor union encroachment on the entrepreneur.

The 1830s Democratic Party became divided between Southern Democrats, who supported slavery, secession, and later segregation, and the Northern Democrats, who tended to support the abolition of slavery, union, and equality. Many Democrats were conservative in the sense that they wanted things to be like they were in the past, especially as far as race was concerned. They generally favored poorer farmers and urban workers, and were hostile to banks, industrialization, and high tariffs.

The post-Civil War Republican Party had conservative factions, but was not uniformly conservative. The Southern Democrats united with pro-segregation Northern Republicans to form the Conservative Coalition, which successfully put an end to Blacks being elected to national political office until 1967, when Edward Brooke was elected Senator from Massachusetts. Conservative Democrats influenced US politics until 1994&#x27;s Republican Revolution, as the American South shifted from solid Democrat to solid Republican, while maintaining its conservative values.

In late 19th century, the Democratic Party split into two factions; the more conservative Eastern business faction (led by Grover Cleveland) favored gold, while the South and West (led by William Jennings Bryan) wanted more silver in order to raise prices for their crops. In 1892, Cleveland won the election on a conservative platform, which supported maintaining the gold standard, reducing tariffs, and taking a approach to government intervention. A severe nationwide depression ruined his plans. Many of his supporters in 1896 supported the Gold Democrats when liberal William Jennings Bryan won the nomination and campaigned for bimetallism, money backed by both gold and silver. The conservative wing nominated Alton B. Parker in 1904, but he got very few votes.

The major conservative party in the United States today is the Republican Party, also known as the GOP (Grand Old Party). Modern American conservatives often consider individual liberty as the fundamental trait of democracy, as long as it conforms to conservative values, small government, deregulation of the government, and economic liberalism—which contrasts with modern American liberals, who generally place a greater value on social equality and social justice. Other major priorities within American conservatism include support for the nuclear family, law and order, the right to bear arms, Christian values, anti-communism, and a defense of &quot;Western civilization from the challenges of modernist culture and totalitarian governments&quot;. Economic conservatives and libertarians favor small government, low taxes, limited regulation, and free enterprise. Some social conservatives see traditional social values threatened by secularism; so, they support school prayer, and oppose abortion. Neoconservatives want to expand American ideals throughout the world, and show a strong support for Israel. Paleoconservatives oppose multiculturalism and press for restrictions on immigration.

The conservative movement of the 1950s attempted to bring together the divergent conservative strands, stressing the need for unity to prevent the spread of &quot;godless communism&quot;, which Reagan later labeled an &quot;evil empire&quot;. During the Reagan administration, conservatives also supported the so-called Reagan Doctrine, under which the US as part of a Cold War strategy provided military and other support to guerrilla insurgencies that were fighting governments identified as socialist or communist. The Reagan administration also adopted neoliberalism and Reaganomics (pejoratively referred to as trickle-down economics), resulting in the 1980s economic growth and trillion-dollar deficits. Other modern conservative positions include anti-environmentalism. On average, American conservatives desire tougher foreign policies than liberals do.

The Tea Party movement, founded in 2009, proved a large outlet for populist American conservative ideas. Their stated goals included rigorous adherence to the US constitution, lower taxes, and opposition to a growing role for the federal government in health care. Electorally, it was considered a key force in Republicans reclaiming control of the US House of Representatives in 2010.

Long-term shifts in conservative thinking following the election of Donald Trump have been described as a &quot;new fusionism&quot; of traditional conservative ideology and right-wing populist themes. These have resulted in shifts towards greater support for national conservatism, protectionism, cultural conservatism, a more realist foreign policy, a repudiation of neoconservatism, reduced efforts to roll back entitlement programs, and a disdain for traditional checks and balances.

=== Oceania ===
==== Australia ====
The Liberal Party of Australia adheres to the principles of social conservatism and liberal conservatism. It is liberal in the sense of economics. Commentators explain: &quot;In America, &#x27;liberal&#x27; means left-of-center, and it is a pejorative term when used by conservatives in adversarial political debate. In Australia, of course, the conservatives are in the Liberal Party.&quot; The National Right is the most organized and reactionary of the three factions within the party.

Political scientist James Jupp writes that &quot;[the] decline in English influences on Australian reformism and radicalism, and appropriation of the symbols of Empire by conservatives continued under the Liberal Party leadership of Sir Robert Menzies, which lasted until 1966&quot;.

Other conservative parties are the National Party of Australia (a sister party of the Liberals), Family First Party, Democratic Labor Party, Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party, Australian Conservatives, and the Katter&#x27;s Australian Party.

The largest party in the country is the Australian Labor Party, and its dominant faction is Labor Right, a socially conservative element. Australia undertook significant economic reform under the Labor Party in the mid-1980s. Consequently, issues like protectionism, welfare reform, privatization, and deregulation are no longer debated in the political space as they are in Europe or North America.

==== New Zealand ====

Historic conservatism in New Zealand traces its roots to the unorganized conservative opposition to the New Zealand Liberal Party in the late 19th century. In 1909 this ideological strand found a more organized expression in the Reform Party, a forerunner to the contemporary New Zealand National Party, which absorbed historic conservative elements. The National Party, established in 1936, embodies a spectrum of tendencies, including conservative and liberal. Throughout its history, the party has oscillated between periods of conservative emphasis and liberal reform. Its stated values include &quot;individual freedom and choice&quot; and &quot;limited government&quot;.

In the 1980s and 1990s both the National Party and its main opposing party, the traditionally left-wing Labour Party, implemented free-market reforms.

The New Zealand First party, which split from the National Party in 1993, espouses nationalist and conservative principles.

== Psychology ==
=== Conscientiousness ===
The Big Five personality model has applications in the study of political psychology. It has been found by several studies that individuals who score high in Conscientiousness (the quality of working hard and being careful) are more likely to possess a right-wing political identification. Since conscientiousness is positively related to job performance, a 2021 study found that conservative service workers earn higher ratings, evaluations, and tips than social liberal ones.

=== Disgust sensitivity ===
A number of studies have found that disgust is tightly linked to political orientation. People who are highly sensitive to disgusting images are more likely to align with the political right and value traditional ideals of bodily and spiritual purity, tending to oppose, for example, abortion and gay marriage.

Research in the field of evolutionary psychology has also found that people who are more disgust sensitive tend to favor their own in-group over out-groups. A proposed reason for this phenomenon is that people begin to associate outsiders with disease while associating health with people similar to themselves.

The higher one&#x27;s disgust sensitivity is, the greater the tendency to make more conservative moral judgments. Disgust sensitivity is associated with moral hypervigilance, which means that people who have higher disgust sensitivity are more likely to think that suspects of a crime are guilty. They also tend to view them as evil, if found guilty, and endorse harsher punishment in the setting of a court.

=== Authoritarianism ===
The right-wing authoritarian personality (RWA) is a personality type that describes somebody who is highly submissive to their authority figures, acts aggressively in the name of said authorities, and is conformist in thought and behavior. According to psychologist Bob Altemeyer, individuals who are politically conservative tend to rank high in RWA. This finding was echoed by philosopher Theodor W. Adorno in &quot;The Authoritarian Personality&quot; (1950) based on the F-scale personality test.

A study done on Israeli and Palestinian students in Israel found that RWA scores of right-wing party supporters were significantly higher than those of left-wing party supporters. However, a 2005 study by psychologist H. Michael Crowson and colleagues suggested a moderate gap between RWA and other conservative positions, stating that their &quot;results indicated that conservatism is not synonymous with RWA&quot;.

According to political scientist Karen Stenner, who specializes in authoritarianism, conservatives will embrace diversity and civil liberties to the extent that they are institutionalized traditions in the social order, but they tend to be drawn to authoritarianism when public opinion is fractious and there is a loss of confidence in public institutions.

=== Ambiguity intolerance ===
In 1973, psychologist Glenn Wilson published an influential book providing evidence that a general factor underlying conservative beliefs is &quot;fear of uncertainty&quot;. A meta-analysis of research literature found that many factors, such as intolerance of ambiguity and need for cognitive closure, contribute to the degree of one&#x27;s political conservatism and its manifestations in decision-making. A study by Kathleen Maclay stated that these traits &quot;might be associated with such generally valued characteristics as personal commitment and unwavering loyalty&quot;. The research also suggested that while most people are resistant to change, social liberals are more tolerant of it.

=== Social dominance orientation ===
Social dominance orientation (SDO) is a personality trait measuring an individual&#x27;s support for social hierarchy and the extent to which they desire their in-group be superior to out-groups. Psychologist Felicia Pratto and her colleagues have found evidence to support the claim that a high SDO is strongly correlated with conservative views and opposition to social engineering to promote equality. Pratto and her colleagues also found that high SDO scores were highly correlated with measures of prejudice.

However, psychologist David J. Schneider argued for a more complex relationships between the three factors, writing that &quot;correlations between prejudice and political conservatism are reduced virtually to zero when controls for SDO are instituted, suggesting that the conservatism–prejudice link is caused by SDO&quot;. Political theorist Kenneth Minogue criticized Pratto&#x27;s work, saying:

A 1996 study by Pratto and her colleagues examined the topic of racism. Contrary to what these theorists predicted, correlations between conservatism and racism were strongest among the most educated individuals, and weakest among the least educated. They also found that the correlation between racism and conservatism could be accounted for by their mutual relationship with SDO.

=== Happiness ===
In his book &quot;Gross National Happiness&quot; (2008), Arthur C. Brooks presents the finding that conservatives are roughly twice as happy as social liberals. A 2008 study suggested that conservatives tend to be happier than social liberals because of their tendency to justify the current state of affairs and to remain unbothered by inequalities in society. A 2012 study disputed this hypothesis, demonstrating that conservatives expressed greater personal agency (e.g., personal control, responsibility), more positive outlook (e.g., optimism, self-worth), and more transcendent moral beliefs (e.g., greater religiosity, greater moral clarity).

== Prominent figures ==

=== Statesmen ===


=== Intellectuals ===

=== Artists ===
== See also ==
===National variants===

* Conservatism in Australia
* Conservatism in Bangladesh
* Conservatism in Brazil
* Conservatism in Canada
* Conservatism in Colombia
* Conservatism in Germany
* Conservatism in Hong Kong
* Conservatism in India
* Conservatism in Japan
* Conservatism in Malaysia
* Conservatism in New Zealand
* Conservatism in Pakistan
* Conservatism in Peru
* Conservatism in Russia
* Conservatism in Serbia
* Conservatism in South Korea
* Conservatism in Turkey
* Conservatism in the United Kingdom
* Conservatism in the United States
===Ideological variants===

* Authoritarian conservatism
* Black conservatism
* Corporatist conservatism
* Cultural conservatism
* Feminist conservatism
* Fiscal conservatism
* Green conservatism
* LGBT conservatism
* Liberal conservatism
* Libertarian conservatism
* Moderate conservatism
* National conservatism
* Neoconservatism
* Paternalistic conservatism
* Pragmatic conservatism
* Progressive conservatism
* Populist conservatism
* Social conservatism
* Traditionalist conservatism
* Ultraconservatism
===Related topics===

* Christian democracy
* Christian right
* Communitarianism
* Counter-revolutionary
* Familialism
* Historism
* Neopatriarchy
* Reactionary
* Right realism
* Small-c conservative
* Toryism
* Traditionalist Catholicism
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==

General
* 
* 
* 
* [2396 pages; worldwide sources]

Conservatism and fascism
* 

Conservatism and liberalism
* 

Conservatism and women
* 
* 

Conservatism in Germany
* 
* 

Conservatism in Latin America
* 

Conservatism in Russia
* 

Conservatism in the United Kingdom
* 
* 

Conservatism in the United States
* 
* 
* 
* 

Psychology
* 
* 


== External links ==

* Conservatism an article by &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="0" end="12" title="Conservatism" label="Conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791813" start="18" end="26" title="Philosophy of culture" label="cultural"/>
<link wikidata="Q180592" start="28" end="34" title="Social philosophy" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q179805" start="40" end="60" title="political philosophy" label="political philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="65" end="73" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q178706" start="121" end="132" title="institution" label="institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="135" end="142" title="Convention (norm)" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="148" end="154" title="Value (ethics and social sciences)" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="219" end="226" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="231" end="243" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="268" end="283" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="401" end="415" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="417" end="435" title="organized religion" label="organized religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="441" end="449" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="455" end="467" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="469" end="484" title="property rights" label="property rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="486" end="497" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="499" end="510" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="516" end="524" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518716" start="594" end="606" title="social order" label="social order"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="674" end="686" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="704" end="721" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="740" end="759" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q309854" start="866" end="883" title="Joseph de Maistre" label="Joseph de Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767" start="970" end="1000" title="François-René de Chateaubriand" label="François-René de Chateaubriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="1022" end="1041" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="1426" end="1436" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="1441" end="1450" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1534" end="1541" title="#Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086308" start="1543" end="1548" title="Conservatism in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1550" end="1554" title="#Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q126391647" start="1556" end="1562" title="Conservatism in Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1564" end="1569" title="#Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q125531089" start="1571" end="1576" title="Conservatism in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1578" end="1584" title="#Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q67358148" start="1586" end="1592" title="Conservatism in Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1594" end="1603" title="#Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163014" start="1609" end="1620" title="Conservatism in South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="1651" end="1670" title="right-wing politics" label="right-wing politics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1707" end="1728" title="#Ideological variants" label="a wide range of views"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="1757" end="1768" title="Libertarian conservatism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q123685117" start="1772" end="1785" title="Authoritarian conservatism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="1787" end="1795" title="Right-wing populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="1799" end="1806" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="elitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248834" start="1808" end="1819" title="Progressive conservatism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="1823" end="1834" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q116859677" start="1836" end="1844" title="Moderate conservatism" label="moderate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091203" start="1848" end="1855" title="Ultraconservatism" label="extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q9151108" start="1983" end="1997" title="Andrew Heywood" label="Andrew Heywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q158997" start="2148" end="2160" title="Russell Kirk" label="Russell Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689851" start="2208" end="2229" title="The Conservative Mind" label="The Conservative Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="2334" end="2351" title="divine revelation" label="divine revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="2356" end="2367" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400881" start="2553" end="2561" title="property" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q24091434" start="2566" end="2573" title="freedom" label="freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="2615" end="2625" title="Convention (norm)" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165788" start="2779" end="2787" title="prudence" label="prudence"/>
<link wikidata="Q19074" start="2825" end="2845" title="Samuel P. Huntington" label="Samuel P. Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q175366" start="3002" end="3014" title="Quintin Hogg, Baron Hailsham of St Marylebone" label="Quintin Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="3044" end="3062" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="3445" end="3455" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="3460" end="3467" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30321720" start="3575" end="3595" title="Noël O&amp;#x27;Sullivan" label="Noël O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q742609" start="3647" end="3659" title="human nature" label="human nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="3742" end="3755" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130390" start="3834" end="3849" title="state of nature" label="state of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="3953" end="3964" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="3978" end="3991" title="Law and order (politics)" label="law and order"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="3993" end="4005" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="4097" end="4109" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="4180" end="4198" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="4212" end="4223" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q959541" start="4393" end="4410" title="Michael Oakeshott" label="Michael Oakeshott"/>
<link wikidata="Q844569" start="4592" end="4600" title="Identity (social science)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q539127" start="4723" end="4734" title="Corey Robin" label="Corey Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431887" start="4798" end="4804" title="Social inequality" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="4809" end="4828" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055257" start="5174" end="5186" title="Yoram Hazony" label="Yoram Hazony"/>
<link wikidata="Q207333" start="5302" end="5307" title="honor" label="honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315471" start="5499" end="5519" title="Nicolás Gómez Dávila" label="Nicolás Gómez Dávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q872773" start="5789" end="5810" title="traditional authority" label="traditional authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="5837" end="5846" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="5920" end="5928" title="Sacredness" label="sanctity"/>
<link wikidata="Q354504" start="6033" end="6049" title="Alexandre Kojève" label="Alexandre Kojève"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333105" start="6334" end="6347" title="Robert Nisbet" label="Robert Nisbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="6485" end="6490" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q21772656" start="6492" end="6497" title="Fraternal order" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="6499" end="6505" title="parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8436" start="6511" end="6517" title="family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q60025" start="6619" end="6632" title="Hannah Arendt" label="Hannah Arendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="6881" end="6893" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="7014" end="7035" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Marquis of Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355405" start="7071" end="7106" title="Rockingham Whigs" label="Rockingham branch of the Whig party"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="7290" end="7309" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7356" end="7373" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="7427" end="7443" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="7465" end="7475" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="7497" end="7507" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207333" start="7661" end="7666" title="honor" label="honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="7999" end="8019" title="religious toleration" label="religious toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q457998" start="8316" end="8337" title="Counter-Enlightenment" label="Counter-Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q309854" start="8368" end="8385" title="Joseph de Maistre" label="Joseph de Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q316674" start="8390" end="8405" title="Louis de Bonald" label="Louis de Bonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="8453" end="8483" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q795240" start="8533" end="8548" title="Catholic Church in France" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="8644" end="8655" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49767" start="8770" end="8800" title="François-René de Chateaubriand" label="François-René de Chateaubriand"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="8813" end="8821" title="Romanticism" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65087" start="8983" end="8995" title="Justus Möser" label="Justus Möser"/>
<link wikidata="Q77476" start="9000" end="9019" title="Friedrich von Gentz" label="Friedrich von Gentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q169759" start="9035" end="9086" title="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen" label="Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="9149" end="9165" title="German idealism" label="German idealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q63176" start="9174" end="9185" title="Adam Müller" label="Adam Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="9190" end="9219" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="9320" end="9329" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="10181" end="10191" title="autocratic" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="10508" end="10523" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q117144" start="10542" end="10555" title="Miklós Horthy" label="Miklós Horthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189139" start="10576" end="10591" title="Ioannis Metaxas" label="Ioannis Metaxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="10608" end="10619" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="10650" end="10677" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António de Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734" start="10702" end="10720" title="Engelbert Dollfuss" label="Engelbert Dollfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="10759" end="10775" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="10791" end="10799" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q159585" start="10821" end="10830" title="Boris III of Bulgaria" label="Boris III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="10916" end="10923" title="fascism" label="fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="11055" end="11064" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="11317" end="11321" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734" start="11496" end="11514" title="Engelbert Dollfuss" label="Engelbert Dollfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037291" start="11518" end="11532" title="Austrian Nazism" label="Austrian Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q151179" start="11544" end="11561" title="Ustaše" label="Croatian fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="11580" end="11605" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153448" start="11634" end="11644" title="Iron Guard" label="Iron Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="11672" end="11684" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="11743" end="11751" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II"/>
<link wikidata="Q318105" start="11777" end="11800" title="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu" label="Corneliu Zelea Codreanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="11868" end="11878" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="11895" end="11907" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q151394" start="12019" end="12046" title="António de Oliveira Salazar" label="António de Oliveira Salazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150044" start="12141" end="12150" title="Caesarism" label="Caesarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q352959" start="12236" end="12257" title="Seymour Martin Lipset" label="Seymour Martin Lipset"/>
<link wikidata="Q61816746" start="12354" end="12368" title="Edmund Fawcett" label="Edmund Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q14850164" start="12425" end="12434" title="Pluralism (political theory)" label="pluralist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="12599" end="12614" title="anti-liberalism" label="anti-liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12734" end="12742" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="12915" end="12931" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q113951" start="12986" end="13011" title="Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" label="Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn"/>
<link wikidata="Q126913543" start="13192" end="13208" title="Juan José Zúñiga" label="Juan José Zúñiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149892" start="13268" end="13277" title="Luis Arce" label="Luis Arce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="13421" end="13435" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39259" start="13457" end="13477" title="Recep Tayyip Erdoğan" label="Recep Tayyip Erdoğan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57641" start="13504" end="13516" title="Viktor Orbán" label="Viktor Orbán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="13544" end="13557" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="13582" end="13594" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="13765" end="13782" title="classical liberal" label="classical liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11480083" start="13799" end="13823" title="economic interventionism" label="economic interventionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878070" start="14202" end="14206" title="duty" label="duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="14282" end="14303" title="industrial revolution" label="industrial revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="14357" end="14376" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="14442" end="14461" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="14543" end="14551" title="National identity" label="national"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368367" start="14556" end="14573" title="cultural identity" label="cultural identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433311" start="14606" end="14637" title="family as a model for the state" label="family as a model for the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="14700" end="14711" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="14825" end="14837" title="Euroscepticism" label="eurosceptics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055257" start="14861" end="14873" title="Yoram Hazony" label="Yoram Hazony"/>
<link wikidata="Q60775384" start="14929" end="14954" title="The Virtue of Nationalism" label="The Virtue of Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878070" start="15378" end="15382" title="duty" label="duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7101870" start="15384" end="15394" title="Organic unity" label="organicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="15400" end="15409" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551358" start="15459" end="15476" title="social safety net" label="social safety net"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155757" start="15518" end="15542" title="redistribution of wealth" label="redistribution of wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="15706" end="15720" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="15742" end="15759" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="15773" end="15783" title="One nation conservatism" label="One Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="15790" end="15797" title="Toryism" label="Toryism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="15935" end="15950" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="15952" end="15971" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="15973" end="15990" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="15996" end="16012" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="16031" end="16038" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="16051" end="16068" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207011" start="16112" end="16127" title="State Socialism (Germany)" label="state socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170365" start="16316" end="16322" title="Junker (Prussia)" label="Junker"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="16360" end="16367" title="German Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q10873" start="16380" end="16395" title="Leo von Caprivi" label="Leo von Caprivi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="16529" end="16547" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="16742" end="16752" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="16781" end="16800" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="16909" end="16929" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="16997" end="17003" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q970562" start="17065" end="17073" title="Red Tory" label="Red Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="17152" end="17192" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q128645" start="17228" end="17242" title="Arthur Meighen" label="Arthur Meighen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128641" start="17244" end="17257" title="R. B. Bennett" label="R. B. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q128614" start="17259" end="17275" title="John Diefenbaker" label="John Diefenbaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q128574" start="17277" end="17286" title="Joe Clark" label="Joe Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="17288" end="17302" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q128553" start="17308" end="17320" title="Kim Campbell" label="Kim Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551419" start="17467" end="17488" title="social transformation" label="social transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="17551" end="17578" title="traditionalist conservative" label="traditionalist conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="17853" end="17865" title="mass culture" label="mass culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="17870" end="17880" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q539127" start="18012" end="18023" title="Corey Robin" label="Corey Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900220" start="18099" end="18109" title="Mark Lilla" label="Mark Lilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q23302679" start="18176" end="18190" title="Francis Wilson (political scientist)" label="Francis Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="18629" end="18647" title="German Romanticism" label="German Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12348939" start="18694" end="18705" title="medievalism" label="medievalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="18818" end="18835" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q334147" start="19134" end="19146" title="Julius Evola" label="Julius Evola"/>
<link wikidata="Q113951" start="19168" end="19193" title="Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" label="Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn"/>
<link wikidata="Q781421" start="19205" end="19225" title="political theology" label="political theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315471" start="19226" end="19246" title="Nicolás Gómez Dávila" label="Nicolás Gómez Dávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q280254" start="19271" end="19282" title="John Lukacs" label="John Lukacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="19689" end="19693" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="19931" end="19950" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844072" start="19980" end="19992" title="Centre-right politics" label="center-right"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20014" end="20039" title="Christian ethics#Politics" label="Christian social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="20132" end="20168" title="Laissez-faire" label="&amp;quot;laissez-faire&amp;quot;-capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q750673" start="20261" end="20290" title="Christian Democratic and Flemish" label="Christian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="20303" end="20306" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49763" start="20311" end="20314" title="Christian Social Union in Bavaria" label="CSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="20327" end="20336" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="20341" end="20352" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="20369" end="20388" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115221" start="21077" end="21082" title="mores" label="mores"/>
<link wikidata="Q847808" start="21141" end="21159" title="social engineering (political science)" label="social engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441538" start="21228" end="21243" title="culture of life" label="culture of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="21316" end="21324" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151519" start="21326" end="21346" title="embryonic stem cells" label="embryonic stem cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="21361" end="21371" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417112" start="21386" end="21401" title="bioconservatism" label="bioconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="21425" end="21433" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194100" start="21438" end="21451" title="transhumanism" label="transhumanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811480" start="21478" end="21491" title="family values" label="family values"/>
<link wikidata="Q720069" start="21505" end="21519" title="nuclear family" label="nuclear family"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="21676" end="21690" title="civil marriage" label="civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q180472" start="21695" end="21709" title="child adoption" label="child adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242821" start="21724" end="21745" title="same-sex relationship" label="same-sex relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q108887968" start="21761" end="21776" title="public morality" label="public morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551312" start="21797" end="21802" title="Prohibition (drugs)" label="drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="21807" end="21819" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="21838" end="21849" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359138" start="21864" end="21882" title="organized religion" label="organized religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="21901" end="21908" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="21913" end="21923" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="22098" end="22109" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="22137" end="22146" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="22148" end="22157" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22159" end="22169" title="Organicism#In politics and sociology" label="organicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="22171" end="22182" title="agrarianism" label="agrarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="22184" end="22194" title="classicism" label="classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479257" start="22200" end="22212" title="high culture" label="high culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132131" start="22252" end="22259" title="loyalty" label="loyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="22307" end="22318" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="22323" end="22341" title="counter-revolution" label="counter-revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="22408" end="22421" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287147" start="22539" end="22555" title="Ralph Adams Cram" label="Ralph Adams Cram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580683" start="22557" end="22572" title="William S. Lind" label="William S. Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074822" start="22578" end="22597" title="Charles A. Coulombe" label="Charles A. Coulombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="22836" end="22853" title="Classical liberalism" label="classical liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="22924" end="22933" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="22935" end="22944" title="Socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661415" start="22950" end="22955" title="Green politics" label="green"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="23207" end="23218" title="social norm" label="social norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="23475" end="23483" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="23558" end="23567" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="23575" end="23585" title="Confucianism" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23691" end="23727" title="Family as a model for the state#Confucian thought" label="modeled after the patriarchal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="23745" end="23763" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="23829" end="23841" title="Meritocracy" label="meritocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="23893" end="23912" title="Imperial examination" label="civil service exams"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="23954" end="23962" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="24157" end="24174" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="24260" end="24277" title="1911 Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q185152" start="24296" end="24300" title="Puyi" label="Puyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="24347" end="24364" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="24430" end="24440" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="24480" end="24495" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="24558" end="24575" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="24583" end="24606" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="24652" end="24658" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="24795" end="24814" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3144424" start="24837" end="24858" title="Five Black Categories" label="Five Black Categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q821788" start="25007" end="25017" title="Red Guards" label="Red Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713721" start="25067" end="25076" title="Four Olds" label="Four Olds"/>
<link wikidata="Q210272" start="25189" end="25206" title="cultural heritage" label="cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q117336521" start="25348" end="25361" title="Conservative Faction (Cultural Revolution)" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q64543" start="25547" end="25558" title="Wang Huning" label="Wang Huning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543753" start="25583" end="25596" title="Éminence grise" label="grey eminence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="25655" end="25662" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="25750" end="25760" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="25784" end="25799" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25913" end="25937" title="Authoritarian capitalism#China" label="authoritarian capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48729819" start="26013" end="26032" title="Neoauthoritarianism (China)" label="Neoauthoritarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="26113" end="26127" title="Chinese economic reform" label="market reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q10230" start="26403" end="26425" title="Bharatiya Janata Party" label="Bharatiya Janata Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="26440" end="26453" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q60518581" start="26574" end="26597" title="List of largest political parties" label="largest political party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307223" start="26611" end="26628" title="Hindu nationalism" label="Hindu nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q281347" start="26644" end="26652" title="Hindutva" label="Hindutva"/>
<link wikidata="Q207991" start="27038" end="27053" title="Pahlavi dynasty" label="Pahlavi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q189326" start="27067" end="27080" title="Qajar dynasty" label="Qajar dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131857" start="27103" end="27119" title="1921 Persian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="27144" end="27167" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q593774" start="27249" end="27282" title="1953 Iranian coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1953 &amp;quot;coup d&amp;#x27;état&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q184299" start="27397" end="27401" title="Shah" label="Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="27403" end="27424" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068139" start="27439" end="27455" title="White Revolution" label="White Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155757" start="27537" end="27561" title="redistribution of wealth" label="redistribution of wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q126065" start="27685" end="27703" title="Iranian Revolution" label="Iranian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258515" start="27801" end="27823" title="Imperial State of Iran" label="Imperial State of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="27831" end="27855" title="Islamic Republic of Iran" label="Islamic Republic of Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248834" start="27876" end="27900" title="progressive conservatism" label="progressive conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="27931" end="27955" title="reactionary conservatism" label="reactionary conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17173896" start="28036" end="28048" title="Iranian Principlists" label="Principlists"/>
<link wikidata="Q73509" start="28057" end="28067" title="Iranian reform movement" label="Reformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="28115" end="28130" title="State of Israel" label="State of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106181016" start="28306" end="28319" title="2022 Israeli legislative election" label="2022 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q548478" start="28624" end="28638" title="Jewish culture" label="Jewish culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="28662" end="28669" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28691" end="28702" title="List of irredentist claims or disputes#Israel and Palestine" label="irredentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q592710" start="28719" end="28730" title="Revisionist Zionism" label="Revisionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399359" start="28735" end="28746" title="Neo-Zionism" label="Neo-Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44526" start="28774" end="28788" title="Greater Israel" label="Greater Israel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28805" end="28812" title="Zionism#Liberal Zionism" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q607470" start="28816" end="28829" title="Labor Zionism" label="Labor Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="28857" end="28875" title="two-state solution" label="two-state solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="28896" end="28913" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907117" start="28927" end="28986" title="Halachic state" label="the role of religion and the Rabbinate in the public sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="29004" end="29015" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q607505" start="29021" end="29055" title="Israel-United States relations" label="closer ties with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q232595" start="29191" end="29215" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Japan)" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q841842" start="29288" end="29299" title="1955 System" label="1955 System"/>
<link wikidata="Q50686" start="29365" end="29380" title="one-party state" label="one-party state"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="29482" end="29488" title="Feudalism" label="feudal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38142" start="29532" end="29539" title="Samurai" label="Samurai"/>
<link wikidata="Q183738" start="29561" end="29568" title="bushido" label="bushido"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="29597" end="29606" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji era"/>
<link wikidata="Q714820" start="29816" end="29833" title="Satsuma Rebellion" label="Satsuma Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="29883" end="29895" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q132345" start="30080" end="30090" title="Shinzo Abe" label="Shinzo Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q712737" start="30178" end="30187" title="Article 9 of the Japanese Constitution" label="Article 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q217096" start="30330" end="30338" title="Naruhito" label="Naruhito"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="30360" end="30376" title="Emperor of Japan" label="Emperor of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30570" end="30584" title="Anti-communism#Japan and Manchukuo" label="Anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774135" start="30589" end="30611" title="Anti-Chinese sentiment in Japan" label="anti-Chinese sentiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q657216" start="30648" end="30670" title="Peace Preservation Law" label="Peace Preservation Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q704000" start="30712" end="30733" title="Tokubetsu Kōtō Keisatsu" label="Special Higher Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="30802" end="30817" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="30822" end="30834" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="30847" end="30870" title="Communist International" label="Communist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="30886" end="30905" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="30933" end="30949" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="30951" end="30966" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="30976" end="30994" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q385691" start="31020" end="31025" title="tenkō" label="tenkō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571843" start="31297" end="31306" title="Red Purge" label="Red Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q641600" start="31398" end="31422" title="Japanese Communist Party" label="Japanese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q11507216" start="31502" end="31514" title="Nippon Kaigi" label="Nippon Kaigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="31675" end="31688" title="National Diet" label="National Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q359480" start="31773" end="31786" title="Fumio Kishida" label="Fumio Kishida"/>
<link wikidata="Q132596" start="31788" end="31796" title="Tarō Asō" label="Tarō Asō"/>
<link wikidata="Q132345" start="31798" end="31808" title="Shinzō Abe" label="Shinzō Abe"/>
<link wikidata="Q122465" start="31814" end="31828" title="Yoshihide Suga" label="Yoshihide Suga"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="32021" end="32034" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q694604" start="32044" end="32052" title="Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan" label="a treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q104862276" start="32081" end="32136" title="U.S.–Japan Alliance" label="a military alliance between the United States and Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q134456" start="32196" end="32209" title="Yukio Mishima" label="Yukio Mishima"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="32329" end="32345" title="Japanese culture" label="Japanese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q371395" start="32411" end="32437" title="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party" label="People&amp;#x27;s Action Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q858717" start="32515" end="32527" title="Asian values" label="Asian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589317" start="32971" end="32981" title="Government of Singapore" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="33165" end="33174" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="33180" end="33190" title="city state" label="city state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511637" start="33217" end="33228" title="nanny state" label="nanny state"/>
<link wikidata="Q653790" start="33277" end="33305" title="Law of Singapore" label="regulations and restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q866756" start="33342" end="33356" title="Prime Minister of Singapore" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q131248" start="33357" end="33369" title="Lee Kuan Yew" label="Lee Kuan Yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q498921" start="33530" end="33543" title="Straits Times" label="Straits Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q14356" start="34078" end="34092" title="Park Chung Hee" label="Park Chung Hee"/>
<link wikidata="Q487810" start="34113" end="34124" title="May 16 coup" label="May 16 coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q6296418" start="34174" end="34198" title="President of South Korea" label="President of South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q488521" start="34239" end="34258" title="Yushin Constitution" label="Yushin Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q488521" start="34276" end="34291" title="Fourth Republic of Korea" label="Fourth Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q482859" start="34334" end="34351" title="Assassination of Park Chung Hee" label="his assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q85412437" start="34618" end="34636" title="People Power Party (South Korea)" label="People Power Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009697" start="34700" end="34724" title="New Korea Party" label="Democratic-Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q242651" start="34748" end="34759" title="Roh Tae-woo" label="Roh Tae-woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q494973" start="34796" end="34825" title="Sixth Republic of South Korea" label="Sixth Republic of South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q242651" start="34882" end="34893" title="Roh Tae-woo" label="Roh Tae-woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q489162" start="34901" end="34925" title="Democratic Justice Party" label="Democratic Justice Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q165210" start="34927" end="34940" title="Kim Young Sam" label="Kim Young Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11279167" start="34948" end="34978" title="Reunification Democratic Party" label="Reunification Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q246167" start="34983" end="34995" title="Kim Jong-pil" label="Kim Jong-pil"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254989" start="35003" end="35034" title="New Democratic Republican Party" label="New Democratic Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q165210" start="35036" end="35049" title="Kim Young-sam" label="Kim Young-sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7009697" start="35275" end="35290" title="New Korea Party" label="New Korea Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="35396" end="35423" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q20916" start="35448" end="35468" title="Liberty Korea Party" label="Grand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q45785" start="35491" end="35503" title="Kim Dae-jung" label="Kim Dae-jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q14342" start="35576" end="35589" title="Lee Myung-bak" label="Lee Myung-bak"/>
<link wikidata="Q482837" start="35623" end="35627" title="2007 South Korean presidential election" label="2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="35727" end="35738" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="35743" end="35751" title="Romanticism" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="35768" end="35779" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="35788" end="35807" title="Feudalism" label="feudal social order"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248834" start="35917" end="35928" title="Progressive conservatism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="36155" end="36159" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="36192" end="36210" title="Russian Revolution" label="Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="36320" end="36329" title="Far-right politics" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q123685117" start="36345" end="36358" title="Authoritarian conservatism" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091203" start="36363" end="36370" title="Ultraconservatism" label="extreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q116859677" start="36421" end="36429" title="Moderate conservatism" label="moderate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="36509" end="36523" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="36598" end="36613" title="Francoist Spain" label="Francoist Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="36618" end="36637" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Salazarian Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="36709" end="36741" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="the collapse of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="36771" end="36778" title="Liberal conservatism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="36804" end="36815" title="National conservatism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167348" start="36877" end="36886" title="globalism" label="globalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="36929" end="36940" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q683337" start="37031" end="37038" title="Co-Princes of Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q160913" start="37040" end="37047" title="Monarchy of Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="37049" end="37056" title="Monarchy of Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898090" start="37058" end="37071" title="Monarchy of Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276071" start="37073" end="37083" title="Monarchy of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="37085" end="37091" title="Monarchy of Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="37097" end="37108" title="Monarchy of the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="37110" end="37116" title="Monarchy of Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="37118" end="37123" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="37125" end="37131" title="Monarchy of Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="37141" end="37155" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054567" start="37230" end="37255" title="Monarchist National Party" label="Monarchist National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549000" start="37274" end="37295" title="Black-Yellow Alliance" label="Black-Yellow Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="37418" end="37440" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Klemens von Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q19960681" start="37502" end="37520" title="Conservative Order" label="Conservative Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="37545" end="37563" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="37588" end="37605" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="37614" end="37629" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413483" start="37659" end="37684" title="European balance of power" label="European balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="37789" end="37804" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="37862" end="37876" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="37885" end="37899" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="37929" end="37948" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Austro-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="37974" end="37997" title="Austro-Hungarian Empire" label="Austro-Hungarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="38147" end="38158" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="38187" end="38210" title="First Austrian Republic" label="First Austrian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q306123" start="38217" end="38235" title="Austrian Civil War" label="Austrian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="38386" end="38397" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11730" start="38467" end="38477" title="Otto Bauer" label="Otto Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179111" start="38520" end="38543" title="Social Democratic Party of Austria" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="38557" end="38580" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163104" start="38588" end="38599" title="Conservative corporatism" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q747439" start="38604" end="38612" title="Clericalism" label="clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q695482" start="38631" end="38646" title="Patriotic Front (Austria)" label="Patriotic Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q692131" start="38685" end="38707" title="Christian Social Party (Austria)" label="Christian Social Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q176495" start="38802" end="38826" title="Federal State of Austria" label="Federal State of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="38856" end="38869" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="38889" end="38897" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q113951" start="39094" end="39119" title="Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn" label="Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="39169" end="39175" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="39181" end="39188" title="Left-wing politics" label="leftist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="39190" end="39201" title="Mob rule" label="ochlocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264925" start="39207" end="39216" title="Demagogy" label="demagogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11734" start="39337" end="39355" title="Engelbert Dollfuss" label="Engelbert Dollfuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="39399" end="39408" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="39421" end="39433" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="39459" end="39472" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037291" start="39503" end="39522" title="Austrian Nazi Party" label="Austrian Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="39617" end="39629" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q873152" start="39707" end="39718" title="July Putsch" label="July Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="39835" end="39851" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q306045" start="40093" end="40110" title="Austrian nobility" label="Austrian nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500812" start="40119" end="40134" title="Catholic clergy" label="Catholic clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76343" start="40188" end="40205" title="Otto von Hapsburg" label="Otto von Hapsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6622133" start="40216" end="40228" title="List of heirs to the Austrian throne" label="Crown Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="40376" end="40388" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q186867" start="40589" end="40617" title="Austrian People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Austrian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262885" start="40733" end="40747" title="Sebastian Kurz" label="Sebastian Kurz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45662" start="40784" end="40794" title="Klemens von Metternich" label="Metternich"/>
<link wikidata="Q792293" start="40858" end="40872" title="Catholic Party (Belgium)" label="Catholic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q750673" start="40878" end="40907" title="Christen-Democratisch en Vlaams" label="Christian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666386" start="40990" end="41004" title="Royal Question" label="Royal Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="41107" end="41117" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q290209" start="41308" end="41327" title="Flemish Movement" label="Flemish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q28982" start="41345" end="41365" title="New Flemish Alliance" label="New Flemish Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252927" start="41481" end="41486" title="Højre" label="Højre"/>
<link wikidata="Q151305" start="41560" end="41583" title="Christian IX of Denmark" label="Christian IX of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="41713" end="41719" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q902619" start="41767" end="41810" title="Conservative People&amp;#x27;s Party (Denmark)" label="Conservative People&amp;#x27;s Party of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363267" start="41916" end="41934" title="Free Conservatives" label="Free Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42045" end="42053" title="Right-wing populism#Denmark" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="42058" end="42066" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="42127" end="42134" title="Elitism" label="elitist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="42139" end="42144" title="Urbanization" label="urban"/>
<link wikidata="Q217321" start="42414" end="42422" title="Venstre (Denmark)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q58913" start="42511" end="42535" title="Young Conservatives (Denmark)" label="Young Conservatives (KU)"/>
<link wikidata="Q327190" start="42787" end="42800" title="Poul Schlüter" label="Poul Schlüter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777517" start="42846" end="42850" title="1984 Danish general election" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q64869600" start="42956" end="42960" title="2022 Danish general election" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q507170" start="43087" end="43113" title="Danish People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Danish People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23014672" start="43224" end="43233" title="New Right (Denmark)" label="New Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="43360" end="43368" title="Monarchy of Denmark" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q304191" start="43463" end="43487" title="National Coalition Party" label="National Coalition Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q518886" start="43705" end="43726" title="social market economy" label="social market economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q512990" start="43751" end="43763" title="Anti-Russian sentiment" label="anti-Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="43768" end="43782" title="Anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q211855" start="43898" end="43915" title="Finnish Civil War" label="Finnish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115002" start="43925" end="43938" title="Whites (Finland)" label="White Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811029" start="43960" end="43971" title="Finnish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Republic" label="Red Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q327042" start="43977" end="43999" title="Finnish Defence Forces" label="Finnish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014199" start="44021" end="44032" title="White Guard (Finland)" label="White Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152306" start="44047" end="44074" title="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim" label="Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q313422" start="44097" end="44117" title="German Army (German Empire)" label="German Imperial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412941" start="44180" end="44194" title="Lapua movement" label="Lapua movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441292" start="44274" end="44319" title="Mäntsälä rebellion" label="a failed &amp;quot;coup d&amp;#x27;etat&amp;quot; attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="44551" end="44559" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="44573" end="44589" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="44615" end="44634" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="44636" end="44647" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="44652" end="44661" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="44693" end="44702" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q214028" start="44863" end="44878" title="July Revolution" label="July Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="44888" end="44904" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347533" start="44935" end="44949" title="House of Orléans" label="Orléans branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="45021" end="45041" title="Second French Empire" label="Second French Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q672087" start="45058" end="45069" title="Bonapartist" label="Bonapartist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="45080" end="45092" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q88851" start="45229" end="45253" title="Henri, Count of Chambord" label="Henri, Count of Chambord"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="45662" end="45674" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5721" start="45702" end="45717" title="Philippe Pétain" label="Philippe Pétain"/>
<link wikidata="Q770215" start="46062" end="46070" title="Gaullism" label="Gaullist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874022" start="46100" end="46111" title="French nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="46302" end="46319" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="46332" end="46350" title="Free France" label="Free French Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q672087" start="46439" end="46450" title="Bonapartism" label="Bonapartist"/>
<link wikidata="Q20012759" start="46497" end="46512" title="The Republicans (France)" label="The Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q173152" start="46523" end="46551" title="Union for a Popular Movement" label="Union for a Popular Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q329" start="46580" end="46595" title="Nicolas Sarkozy" label="Nicolas Sarkozy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473640" start="46680" end="46689" title="Sarkozysm" label="Sarkozysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q288477" start="46725" end="46737" title="Éric Zemmour" label="Éric Zemmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q109932430" start="46768" end="46778" title="Reconquête" label="Reconquête"/>
<link wikidata="Q12927" start="46835" end="46848" title="Marine Le Pen" label="Marine Le Pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q205150" start="46856" end="46870" title="National Rally" label="National Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="46932" end="46940" title="Romanticism" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="47004" end="47024" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="47089" end="47107" title="German Romanticism" label="German Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47119" end="47129" title="Organicism#In politics and sociology" label="organicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12348939" start="47134" end="47145" title="Medievalism" label="medievalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q440582" start="47192" end="47205" title="Right Hegelians" label="Old Hegelians"/>
<link wikidata="Q695746" start="47228" end="47252" title="German historical school" label="German historical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q157271" start="47292" end="47310" title="Friedrich Schlegel" label="Friedrich Schlegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60684" start="47312" end="47319" title="Novalis" label="Novalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60576" start="47321" end="47349" title="Wilhelm Heinrich Wackenroder" label="Wilhelm Heinrich Wackenroder"/>
<link wikidata="Q76892" start="47351" end="47377" title="Friedrich Carl von Savigny" label="Friedrich Carl von Savigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q63176" start="47383" end="47394" title="Adam Müller" label="Adam Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="47481" end="47492" title="German nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="47551" end="47570" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="47600" end="47613" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="47670" end="47687" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="47737" end="47753" title="Balance of power (international relations)" label="balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q751533" start="47927" end="47946" title="class collaboration" label="class collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q170365" start="47998" end="48004" title="Junker (Prussia)" label="Junker"/>
<link wikidata="Q501503" start="48041" end="48048" title="German Emperor" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="48072" end="48085" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="48176" end="48202" title="universal manhood suffrage" label="universal manhood suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="48368" end="48383" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="48454" end="48464" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411984" start="48667" end="48690" title="Conservative Revolution" label="Conservative Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q57112" start="48743" end="48758" title="Oswald Spengler" label="Oswald Spengler"/>
<link wikidata="Q77148" start="48767" end="48779" title="Carl Schmitt" label="Carl Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q76727" start="48792" end="48804" title="Ernst Jünger" label="Ernst Jünger"/>
<link wikidata="Q158227" start="48867" end="48902" title="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="48957" end="48963" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594991" start="48973" end="49003" title="Agrarian conservatism in Germany" label="traditional agrarian movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="49093" end="49105" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21209" start="49231" end="49253" title="Claus von Stauffenberg" label="Claus von Stauffenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57574" start="49258" end="49278" title="Henning von Tresckow" label="Henning von Tresckow"/>
<link wikidata="Q76326" start="49287" end="49306" title="Dietrich Bonhoeffer" label="Dietrich Bonhoeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76439" start="49315" end="49344" title="Clemens August Graf von Galen" label="Clemens August Graf von Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57430" start="49361" end="49385" title="Carl Friedrich Goerdeler" label="Carl Friedrich Goerdeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="49514" end="49524" title="Wilhelm II" label="Wilhelm II"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="49579" end="49591" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q727480" start="49648" end="49662" title="ordoliberalism" label="ordoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q122452227" start="49703" end="49718" title="ordered liberty" label="ordered liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q65589" start="49919" end="49935" title="Alexander Rüstow" label="Alexander Rüstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q62444" start="49940" end="49953" title="Wilhelm Röpke" label="Wilhelm Röpke"/>
<link wikidata="Q312390" start="50074" end="50088" title="Wirtschaftswunder" label="German miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="50162" end="50174" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="50179" end="50186" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="50248" end="50274" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="50297" end="50308" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="50328" end="50348" title="German reunification" label="German reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048268" start="50372" end="50392" title="European integration" label="European integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11146" start="50412" end="50429" title="Maastricht Treaty" label="Maastricht Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q567" start="50514" end="50527" title="Angela Merkel" label="Angela Merkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="50603" end="50607" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q708725" start="50741" end="50748" title="CDU/CSU" label="CDU/CSU"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="50861" end="50884" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q782419" start="50958" end="50977" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Greece)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840097" start="51000" end="51023" title="Greek monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q265824" start="51040" end="51050" title="Second Hellenic Republic" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q937927" start="51051" end="51064" title="Liberal Party (Greece)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358836" start="51149" end="51169" title="4th of August Regime" label="4th of August Regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q189139" start="51181" end="51196" title="Ioannis Metaxas" label="Ioannis Metaxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="51389" end="51404" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q312046" start="51549" end="51567" title="Alexandros Papagos" label="Alexandros Papagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563354" start="51580" end="51591" title="Greek Rally" label="Greek Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371314" start="51783" end="51805" title="National Radical Union" label="National Radical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q156806" start="51812" end="51835" title="Konstantinos Karamanlis" label="Konstantinos Karamanlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343608" start="51908" end="51920" title="Centre Union" label="Centre Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="52006" end="52017" title="Greek junta" label="Greek junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204796" start="52041" end="52063" title="metapolitefsi" label="regime&amp;#x27;s collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q223153" start="52150" end="52163" title="New Democracy (Greece)" label="New Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050999" start="52231" end="52261" title="Turkish invasion of Cyprus" label="Turkish expansionism in Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q529666" start="52419" end="52437" title="Independent Greeks" label="Independent Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="52473" end="52479" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="52527" end="52535" title="National conservatism" label="national"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="52540" end="52562" title="religious conservatism" label="religious conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="52696" end="52708" title="Greek people" label="Greek people"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970362" start="52718" end="52739" title="Greek Orthodox Church" label="Greek Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845565" start="52799" end="52816" title="Hungary between the two world wars" label="inter-war Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q455193" start="52899" end="52910" title="István Deák" label="István Deák"/>
<link wikidata="Q925418" start="53015" end="53040" title="Hungarian Communist Party" label="Hungarian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q160159" start="53064" end="53081" title="Arrow Cross Party" label="Arrow Cross Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q156473" start="53102" end="53116" title="Ferenc Szálasi" label="Ferenc Szálasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57641" start="53182" end="53194" title="Viktor Orbán" label="Viktor Orbán"/>
<link wikidata="Q387006" start="53202" end="53208" title="Fidesz" label="Fidesz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315094" start="53224" end="53249" title="Prime Minister of Hungary" label="Prime Minister of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="53289" end="53308" title="soft Euroscepticism" label="soft Euroscepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="53310" end="53329" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="53335" end="53356" title="national conservatism" label="national conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354593" start="53400" end="53418" title="Conservative Party (Iceland)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q218303" start="53435" end="53453" title="Independence Party (Iceland)" label="Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540707" start="53513" end="53526" title="Liberal Party (Iceland, historical)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q751533" start="53719" end="53738" title="class collaboration" label="class collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q640866" start="54243" end="54258" title="Catholic Church in Ireland" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="54286" end="54305" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071693" start="54307" end="54323" title="Irish neutrality" label="Irish neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54325" end="54338" title="anti-abortion movements#Ireland" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="54340" end="54354" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781399" start="54356" end="54371" title="pro-Europeanism" label="pro-Europeanism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54393" end="54409" title="Opposition to immigration#Ireland" label="anti-immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="54437" end="54452" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54471" end="54495" title="Éamon de Valera#Catholic social policy" label="Catholic social policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="54657" end="54680" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62955" start="54740" end="54751" title="importation" label="importation"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="54755" end="54759" title="sales" label="sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="54763" end="54777" title="contraceptives" label="contraceptives"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="54821" end="54832" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="54857" end="54866" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q115824494" start="55100" end="55165" title="Irish anti-immigration protests" label="series of protests calling for a reduction in illegal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834471" start="55233" end="55265" title="Transitional shelter" label="temporary asylum seeker shelters"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="55351" end="55371" title="unification of Italy" label="unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949884" start="55418" end="55434" title="Historical Right" label="Historical Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949890" start="55534" end="55549" title="Historical Left" label="Historical Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="55557" end="55568" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717398" start="55649" end="55676" title="Italian People&amp;#x27;s Party (1919)" label="Italian People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55742" end="55750" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="55817" end="55840" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q132167997" start="56004" end="56017" title="Liberal Union (Italy)" label="Liberal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q508733" start="56043" end="56064" title="Italian Liberal Party" label="Italian Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="56090" end="56106" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q139596" start="56119" end="56141" title="National Fascist Party" label="National Fascist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q468823" start="56180" end="56193" title="March on Rome" label="March on Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q796897" start="56212" end="56226" title="Prime Minister of Italy" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q150642" start="56235" end="56254" title="Victor Emmanuel III" label="Victor Emmanuel III"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="56798" end="56814" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260521" start="56972" end="57009" title="1946 Italian institutional referendum" label="1946 Italian institutional referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="57276" end="57288" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q815348" start="57343" end="57362" title="Christian Democracy (Italy)" label="Christian Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="57464" end="57487" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q461886" start="57496" end="57519" title="Italian Communist Party" label="Italian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604679" start="57567" end="57583" title="Denis Mack Smith" label="Denis Mack Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q747439" start="57749" end="57757" title="Clericalism" label="clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q508733" start="57925" end="57946" title="Italian Liberal Party" label="Italian Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054567" start="57999" end="58024" title="Monarchist National Party" label="Monarchist National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126102" start="58046" end="58069" title="Italian Social Movement" label="Italian Social Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860" start="58111" end="58128" title="Silvio Berlusconi" label="Silvio Berlusconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q520749" start="58200" end="58204" title="1994 Italian general election" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q600309" start="58206" end="58210" title="2001 Italian general election" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166185" start="58216" end="58220" title="2008 Italian general election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q662849" start="58365" end="58382" title="National Alliance (Italy)" label="National Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q47750" start="58426" end="58435" title="Lega Nord" label="Lega Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q47720" start="58489" end="58510" title="The People of Freedom" label="The People of Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q14924303" start="58546" end="58558" title="Forza Italia (2013)" label="Forza Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970032" start="58570" end="58591" title="2018 Italian general election" label="2018 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q47817" start="58608" end="58626" title="Five Star Movement" label="Five Star Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q50379923" start="58691" end="58712" title="2022 Italian general election" label="2022 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059248" start="58716" end="58738" title="Centre-right coalition (Italy)" label="center-right coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757843" start="58777" end="58794" title="Brothers of Italy" label="Brothers of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85776185" start="58895" end="58899" title="Lega (political party)" label="Lega"/>
<link wikidata="Q451791" start="58945" end="58959" title="Giorgia Meloni" label="Giorgia Meloni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344670" start="59031" end="59067" title="Christian Social People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Christian Social People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q239333" start="59439" end="59484" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q332739" start="59529" end="59546" title="Party for Freedom" label="Party for Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q106625072" start="59568" end="59581" title="2023 Dutch general election" label="2023 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q586364" start="59678" end="59706" title="Conservative Party (Norway)" label="Conservative Party of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q500190" start="59864" end="59877" title="Liberal Party (Norway)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q190219" start="60096" end="60102" title="Labour Party (Norway)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q58434" start="60154" end="60165" title="paternalism" label="paternalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="60219" end="60238" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60288" end="60319" title="Kåre Willoch#Premiership" label="Kåre Willoch&amp;#x27;s premiership"/>
<link wikidata="Q190238" start="60422" end="60425" title="NRK" label="NRK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="60466" end="60479" title="Law and order (politics)" label="law and order"/>
<link wikidata="Q156874" start="60600" end="60615" title="Law and Justice" label="Law and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="60722" end="60746" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152005" start="60773" end="60788" title="Catholic Church in Poland" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q388698" start="60835" end="60846" title="Atlanticism" label="Atlanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="61104" end="61113" title="Keynesian" label="Keynesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q416916" start="61240" end="61243" title="Solidarity Electoral Action" label="AWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="61247" end="61254" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="Endecja"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="61449" end="61468" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345559" start="61572" end="61609" title="European Conservatives and Reformists Group" label="European Conservatives and Reformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="61846" end="61863" title="liberal democracy" label="liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q605479" start="61922" end="61942" title="illiberal democracy" label="illiberal democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="61981" end="61996" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387250" start="62162" end="62186" title="State Unity in the Kresy" label="State Unity in the Kresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q210355" start="62237" end="62255" title="National Democracy (Poland)" label="National Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161590" start="62272" end="62285" title="Roman Dmowski" label="Roman Dmowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="62323" end="62337" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q75617" start="62342" end="62359" title="petite bourgeoise" label="petite bourgeoise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62429" end="62452" title="Peasant movement#Poland" label="Polish peasant movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471199" start="62475" end="62496" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Party &amp;quot;Piast&amp;quot; (1913–1931)" label="PSL &amp;quot;Piast&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5102692" start="62538" end="62555" title="Chjeno-Piast" label="common government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483784" start="62566" end="62581" title="Lanckorona Pact" label="Lanckorona Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q700386" start="62681" end="62692" title="Russophilia" label="Russophilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="62730" end="62744" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851355" start="62759" end="62769" title="White Army" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q59599" start="62817" end="62834" title="civic nationalism" label="civic nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="62840" end="62855" title="parliamentarism" label="parliamentarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q885" start="62866" end="62881" title="Józef Piłsudski" label="Józef Piłsudski"/>
<link wikidata="Q505989" start="62889" end="62893" title="Nonpartisan Bloc for Cooperation with the Government" label="BBWR"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="62913" end="62938" title="presidential republic" label="empowering the presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q357184" start="63025" end="63049" title="Stanisław Cat-Mackiewicz" label="Stanisław Cat-Mackiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174101" start="63117" end="63128" title="Romanticism in Poland" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571526" start="63133" end="63143" title="Christ of Europe" label="Messianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747" start="63291" end="63305" title="Vladimir Putin" label="Vladimir Putin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="63631" end="63647" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453988" start="63649" end="63665" title="free immigration" label="free immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17898" start="63671" end="63693" title="LGBT rights by country or territory" label="rights for LGBT people"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="63761" end="63774" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11480083" start="63780" end="63801" title="Economic interventionism" label="economic intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="63852" end="63871" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="63889" end="63897" title="Right-wing populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="63941" end="63958" title="Right-libertarianism" label="right-libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q155271" start="64109" end="64119" title="think tank" label="think tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198339" start="64197" end="64210" title="Izborsky Club" label="Izborsky Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q607825" start="64231" end="64250" title="Alexander Prokhanov" label="Alexander Prokhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354258" start="64261" end="64280" title="Russian nationalism" label="Russian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q548164" start="64394" end="64410" title="Vladislav Surkov" label="Vladislav Surkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="64582" end="64605" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q44187" start="64613" end="64639" title="Patriarch Kirill of Moscow" label="Patriarch Kirill of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="64747" end="64765" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q10656531" start="64986" end="65005" title="Swedish Romantic literature" label="Swedish Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q380937" start="65021" end="65039" title="Erik Gustaf Geijer" label="Erik Gustaf Geijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390991" start="65056" end="65065" title="Gothicism" label="Gothicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="65081" end="65091" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="65100" end="65114" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q821990" start="65145" end="65170" title="Christopher Jacob Boström" label="Christopher Jacob Boström"/>
<link wikidata="Q366765" start="65339" end="65352" title="Esaias Tegnér" label="Esaias Tegnér"/>
<link wikidata="Q444538" start="65357" end="65384" title="Per Daniel Amadeus Atterbom" label="Per Daniel Amadeus Atterbom"/>
<link wikidata="Q110843" start="65458" end="65476" title="Moderate Party" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="65547" end="65565" title="universal suffrage" label="universal suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q53294" start="65671" end="65684" title="Arvid Lindman" label="Arvid Lindman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895489" start="65727" end="65740" title="male suffrage" label="male suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q53633" start="65878" end="65891" title="Ernst Trygger" label="Ernst Trygger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="65957" end="65970" title="death penalty" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q455088" start="66171" end="66185" title="Rudolf Kjellén" label="Rudolf Kjellén"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="66204" end="66215" title="geopolitics" label="geopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904237" start="66220" end="66231" title="biopolitics" label="biopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66251" end="66278" title="Organicism#In politics and sociology" label="organic theory of the state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163104" start="66302" end="66313" title="Conservative corporatism" label="corporatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q105112" start="66501" end="66524" title="Swedish Social Democratic Party" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184704" start="66585" end="66600" title="grand coalition" label="grand coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q110832" start="66760" end="66772" title="Centre Party (Sweden)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q110857" start="66802" end="66829" title="Liberals (Sweden)" label="Liberal People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q110843" start="66875" end="66889" title="Moderate Party" label="Moderate Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306200" start="66932" end="66936" title="Fälldin I cabinet" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306190" start="66944" end="66948" title="Fälldin II cabinet" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q53721" start="67003" end="67020" title="Thorbjörn Fälldin" label="Thorbjörn Fälldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907653" start="67034" end="67038" title="Carl Bildt cabinet" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q52922" start="67056" end="67066" title="Carl Bildt" label="Carl Bildt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213654" start="67107" end="67126" title="Christian Democrats (Sweden)" label="Christian Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="67198" end="67214" title="mass immigration" label="mass immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="67365" end="67381" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q504069" start="67442" end="67458" title="Sweden Democrats" label="Sweden Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941329" start="67647" end="67657" title="Ebba Busch" label="Ebba Busch"/>
<link wikidata="Q56629098" start="67738" end="67742" title="2022 Swedish general election" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q114671310" start="67778" end="67788" title="Kristersson cabinet" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q114660969" start="67865" end="67879" title="Tidö Agreement" label="Tidö Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800937" start="67895" end="67906" title="Tidö Castle" label="Tidö Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="68170" end="68177" title="Cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons"/>
<link wikidata="Q177581" start="68249" end="68265" title="Swiss neutrality" label="Swiss neutrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q684719" start="68349" end="68365" title="Federal Assembly (Switzerland)" label="Federal Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q385258" start="68403" end="68428" title="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Swiss People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q659461" start="68440" end="68480" title="Christian Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party of Switzerland" label="Christian Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q151768" start="68496" end="68540" title="Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q162767" start="68623" end="68646" title="Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf" label="Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf"/>
<link wikidata="Q477228" start="68715" end="68753" title="Party of Farmers, Traders and Independents" label="Party of Farmers, Traders and Citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="69039" end="69052" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q309310" start="69057" end="69069" title="Isolationism" label="isolationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q158818" start="69168" end="69190" title="Anti-Defamation League" label="Anti-Defamation League"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="69383" end="69400" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="69426" end="69439" title="Far-right politics" label="extreme right"/>
<link wikidata="Q19956162" start="69513" end="69528" title="Hans-Georg Betz" label="Hans-Georg Betz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508143" start="69665" end="69680" title="Ukrainian State" label="Ukrainian State"/>
<link wikidata="Q435090" start="69714" end="69732" title="Pavlo Skoropadskyi" label="Pavlo Skoropadskyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747983" start="69785" end="69791" title="Hetman of Ukraine" label="Hetman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212439" start="69861" end="69881" title="Cossack Hetmanate" label="Cossack Hetman state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978120" start="70061" end="70080" title="Vyacheslav Lypynsky" label="Vyacheslav Lypynsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="70217" end="70229" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="70290" end="70300" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whig Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="70335" end="70348" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="70357" end="70375" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="70461" end="70467" title="Tories (British political party)" label="Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q332470" start="70818" end="70838" title="Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke" label="Viscount Bolingbroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q212983" start="70850" end="70858" title="Jacobitism" label="Jacobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="70943" end="70964" title="Catholic emancipation" label="Catholic emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="70969" end="70990" title="American Revolution" label="American independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="71013" end="71027" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="71155" end="71163" title="Loyalism" label="loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="71270" end="71294" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441261" start="71369" end="71385" title="Quarterly Review" label="Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616695" start="71453" end="71469" title="Edinburgh Review" label="Edinburgh Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529971" start="71514" end="71539" title="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Blackwood&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="71691" end="71712" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformist dissent"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="71800" end="71811" title="British imperialism" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="71823" end="71834" title="high-church" label="high-church"/>
<link wikidata="Q24045685" start="71882" end="71916" title="Orthodox Churchman&amp;#x27;s Magazine" label="Orthodox Churchman&amp;#x27;s Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179885" start="71971" end="71978" title="Jacobin" label="Jacobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="71980" end="71989" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687" start="71994" end="72003" title="Unitarianism" label="Unitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982365" start="72029" end="72041" title="ultra-Tories" label="ultra-Tories"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="72168" end="72180" title="mercantilism" label="mercantilism"/>
<link wikidata="Q318785" start="72186" end="72201" title="Navigation Acts" label="Navigation Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q154640" start="72211" end="72224" title="Holy Alliance" label="Holy Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="72270" end="72280" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="72337" end="72354" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="72667" end="72675" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="72887" end="72896" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="73473" end="73488" title="Anglican Church" label="Anglican Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="73667" end="73681" title="Tory democracy" label="Tory democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="73836" end="73850" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="73851" end="73862" title="Robert Peel" label="Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q661123" start="73880" end="73898" title="Tamworth Manifesto" label="Tamworth Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757318" start="74017" end="74026" title="High Tory" label="High Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="74126" end="74144" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="74281" end="74294" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Earl of Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="74299" end="74316" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q24631" start="74387" end="74403" title="George Hamilton-Gordon, 4th Earl of Aberdeen" label="Earl of Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="74451" end="74461" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="74492" end="74505" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="74630" end="74635" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q97570923" start="74644" end="74652" title="radicalism (politics)" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="74665" end="74678" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q205157" start="74878" end="74883" title="History of Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311653" start="74884" end="74893" title="Irish Parliamentary Party" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="74902" end="74919" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754707" start="75098" end="75115" title="Liberal Unionist Party" label="Liberal Unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q315999" start="75124" end="75142" title="Joseph Chamberlain" label="Joseph Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="75848" end="75860" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="75952" end="75966" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="76172" end="76189" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="76201" end="76211" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223200" start="76380" end="76396" title="soft euroscepticism" label="soft eurosceptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="76418" end="76432" title="Federal Europe" label="Federal Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q215519" start="76484" end="76509" title="Democratic Unionist Party" label="Democratic Unionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="76542" end="76575" title="United Kingdom Independence Party" label="United Kingdom Independence Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="76770" end="76795" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q30178117" start="76865" end="76884" title="Second May ministry" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="77350" end="77371" title="military dictatorship" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496151" start="77778" end="77789" title="Louis Hartz" label="Louis Hartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="78023" end="78027" title="Portugal" label="Luso"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="78028" end="78035" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="78040" end="78054" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="78144" end="78154" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q55846014" start="78159" end="78169" title="Monarchism in Brazil" label="monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370527" start="78381" end="78412" title="military dictatorship in Brazil" label="military dictatorship in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292358" start="78491" end="78505" title="Brazilian Army" label="Brazilian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624469" start="78925" end="78942" title="Brazilian Miracle" label="Brazilian Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="79033" end="79046" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79268" end="79285" title="Conservative wave#Brazil" label="conservative wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958898" start="79311" end="79347" title="2014 Brazilian presidential election" label="2014 Brazilian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q949699" start="79380" end="79407" title="National Congress of Brazil" label="National Congress of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="79602" end="79611" title="ruralists" label="ruralists"/>
<link wikidata="Q598435" start="79613" end="79625" title="Military of Brazil" label="the military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2289697" start="79627" end="79637" title="Police of Brazil" label="the police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="79643" end="79666" title="#Religious_conservatism" label="religious conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q20135510" start="79920" end="79940" title="Free Brazil Movement" label="Free Brazil Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304982" start="79985" end="79999" title="Jair Bolsonaro" label="Jair Bolsonaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366265" start="80007" end="80027" title="Social Liberal Party (Brazil)" label="Social Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220142" start="80050" end="80086" title="2018 Brazilian presidential election" label="2018 Brazilian presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366524" start="80142" end="80156" title="National Party (Chile, 1966–1973)" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704093" start="80287" end="80317" title="military dictatorship of Chile" label="military dictatorship of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886342" start="80346" end="80360" title="Government Junta of Chile (1973)" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="80379" end="80395" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3905314" start="80420" end="80431" title="Pinochetism" label="Pinochetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133641" start="80542" end="80562" title="Chile&amp;#x27;s economy" label="Chile&amp;#x27;s economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q609515" start="80643" end="80655" title="Chicago Boys" label="Chicago Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q746418" start="80663" end="80675" title="Liberalization" label="liberalizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="80708" end="80718" title="Neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q747333" start="80745" end="80773" title="Colombian Conservative Party" label="Colombian Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q452017" start="80835" end="80863" title="Francisco de Paula Santander" label="Francisco de Paula Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="81309" end="81339" title="separation of church and state" label="separation of church and state"/>
<link wikidata="Q939021" start="81534" end="81557" title="Colombian Liberal Party" label="Colombian Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="81640" end="81667" title="traditionalist conservatism" label="traditionalist conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="81669" end="81688" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="81694" end="81713" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populism"/>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="81785" end="81805" title="classical liberalism" label="classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="81924" end="81941" title="Toryism" label="Tory conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496151" start="81976" end="81987" title="Louis Hartz" label="Louis Hartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329469" start="82115" end="82129" title="Reginald Bibby" label="Reginald Bibby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555173" start="82362" end="82371" title="Loyalism" label="loyalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="82399" end="82418" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066234" start="82746" end="82760" title="Family Compact" label="Family Compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="82791" end="82808" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q274053" start="83055" end="83067" title="ultramontane" label="ultramontane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="83178" end="83185" title="Toryism" label="Toryism"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="83513" end="83530" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="83543" end="83571" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872697" start="83595" end="83605" title="Autonomism in Quebec" label="autonomist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815983" start="83606" end="83621" title="Union Nationale (Quebec)" label="Union Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q113941" start="83630" end="83647" title="Maurice Duplessis" label="Maurice Duplessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114993" start="83848" end="83862" title="Grande Noirceur" label="Great Darkness"/>
<link wikidata="Q239514" start="83879" end="83895" title="Quiet Revolution" label="Quiet Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="84053" end="84070" title="Social democracy" label="social democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="84075" end="84087" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="sovereignist"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="84088" end="84103" title="Parti Québécois" label="Parti Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587194" start="84112" end="84120" title="Centrism" label="centrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091392" start="84125" end="84135" title="Federalism in Quebec" label="federalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631384" start="84136" end="84156" title="Quebec Liberal Party" label="Quebec Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631384" start="84263" end="84283" title="Quebec Liberal Party" label="Quebec Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="84291" end="84306" title="Parti Québécois" label="Parti Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815983" start="84398" end="84413" title="Union Nationale (Quebec)" label="Union Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3418129" start="84436" end="84467" title="Ralliement créditiste du Québec" label="Ralliement créditiste du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140345" start="84472" end="84496" title="Parti national populaire" label="Parti national populaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q507416" start="84509" end="84533" title="1981 Quebec general election" label="1981 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586424" start="84636" end="84660" title="1994 Quebec general election" label="1994 provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q343735" start="84670" end="84699" title="Action démocratique du Québec" label="Action démocratique du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193702" start="84715" end="84734" title="Parliamentary opposition" label="Official opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="84742" end="84759" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085147" start="84807" end="84823" title="François Legault" label="François Legault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348226" start="84831" end="84854" title="Coalition Avenir Québec" label="Coalition Avenir Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="84893" end="84921" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="84978" end="84992" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055257" start="85029" end="85041" title="Yoram Hazony" label="Yoram Hazony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276882" start="85131" end="85146" title="Jordan Peterson" label="Jordan Peterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="85391" end="85410" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q158997" start="85629" end="85641" title="Russell Kirk" label="Russell Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689851" start="85680" end="85701" title="The Conservative Mind" label="The Conservative Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="85795" end="85814" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="85941" end="85953" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="86024" end="86040" title="Founding Fathers" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="86055" end="86065" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="86095" end="86112" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="86183" end="86196" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q25349473" start="86269" end="86291" title="Judeo-Christian ethics" label="Judeo-Christian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="86347" end="86362" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="86364" end="86371" title="Liberty" label="Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="86485" end="86496" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="86647" end="86663" title="History of the Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="86687" end="86705" title="Southern Democrats" label="Southern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058301" start="86772" end="86790" title="Northern Democrats" label="Northern Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="87147" end="87163" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163103" start="87311" end="87333" title="Conservative Coalition" label="Conservative Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276635" start="87435" end="87448" title="Edward Brooke" label="Edward Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231238" start="87489" end="87510" title="Conservative Democrat" label="Conservative Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2387981" start="87553" end="87574" title="Republican Revolution" label="Republican Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7570722" start="87598" end="87645" title="Southern strategy" label="shifted from solid Democrat to solid Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="87717" end="87733" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="87814" end="87830" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Grover Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="87879" end="87901" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418422" start="88163" end="88173" title="Panic of 1893" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q10594775" start="88237" end="88251" title="National Democratic Party (United States)" label="Gold Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="88265" end="88287" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q745405" start="88326" end="88337" title="bimetallism" label="bimetallism"/>
<link wikidata="Q443866" start="88409" end="88424" title="Alton B. Parker" label="Alton B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="88629" end="88647" title="Individualism" label="individual liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="88734" end="88750" title="small government" label="small government"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="88752" end="88764" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="88829" end="88853" title="Modern Liberalism in the United States" label="modern American liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="88894" end="88909" title="social equality" label="social equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="88914" end="88928" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="89041" end="89059" title="right to bear arms" label="right to bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084103" start="89061" end="89077" title="Christian values" label="Christian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251200" start="89431" end="89444" title="school prayer" label="school prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129261" start="89450" end="89465" title="Opposition to the legalization of abortion" label="oppose abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="89467" end="89483" title="Neoconservatives" label="Neoconservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074954" start="89575" end="89593" title="Paleoconservatives" label="Paleoconservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="89601" end="89617" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q604988" start="89886" end="89897" title="Evil Empire speech" label="evil empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="89916" end="89937" title="Reagan administration" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="89982" end="89997" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="Reagan Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="90219" end="90232" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q608537" start="90237" end="90248" title="Reaganomics" label="Reaganomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502313" start="90278" end="90300" title="trickle-down economics" label="trickle-down economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774354" start="90416" end="90437" title="anti-environmentalism" label="anti-environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q19042" start="90529" end="90547" title="Tea Party movement" label="Tea Party movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="90980" end="90992" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="91171" end="91192" title="national conservatism" label="national conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="91194" end="91207" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168082" start="91209" end="91230" title="cultural conservatism" label="cultural conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q471183" start="91239" end="91246" title="Realism (international relations)" label="realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="91280" end="91295" title="neoconservatism" label="neoconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="91440" end="91466" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="91496" end="91515" title="social conservatism" label="social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="91520" end="91540" title="liberal conservatism" label="liberal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q117312716" start="91832" end="91846" title="National Right (Liberal Party of Australia)" label="National Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137034" start="91946" end="91956" title="James Jupp" label="James Jupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="92163" end="92177" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q946040" start="92246" end="92273" title="National Party of Australia" label="National Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395400" start="92308" end="92326" title="Family First Party" label="Family First Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054871" start="92328" end="92350" title="Democratic Labour Party (Australia, 1980)" label="Democratic Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002421" start="92352" end="92387" title="Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party" label="Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q29021047" start="92389" end="92413" title="Australian Conservatives" label="Australian Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378340" start="92423" end="92453" title="Katter&amp;#x27;s Australian Party" label="Katter&amp;#x27;s Australian Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="92496" end="92518" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467193" start="92548" end="92559" title="Labor Right" label="Labor Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="92563" end="92584" title="socially conservative" label="socially conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901345" start="92880" end="92916" title="Historic conservatism in New Zealand" label="Historic conservatism in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793808" start="92984" end="93009" title="New Zealand Liberal Party" label="New Zealand Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132236" start="93109" end="93121" title="Reform Party (New Zealand)" label="Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="93156" end="93182" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="93662" end="93674" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="93714" end="93731" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q378132" start="93878" end="93908" title="Big Five Personality Traits" label="The Big Five personality model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596387" start="93942" end="93962" title="political psychology" label="political psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307067" start="94036" end="94053" title="Conscientiousness" label="Conscientiousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q208351" start="94421" end="94428" title="disgust" label="disgust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="94669" end="94677" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="94682" end="94694" title="gay marriage" label="gay marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="94722" end="94745" title="evolutionary psychology" label="evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="94828" end="94836" title="in-group" label="in-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="94842" end="94851" title="Outgroup (sociology)" label="out-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641161" start="95169" end="95183" title="hypervigilance" label="hypervigilance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4376276" start="95449" end="95485" title="right-wing authoritarian personality" label="right-wing authoritarian personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q786753" start="95497" end="95513" title="personality type" label="personality type"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931655" start="95711" end="95724" title="Bob Altemeyer" label="Bob Altemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152388" start="95836" end="95853" title="Theodor W. Adorno" label="Theodor W. Adorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714949" start="95863" end="95892" title="The Authoritarian Personality" label="The Authoritarian Personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q368440" start="95919" end="95926" title="F-scale (personality test)" label="F-scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q93292921" start="96398" end="96411" title="Karen Stenner" label="Karen Stenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569187" start="96775" end="96787" title="Glenn Wilson (psychologist)" label="Glenn Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q457427" start="96999" end="97023" title="Ambiguity tolerance" label="intolerance of ambiguity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979672" start="97037" end="97054" title="Cognitive closure (psychology)" label="cognitive closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551065" start="97490" end="97518" title="Social dominance orientation" label="Social dominance orientation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18773" start="97530" end="97547" title="personality trait" label="personality trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="97591" end="97607" title="social hierarchy" label="social hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="97650" end="97658" title="in-group" label="in-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="97674" end="97684" title="In-group and out-group" label="out-groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q59230053" start="97699" end="97713" title="Felicia Pratto" label="Felicia Pratto"/>
<link wikidata="Q847808" start="97855" end="97873" title="Social engineering (political science)" label="social engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179742" start="97993" end="98002" title="prejudice" label="prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235495" start="98027" end="98045" title="David J. Schneider" label="David J. Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390479" start="98349" end="98364" title="Kenneth Minogue" label="Kenneth Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="98469" end="98475" title="racism" label="racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798155" start="98863" end="98879" title="Arthur C. Brooks" label="Arthur C. Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163006" start="99583" end="99608" title="Conservatism in Australia" label="Conservatism in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q118669779" start="99611" end="99637" title="Conservatism in Bangladesh" label="Conservatism in Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28680488" start="99640" end="99662" title="Conservatism in Brazil" label="Conservatism in Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163008" start="99665" end="99687" title="Conservatism in Canada" label="Conservatism in Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163007" start="99690" end="99714" title="Conservatism in Colombia" label="Conservatism in Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163010" start="99717" end="99740" title="Conservatism in Germany" label="Conservatism in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q15913486" start="99743" end="99768" title="Conservatism in Hong Kong" label="Conservatism in Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086308" start="99771" end="99792" title="Conservatism in India" label="Conservatism in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q125531089" start="99795" end="99816" title="Conservatism in Japan" label="Conservatism in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q117598666" start="99819" end="99843" title="Conservatism in Malaysia" label="Conservatism in Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24901345" start="99846" end="99873" title="Historic conservatism in New Zealand" label="Conservatism in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017310" start="99876" end="99900" title="Conservatism in Pakistan" label="Conservatism in Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906481" start="99903" end="99923" title="Conservatism in Peru" label="Conservatism in Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q67358148" start="99926" end="99948" title="Conservatism in Russia" label="Conservatism in Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163012" start="99951" end="99973" title="Conservatism in Serbia" label="Conservatism in Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163014" start="99976" end="100003" title="Conservatism in South Korea" label="Conservatism in South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q27337474" start="100006" end="100028" title="Conservatism in Turkey" label="Conservatism in Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163013" start="100031" end="100065" title="Conservatism in the United Kingdom" label="Conservatism in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="100068" end="100101" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="Conservatism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q123685117" start="100132" end="100158" title="Authoritarian conservatism" label="Authoritarian conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922300" start="100161" end="100179" title="Black conservatism" label="Black conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163104" start="100182" end="100206" title="Conservative corporatism" label="Corporatist conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168082" start="100209" end="100230" title="Cultural conservatism" label="Cultural conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613283" start="100233" end="100254" title="Conservative variants of feminism" label="Feminist conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="100257" end="100276" title="Fiscal conservatism" label="Fiscal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062758" start="100279" end="100297" title="Green conservatism" label="Green conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457825" start="100300" end="100317" title="LGBT conservatism" label="LGBT conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="100320" end="100340" title="Liberal conservatism" label="Liberal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="100343" end="100367" title="Libertarian conservatism" label="Libertarian conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q116859677" start="100370" end="100391" title="Moderate conservatism" label="Moderate conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q852739" start="100394" end="100415" title="National conservatism" label="National conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="100418" end="100433" title="Neoconservatism" label="Neoconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333466" start="100436" end="100462" title="Paternalistic conservatism" label="Paternalistic conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q106590022" start="100465" end="100487" title="Pragmatic conservatism" label="Pragmatic conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248834" start="100490" end="100514" title="Progressive conservatism" label="Progressive conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="100517" end="100538" title="Right-wing populism" label="Populist conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="100541" end="100560" title="Social conservatism" label="Social conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="100563" end="100590" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="Traditionalist conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091203" start="100593" end="100610" title="Ultraconservatism" label="Ultraconservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="100635" end="100654" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="100657" end="100672" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q324530" start="100675" end="100691" title="Communitarianism" label="Communitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="100694" end="100715" title="Counter-revolutionary" label="Counter-revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395327" start="100718" end="100729" title="Familialism" label="Familialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q780814" start="100732" end="100741" title="Historism" label="Historism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130051108" start="100744" end="100757" title="Neopatriarchy" label="Neopatriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="100760" end="100771" title="Reactionary" label="Reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333565" start="100774" end="100787" title="Right realism" label="Right realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542592" start="100790" end="100810" title="Small-c conservative" label="Small-c conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="100813" end="100820" title="Toryism" label="Toryism"/>
<link wikidata="Q199993" start="100823" end="100849" title="Traditionalist Catholicism" label="Traditionalist Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="101342" end="101365" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6677" wikidata="Q794394" url="?curid=6677" title="Classical liberalism">
<text>Classical liberalism is a political tradition and a branch of liberalism that advocates free market and laissez-faire economics and civil liberties under the rule of law, with special emphasis on individual autonomy, limited government, economic freedom, political freedom and freedom of speech. Classical liberalism, contrary to progressive branches like social liberalism, looks more negatively on social policies, taxation and the state involvement in the lives of individuals, and it advocates deregulation.

Until the Great Depression and the rise of social liberalism, classical liberalism was called economic liberalism. Later, the term was applied as a retronym, to distinguish earlier 19th-century liberalism from social liberalism. By modern standards, in the United States, the bare term &quot;liberalism&quot; often means social or progressive liberalism, but in Europe and Australia, the bare term &quot;liberalism&quot; often means classical liberalism.

Classical liberalism gained full flowering in the early 18th century, building on ideas dating at least as far back as the 16th century, within the Iberian, French, British, and Central European contexts, and it was foundational to the American Revolution and &quot;American Project&quot; more broadly. Notable liberal individuals whose ideas contributed to classical liberalism include John Locke, François Quesnay, Jean-Baptiste Say, Montesquieu, Voltaire, Marquis de Condorcet, Thomas Paine, Thomas Malthus, and David Ricardo. It drew on classical economics, especially the economic ideas espoused by Adam Smith in Book One of &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, and on a belief in natural law. In contemporary times, Ayn Rand, Murray Rothbard, Friedrich Hayek, Milton Friedman, Ludwig von Mises, Thomas Sowell, Walter E. Williams, George Stigler, Larry Arnhart, Ronald Coase and James M. Buchanan are seen as the most prominent advocates of classical liberalism. However, other scholars have made reference to these contemporary thoughts as &quot;neoclassical liberalism&quot;, distinguishing them from 18th-century classical liberalism.

In its defense of economic liberties, classical liberalism may be described as conservative or right wing, while in its defense of civil liberties, it has more in common with modern liberalism (the left). Despite this, classical liberals tend to reject the right&#x27;s higher tolerance for economic protectionism and the left&#x27;s inclination for collective group rights due to classical liberalism&#x27;s central principle of individualism. Additionally, in the United States, classical liberalism is considered closely tied to, or synonymous with, American libertarianism.

== Evolution of core beliefs ==
Core beliefs of classical liberals included new ideaswhich departed from both the older conservative idea of society as a family and from the later sociological concept of society as a complex set of social networks.

Classical liberals agreed with Thomas Hobbes that individuals created government to protect themselves from each other and to minimize conflict between individuals that would otherwise arise in a state of nature. These beliefs were complemented by a belief that financial incentive could best motivate labourers. This belief led to the passage of the Poor Law Amendment Act 1834, which limited the provision of social assistance, based on the idea that markets are the mechanism that most efficiently leads to wealth.

Drawing on ideas of Adam Smith, classical liberals believed that it was in the common interest that all individuals be able to secure their own economic self-interest. They were critical of what would come to be the idea of the welfare state as interfering in a free market. Despite Smith&#x27;s resolute recognition of the importance and value of labour and of labourers, classical liberals criticized labour&#x27;s group rights being pursued at the expense of individual rights while accepting corporations&#x27; rights, which led to inequality of bargaining power. Classical liberals argued that individuals should be free to obtain work from the highest-paying employers, while the profit motive would ensure that products that people desired were produced at prices they would pay. In a free market, both labour and capital would receive the greatest possible reward, while production would be organized efficiently to meet consumer demand. Classical liberals argued for what they called a minimal state and government, limited to the following functions:
* Laws to protect citizens from wrongs committed against them by other citizens, which included protection of individual rights, private property, enforcement of contracts and common law.
* A common national defence to provide protection against foreign invaders.
* Public works and services that cannot be provided in a free market such as a stable currency, standard weights and measures and building and upkeep of roads, canals, harbours, railways, communications and postal services.

Classical liberals asserted that rights are of a negative nature and therefore stipulate that other individuals and governments are to refrain from interfering with the free market, opposing social liberals who assert that individuals have positive rights, such as the right to vote, the right to an education, the right to healthcare, and the right to a minimum wage. For society to guarantee positive rights, it requires taxation over and above the minimum needed to enforce negative rights.

Core beliefs of classical liberals did not necessarily include democracy nor government by a majority vote by citizens because &quot;there is nothing in the bare idea of majority rule to show that majorities will always respect the rights of property or maintain rule of law&quot;. For example, James Madison argued for a constitutional republic with protections for individual liberty over a pure democracy, reasoning that in a pure democracy a &quot;common passion or interest will, in almost every case, be felt by a majority of the whole ... and there is nothing to check the inducements to sacrifice the weaker party&quot;.

In the late 19th century, classical liberalism developed into neoclassical liberalism, which argued for government to be as small as possible to allow the exercise of individual freedom. In its most extreme form, neoclassical liberalism advocated social Darwinism. Right-libertarianism is a modern form of neoclassical liberalism. However, Edwin Van de Haar states although classical liberal thought influenced libertarianism, there are significant differences between them. Classical liberalism refuses to give priority to liberty over order and therefore does not exhibit the hostility to the state which is the defining feature of libertarianism. As such, right-libertarians believe classical liberals do not have enough respect for individual property rights and lack sufficient trust in the free market&#x27;s workings and spontaneous order leading to their support of a much larger state. Right-libertarians also disagree with classical liberals as being too supportive of central banks and monetarist policies.

=== Typology of beliefs ===
Friedrich Hayek identified two different traditions within classical liberalism, namely the British tradition and the French tradition: 
* The British philosophers Bernard Mandeville, David Hume, Edmund Burke, Adam Smith, Adam Ferguson, Josiah Tucker and William Paley held beliefs in empiricism, the common law and in traditions and institutions which had spontaneously evolved but were imperfectly understood. 
*The French philosophers Voltaire, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Denis Diderot, Maximilien Robespierre, Louis Antoine de Saint-Just, Marquis de Condorcet, the Encyclopedists and the Physiocrats believed in rationalism and sometimes showed hostility to tradition and religion.

Hayek conceded that the national labels did not exactly correspond to those belonging to each tradition since he saw the Frenchmen Montesquieu, Benjamin Constant, Joseph De Maistre and Alexis de Tocqueville as belonging to the British tradition and the British Thomas Hobbes, Joseph Priestley, Richard Price, Edward Gibbon, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson and Thomas Paine as belonging to the French tradition. Hayek also rejected the label &quot;laissez-faire&quot; as originating from the French tradition and alien to the beliefs of Hume and Smith.

Guido De Ruggiero also identified differences between &quot;Montesquieu and Rousseau, the English and the democratic types of liberalism&quot; and argued that there was a &quot;profound contrast between the two Liberal systems&quot;. He claimed that the spirit of &quot;authentic English Liberalism&quot; had &quot;built up its work piece by piece without ever destroying what had once been built, but basing upon it every new departure&quot;. This liberalism had &quot;insensibly adapted ancient institutions to modern needs&quot; and &quot;instinctively recoiled from all abstract proclamations of principles and rights&quot;. Ruggiero claimed that this liberalism was challenged by what he called the &quot;new Liberalism of France&quot; that was characterised by egalitarianism and a &quot;rationalistic consciousness&quot;.

In 1848, Francis Lieber distinguished between what he called &quot;Anglican and Gallican Liberty&quot;. Lieber asserted that &quot;independence in the highest degree, compatible with safety and broad national guarantees of liberty, is the great aim of Anglican liberty, and self-reliance is the chief source from which it draws its strength&quot;. On the other hand, Gallican liberty &quot;is sought in government ... . [T]he French look for the highest degree of political civilisation in organisation, that is, in the highest degree of interference by public power&quot;.

== History ==

=== Great Britain ===
French physiocracy heavily influenced British classical liberalism, which traces its roots to the Whigs and Radicals. Whiggery had become a dominant ideology following the Glorious Revolution of 1688 and was associated with supporting the British Parliament, upholding the rule of law, defending landed property and sometimes included freedom of the press and freedom of speech. The origins of rights were seen as being in an ancient constitution existing from time immemorial. Custom rather than as natural rights justified these rights. Whigs believed that executive power had to be constrained. While they supported limited suffrage, they saw voting as a privilege rather than as a right. However, there was no consistency in Whig ideology and diverse writers including John Locke, David Hume, Adam Smith and Edmund Burke were all influential among Whigs, although none of them were universally accepted.

From the 1790s to the 1820s, British radicals concentrated on parliamentary and electoral reform, emphasising natural rights and popular sovereignty. Richard Price and Joseph Priestley adapted the language of Locke to the ideology of radicalism. The radicals saw parliamentary reform as a first step toward dealing with their many grievances, including the treatment of Protestant Dissenters, the slave trade, high prices, and high taxes. There was greater unity among classical liberals than there had been among Whigs. Classical liberals were committed to individualism, liberty, and equal rights, as well as some other important tenants of leftism, since classical liberalism was introduced in the late 18th century as a leftist movement. They believed these goals required a free economy with minimal government interference. Some elements of Whiggery were uncomfortable with the commercial nature of classical liberalism. These elements became associated with conservatism.

Classical liberalism was the dominant political theory in Britain from the early 19th century until the First World War. Its notable victories were the Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829, the Reform Act 1832 and the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846. The Anti-Corn Law League brought together a coalition of liberal and radical groups in support of free trade under the leadership of Richard Cobden and John Bright, who opposed aristocratic privilege, militarism, and public expenditure and believed that the backbone of Great Britain was the yeoman farmer. Their policies of low public expenditure and low taxation were adopted by William Gladstone when he became Chancellor of the Exchequer and later Prime Minister. Classical liberalism was often associated with religious dissent and nonconformism.

Although classical liberals aspired to a minimum of state activity, they accepted the principle of government intervention in the economy from the early 19th century on, with passage of the Factory Acts. From around 1840 to 1860, &quot;laissez-faire&quot; advocates of the Manchester School and writers in &quot;The Economist&quot; were confident that their early victories would lead to a period of expanding economic and personal liberty and world peace, but would face reversals as government intervention and activity continued to expand from the 1850s. Jeremy Bentham and James Mill, although advocates of &quot;laissez-faire&quot;, non-intervention in foreign affairs, and individual liberty, believed that social institutions could be rationally redesigned through the principles of utilitarianism. The Conservative Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli rejected classical liberalism altogether and advocated Tory democracy. By the 1870s, Herbert Spencer and other classical liberals concluded that historical development was turning against them. By the First World War, the Liberal Party had largely abandoned classical liberal principles.

The changing economic and social conditions of the 19th century led to a division between neo-classical and social (or welfare) liberals, who while agreeing on the importance of individual liberty differed on the role of the state. Neo-classical liberals, who called themselves &quot;true liberals&quot;, saw Locke&#x27;s &quot;Second Treatise&quot; as the best guide and emphasised &quot;limited government&quot; while social liberals supported government regulation and the welfare state. Herbert Spencer in Britain and William Graham Sumner were the leading neo-classical liberal theorists of the 19th century. The evolution from classical to social/welfare liberalism is for example reflected in Britain in the evolution of the thought of John Maynard Keynes.

Helena Vieira, writing for the London School of Economics, argued that classical liberalism &quot;may contradict some fundamental democratic principles as they are inconsistent with the &quot;principle of unanimity&quot; (also known as the &quot;Pareto Principle&quot;) – the idea that if everyone in society prefers a policy A to a policy B, then the former should be adopted.&quot;

=== Ottoman Empire ===
The Ottoman Empire had liberal free trade policies by the 18th century, with origins in capitulations of the Ottoman Empire, dating back to the first commercial treaties signed with France in 1536 and taken further with capitulations in 1673, in 1740 which lowered duties to only 3% for imports and exports and in 1790. Ottoman free trade policies were praised by British economists advocating free trade such as J. R. McCulloch in his &quot;Dictionary of Commerce&quot; (1834) but criticized by British politicians opposing free trade such as Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli, who cited the Ottoman Empire as &quot;an instance of the injury done by unrestrained competition&quot; in the 1846 Corn Laws debate, arguing that it destroyed what had been &quot;some of the finest manufactures of the world&quot; in 1812.

=== United States ===

In the United States, liberalism took a strong root because it had little opposition to its ideals, whereas in Europe liberalism was opposed by many reactionary or feudal interests such as the nobility; the aristocracy, including army officers; the landed gentry; and the established church. Thomas Jefferson adopted many of the ideals of liberalism, but in the Declaration of Independence changed Locke&#x27;s &quot;life, liberty and property&quot; to the more socially liberal &quot;Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness&quot;. As the United States grew, industry became a larger and larger part of American life; and during the term of its first populist President, Andrew Jackson, economic questions came to the forefront. The economic ideas of the Jacksonian era were almost universally the ideas of classical liberalism. Freedom, according to classical liberals, was maximised when the government took a &quot;hands off&quot; attitude toward the economy. Historian Kathleen G. Donohue argues:
[A]t the center of classical liberal theory [in Europe] was the idea of &quot;laissez-faire&quot;. To the vast majority of American classical liberals, however, &quot;laissez-faire&quot; did not mean no government intervention at all. On the contrary, they were more than willing to see government provide tariffs, railroad subsidies, and internal improvements, all of which benefited producers. What they condemned was intervention on behalf of consumers.

&quot;The Nation&quot; magazine espoused liberalism every week starting in 1865 under the influential editor Edwin Lawrence Godkin (1831–1902). The ideas of classical liberalism remained essentially unchallenged until a series of depressions, thought to be impossible according to the tenets of classical economics, led to economic hardship from which the voters demanded relief. In the words of William Jennings Bryan, &quot;You shall not crucify this nation on a cross of gold&quot;. Classical liberalism remained the orthodox belief among American businessmen until the Great Depression. The Great Depression in the United States saw a sea change in liberalism, with priority shifting from the producers to consumers. Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal represented the dominance of modern liberalism in politics for decades. In the words of Arthur Schlesinger Jr.: 

Alan Wolfe summarizes the viewpoint that there is a continuous liberal understanding that includes both Adam Smith and John Maynard Keynes:
The view that modern liberalism is a continuation of classical liberalism is controversial and disputed by many. James Kurth, Robert E. Lerner, John Micklethwait, Adrian Wooldridge and several other political scholars have argued that classical liberalism still exists today, but in the form of American conservatism. According to Deepak Lal, only in the United States does classical liberalism continue to be a significant political force through American conservatism. American libertarians also claim to be the true continuation of the classical liberal tradition.

Tadd Wilson, writing for the libertarian Foundation for Economic Education, noted that &quot;Many on the left and right criticize classical liberals for focusing purely on economics and politics to the neglect of a vital issue: culture.&quot;

== Intellectual sources ==
=== John Locke ===

Central to classical liberal ideology was their interpretation of John Locke&#x27;s &quot;Second Treatise of Government&quot; and &quot;A Letter Concerning Toleration&quot;, which had been written as a defence of the Glorious Revolution of 1688. Although these writings were considered too radical at the time for Britain&#x27;s new rulers, Whigs, radicals and supporters of the American Revolution later came to cite them. However, much of later liberal thought was absent in Locke&#x27;s writings or scarcely mentioned and his writings have been subject to various interpretations. For example, there is little mention of constitutionalism, the separation of powers and limited government.

James L. Richardson identified five central themes in Locke&#x27;s writing:

* Individualism
* Consent
* Rule of law and government as trustee
* Significance of property
* Religious toleration

Although Locke did not develop a theory of natural rights, he envisioned individuals in the state of nature as being free and equal. The individual, rather than the community or institutions, was the point of reference. Locke believed that individuals had given consent to government and therefore authority derived from the people rather than from above. This belief would influence later revolutionary movements.

As a trustee, government was expected to serve the interests of the people, not the rulers; and rulers were expected to follow the laws enacted by legislatures. Locke also held that the main purpose of men uniting into commonwealths and governments was for the preservation of their property. Despite the ambiguity of Locke&#x27;s definition of property, which limited property to &quot;as much land as a man tills, plants, improves, cultivates, and can use the product of&quot;, this principle held great appeal to individuals possessed of great wealth.

Locke held that the individual had the right to follow his own religious beliefs and that the state should not impose a religion against Dissenters, but there were limitations. No tolerance should be shown for atheists, who were seen as amoral, or to Catholics, who were seen as owing allegiance to the Pope over their own national government.

=== Adam Smith ===
Adam Smith&#x27;s &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, published in 1776, was to provide most of the ideas of economics, at least until the publication of John Stuart Mill&#x27;s &quot;Principles of Political Economy&quot; in 1848. Smith addressed the motivation for economic activity, the causes of prices and the distribution of wealth and the policies the state should follow to maximise wealth.

Smith wrote that as long as supply, demand, prices and competition were left free of government regulation, the pursuit of material self-interest, rather than altruism, would maximise the wealth of a society through profit-driven production of goods and services. An &quot;invisible hand&quot; directed individuals and firms to work toward the public good as an unintended consequence of efforts to maximise their own gain. This provided a moral justification for the accumulation of wealth, which had previously been viewed by some as sinful.

He assumed that workers could be paid wages as low as was necessary for their survival, which was later transformed by David Ricardo and Thomas Robert Malthus into the &quot;iron law of wages&quot;. His main emphasis was on the benefit of free internal and international trade, which he thought could increase wealth through specialisation in production. He also opposed restrictive trade preferences, state grants of monopolies and employers&#x27; organisations and trade unions. Government should be limited to defence, public works and the administration of justice, financed by taxes based on income.

Smith&#x27;s economics was carried into practice in the nineteenth century with the lowering of tariffs in the 1820s, the repeal of the Poor Relief Act that had restricted the mobility of labour in 1834 and the end of the rule of the East India Company over India in 1858.
=== Classical economics ===
In addition to Smith&#x27;s legacy, Say&#x27;s law, Thomas Robert Malthus&#x27; theories of population and David Ricardo&#x27;s iron law of wages became central doctrines of classical economics. The pessimistic nature of these theories provided a basis for criticism of capitalism by its opponents and helped perpetuate the tradition of calling economics the &quot;dismal science&quot;.

Jean-Baptiste Say was a French economist who introduced Smith&#x27;s economic theories into France and whose commentaries on Smith were read in both France and Britain. Say challenged Smith&#x27;s labour theory of value, believing that prices were determined by utility and also emphasised the critical role of the entrepreneur in the economy. However, neither of those observations became accepted by British economists at the time. His most important contribution to economic thinking was Say&#x27;s law, which was interpreted by classical economists that there could be no overproduction in a market and that there would always be a balance between supply and demand. This general belief influenced government policies until the 1930s. Following this law, since the economic cycle was seen as self-correcting, government did not intervene during periods of economic hardship because it was seen as futile.

Malthus wrote two books, &quot;An Essay on the Principle of Population&quot; (published in 1798) and &quot;Principles of Political Economy&quot; (published in 1820). The second book which was a rebuttal of Say&#x27;s law had little influence on contemporary economists. However, his first book became a major influence on classical liberalism. In that book, Malthus claimed that population growth would outstrip food production because population grew geometrically while food production grew arithmetically. As people were provided with food, they would reproduce until their growth outstripped the food supply. Nature would then provide a check to growth in the forms of vice and misery. No gains in income could prevent this and any welfare for the poor would be self-defeating. The poor were in fact responsible for their own problems which could have been avoided through self-restraint.

Ricardo, who was an admirer of Smith, covered many of the same topics, but while Smith drew conclusions from broadly empirical observations he used deduction, drawing conclusions by reasoning from basic assumptions. While Ricardo accepted Smith&#x27;s labour theory of value, he acknowledged that utility could influence the price of some rare items. Rents on agricultural land were seen as the production that was surplus to the subsistence required by the tenants. Wages were seen as the amount required for workers&#x27; subsistence and to maintain current population levels. According to his iron law of wages, wages could never rise beyond subsistence levels. Ricardo explained profits as a return on capital, which itself was the product of labour, but a conclusion many drew from his theory was that profit was a surplus appropriated by capitalists to which they were not entitled.

=== Utilitarianism ===
The central concept of utilitarianism, which was developed by Jeremy Bentham, was that public policy should seek to provide &quot;the greatest happiness of the greatest number&quot;. While this could be interpreted as a justification for state action to reduce poverty, it was used by classical liberals to justify inaction with the argument that the net benefit to all individuals would be higher.

Utilitarianism provided British governments with the political justification to implement economic liberalism, which was to dominate economic policy from the 1830s. Although utilitarianism prompted legislative and administrative reform and John Stuart Mill&#x27;s later writings on the subject foreshadowed the welfare state, it was mainly used as a justification for &quot;laissez-faire&quot;.

== Political economy ==
Classical liberals following Mill saw utility as the foundation for public policies. This broke both with conservative &quot;tradition&quot; and Lockean &quot;natural rights&quot;, which were seen as irrational. Utility, which emphasises the happiness of individuals, became the central ethical value of all Mill-style liberalism. Although utilitarianism inspired wide-ranging reforms, it became primarily a justification for &quot;laissez-faire&quot; economics. However, Mill adherents rejected Smith&#x27;s belief that the &quot;invisible hand&quot; would lead to general benefits and embraced Malthus&#x27; view that population expansion would prevent any general benefit and Ricardo&#x27;s view of the inevitability of class conflict. &quot;Laissez-faire&quot; was seen as the only possible economic approach and any government intervention was seen as useless and harmful. The Poor Law Amendment Act 1834 was defended on &quot;scientific or economic principles&quot; while the authors of the Poor Relief Act 1601 were seen as not having had the benefit of reading Malthus.

However, commitment to &quot;laissez-faire&quot; was not uniform and some economists advocated state support of public works and education. Classical liberals were also divided on free trade as Ricardo expressed doubt that the removal of grain tariffs advocated by Richard Cobden and the Anti-Corn Law League would have any general benefits. Most classical liberals also supported legislation to regulate the number of hours that children were allowed to work and usually did not oppose factory reform legislation.

Despite the pragmatism of classical economists, their views were expressed in dogmatic terms by such popular writers as Jane Marcet and Harriet Martineau. The strongest defender of &quot;laissez-faire&quot; was &quot;The Economist&quot; founded by James Wilson in 1843. &quot;The Economist&quot; criticised Ricardo for his lack of support for free trade and expressed hostility to welfare, believing that the lower orders were responsible for their economic circumstances. &quot;The Economist&quot; took the position that regulation of factory hours was harmful to workers and also strongly opposed state support for education, health, the provision of water, and granting of patents and copyrights.

&quot;The Economist&quot; also campaigned against the Corn Laws that protected landlords in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland against competition from less expensive foreign imports of cereal products. A rigid belief in &quot;laissez-faire&quot; guided the government response in 1846–1849 to the Great Famine in Ireland, during which an estimated 1.5 million people died. The minister responsible for economic and financial affairs, Charles Wood, expected that private enterprise and free trade, rather than government intervention, would alleviate the famine. The Corn Laws were finally repealed in 1846 by the removal of tariffs on grain which kept the price of bread artificially high, but it came too late to stop the Irish famine, partly because it was done in stages over three years.

=== Free trade and world peace ===
Several liberals, including Smith and Cobden, argued that the free exchange of goods between nations could lead to world peace. Erik Gartzke states: &quot;Scholars like Montesquieu, Adam Smith, Richard Cobden, Norman Angell, and Richard Rosecrance have long speculated that free markets have the potential to free states from the looming prospect of recurrent warfare&quot;. American political scientists John R. Oneal and Bruce M. Russett, well known for their work on the democratic peace theory, state: 

In &quot;The Wealth of Nations&quot;, Smith argued that as societies progressed from hunter gatherers to industrial societies the spoils of war would rise, but that the costs of war would rise further and thus making war difficult and costly for industrialised nations: 
Cobden believed that military expenditures worsened the welfare of the state and benefited a small, but concentrated elite minority, summing up British imperialism, which he believed was the result of the economic restrictions of mercantilist policies. To Cobden and many classical liberals, those who advocated peace must also advocate free markets. The belief that free trade would promote peace was widely shared by English liberals of the 19th and early 20th century, leading the economist John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946), who was a classical liberal in his early life, to say that this was a doctrine on which he was &quot;brought up&quot; and which he held unquestioned only until the 1920s. In his review of a book on Keynes, Michael S. Lawlor argues that it may be in large part due to Keynes&#x27; contributions in economics and politics, as in the implementation of the Marshall Plan and the way economies have been managed since his work, &quot;that we have the luxury of not facing his unpalatable choice between free trade and full employment&quot;. A related manifestation of this idea was the argument of Norman Angell (1872–1967), most famously before World War I in &quot;The Great Illusion&quot; (1909), that the interdependence of the economies of the major powers was now so great that war between them was futile and irrational; and therefore unlikely.

== Notable thinkers ==
* Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679)
* James Harrington (1611–1677)
* John Locke (1632–1704)
* Montesquieu (1689–1755)
* David Hume (1711–1776)
* Voltaire (1694–1778) 
* Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790)
* Adam Smith (1723–1790)
* Edmund Burke (1729–1797)
* Edward Gibbon (1737–1794)
* Immanuel Kant (1724–1804)
* Anders Chydenius (1729–1803)
* Thomas Paine (1737–1809)
* Cesare Beccaria (1738–1794)
* Marquis de Condorcet (1743–1794)
* Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826)
* Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832)
* Gaetano Filangieri (1753–1788)
* Benjamin Constant (1767–1830)
* David Ricardo (1772–1823)
* Alexis de Tocqueville (1805–1859)
* Giuseppe Mazzini (1805–1872)
* John Stuart Mill (1806–1872)
* William Ewart Gladstone (1809–1898)
* Horace Greeley (1811–1873)
* Fukuzawa Yukichi (1835–1901)
* Henry George (1839–1897)
* Friedrich Naumann (1860–1919)
* Ludwig Von Mises (1881–1973)
* Friedrich Hayek (1899–1992)
* Karl Popper (1902–1994)
* Raymond Aron (1905–1983)
* Milton Friedman (1912–2006)
* Robert Nozick (1938–2002)
== Classical liberal parties worldwide ==
While general libertarian, liberal-conservative and some right-wing populist political parties are also included in classical liberal parties in a broad sense, only general classical liberal parties such as Germany&#x27;s FDP, Denmark&#x27;s Liberal Alliance and Thailand Democrat Party should be listed.

=== Classical liberal parties or parties with classical liberal factions ===

* Argentina: Liberty Advances,
* Australia: Liberal Party of Australia, Liberal Democratic Party
* Austria: NEOS – The New Austria and Liberal Forum, Freedom Party of Austria (factions)
* Belgium: Open Flemish Liberals and Democrats, Reformist Movement
* Brazil: New Party
* Canada: People&#x27;s Party
* Chile: Evópoli
* Denmark: , Liberal Alliance
* Estonia: Estonian Reform Party
* Finland: Liberal Party – Freedom to Choose
* France: Renaissance
* Georgia: Girchi — More Freedom, Girchi
* Germany: Free Democratic Party
* Iceland: Viðreisn
* India: Lok Satta Party
* India: Swatantra Bharat Paksh
* Latvia: For Latvia&#x27;s Development, Movement For!
* Lithuania: Liberals&#x27; Movement
* Luxembourg: Democratic Party
* Netherlands: People&#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy, Belang van Nederland
* New Zealand: New Zealand National Party, ACT New Zealand
* Norway: , Progress Party 
* Poland: Modern, Civic Platform
* Portugal: Liberal Initiative
* Romania: National Liberal Party
* Russia: PARNAS
* Serbia: Liberal Democratic Party of Serbia
* Slovakia: Freedom and Solidarity
* South Africa: Democratic Alliance, ActionSA
* Spain: Citizens
* Sweden: Liberals, Classical Liberal Party
* Switzerland: FDP.The Liberals
* Thailand: Democrat Party
* Turkey: Liberal Democratic Party
* United Kingdom: Liberal Party
* United States: Liberal Party USA
* Venezuela: Come Venezuela
=== Historical classical liberal parties or parties with classical liberal factions (since 1900s) ===

* Belgium: Liberal Party, Party for Freedom and Progress, Liberal Reformist Party
* Chile: Liberal Party, Amplitude
* Germany: German Democratic Party
* India: Swatantra Party, Indian Liberal Party
* Ireland: Progressive Democrats
* Japan: Liberal Party (1998), Liberal League
* Netherlands: Freedom Party
* New Zealand: New Zealand Liberal Party, United Party, New Zealand Party
* South Korea: New Democratic Party
* Switzerland: Free Democratic Party of Switzerland, Liberal Party of Switzerland
* United Kingdom: Liberal Party

== See also ==
* Age of Enlightenment
* Austrian School
* Bourbon Democrat
** National Democratic Party
* Classical economics
* Cultural liberalism
* Classical radicalism
** Modern liberalism
* Classical republicanism
* Constitutionalism
* Constitutional liberalism
* Conservative liberalism
* Corporate liberalism
* Economic liberalism
* Fiscal conservatism
* Friedrich Naumann Foundation
* Georgism
* Gladstonian liberalism
* Jeffersonian democracy
* Liberal conservatism
* Liberal democracy
* Liberalism in Europe
* Libertarianism
** Left-libertarianism
** Right-libertarianism
* List of liberal theorists
* Neoclassical liberalism
* Neoliberalism
* Night-watchman state
* Opportunist Republicans
* Orléanist
* Physiocracy
* Political individualism
* Rule of law
* Separation of powers
* Whig history
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==

* Alan Bullock and Maurice Shock, ed. (1967). &quot;The Liberal Tradition: From Fox to Keynes&quot;. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
* Katherine Henry (2011). &quot;Liberalism and the Culture of Security: The Nineteenth-Century Rhetoric of Reform&quot;. University of Alabama Press; draws on literary and other writings to study the debates over liberty and tyranny.
* Donald Markwell (2006). &quot;John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace&quot;. Oxford: Oxford University Press. .
* Gustav Pollak, ed. (1915). &quot;Fifty Years of American Idealism: 1865–1915&quot;; short history of &quot;The Nation&quot; plus numerous excerpts, most by Edwin Lawrence Godkin.


== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q794394" start="0" end="20" title="Classical liberalism" label="Classical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q303132" start="26" end="45" title="political tradition" label="political tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q830997" start="52" end="58" title="History of liberalism" label="branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="62" end="72" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="88" end="99" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="104" end="117" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="132" end="147" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="158" end="169" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q795071" start="217" end="235" title="limited government" label="limited government"/>
<link wikidata="Q322996" start="237" end="253" title="economic freedom" label="economic freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q831058" start="255" end="272" title="political freedom" label="political freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="277" end="294" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="356" end="373" title="social liberalism" label="social liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q828395" start="400" end="415" title="Social policy" label="social policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8161" start="417" end="420" title="tax" label="tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q902410" start="498" end="510" title="deregulation" label="deregulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="523" end="539" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="607" end="626" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="661" end="669" title="retronym" label="retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="766" end="783" title="Liberalism in the United States" label="the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540900" start="875" end="881" title="Liberalism in Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540888" start="886" end="895" title="Liberalism in Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="1205" end="1224" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="1356" end="1366" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q13575" start="1368" end="1384" title="François Quesnay" label="François Quesnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13513" start="1386" end="1403" title="Jean-Baptiste Say" label="Jean-Baptiste Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="1405" end="1416" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="1418" end="1426" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q201477" start="1428" end="1448" title="Marquis de Condorcet" label="Marquis de Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="1450" end="1462" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="1464" end="1478" title="Thomas Malthus" label="Thomas Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="1484" end="1497" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="1510" end="1529" title="classical economics" label="classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="1573" end="1583" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="1605" end="1626" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="1653" end="1664" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q132524" start="1689" end="1697" title="Ayn Rand" label="Ayn Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q297079" start="1699" end="1714" title="Murray Rothbard" label="Murray Rothbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="1716" end="1731" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="1733" end="1748" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="1750" end="1766" title="Ludwig von Mises" label="Ludwig von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q553449" start="1768" end="1781" title="Thomas Sowell" label="Thomas Sowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964738" start="1783" end="1801" title="Walter E. Williams" label="Walter E. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q243534" start="1803" end="1817" title="George Stigler" label="George Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489888" start="1819" end="1832" title="Larry Arnhart" label="Larry Arnhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188113" start="1834" end="1846" title="Ronald Coase" label="Ronald Coase"/>
<link wikidata="Q205353" start="1851" end="1868" title="James M. Buchanan" label="James M. Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925897" start="2019" end="2042" title="neoclassical liberalism" label="neoclassical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="2206" end="2216" title="Right-wing politics" label="right wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="2305" end="2313" title="Left-wing politics" label="the left"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="2364" end="2373" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="the right"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="2402" end="2424" title="protectionism" label="economic protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="2472" end="2484" title="Individual and group rights" label="group rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="2541" end="2554" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="2664" end="2687" title="Libertarianism in the United States" label="American libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="2810" end="2822" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210843" start="2831" end="2850" title="Gemeinschaft and Gesellschaft" label="society as a family"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="2870" end="2882" title="Sociology" label="sociological"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2907" end="2918" title="Gesellschaft#Gesellschaft" label="complex set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="2922" end="2936" title="social network" label="social network"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="2971" end="2984" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130390" start="3136" end="3151" title="state of nature" label="state of nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131141" start="3291" end="3318" title="Poor Law Amendment Act 1834" label="Poor Law Amendment Act 1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q37654" start="3393" end="3400" title="Market (economics)" label="markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="3479" end="3489" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="3687" end="3700" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="3721" end="3732" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="3876" end="3888" title="group rights" label="group rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661649" start="3921" end="3938" title="individual rights" label="individual rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="3955" end="3980" title="Economic liberalism" label="corporations&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101608" start="3995" end="4025" title="inequality of bargaining power" label="inequality of bargaining power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3265969" start="4145" end="4158" title="profit motive" label="profit motive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="4462" end="4467" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="4472" end="4482" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519619" start="5058" end="5066" title="Negative and positive rights" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519619" start="5249" end="5264" title="positive rights" label="positive rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919435" start="5324" end="5343" title="right to healthcare" label="right to healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="5567" end="5576" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813" start="5799" end="5812" title="James Madison" label="James Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="5897" end="5911" title="pure democracy" label="pure democracy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6196" end="6219" title="Right-libertarianism#Neo-classical liberalism" label="neoclassical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="6301" end="6319" title="individual freedom" label="individual freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="6381" end="6397" title="social Darwinism" label="social Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="6399" end="6419" title="Right-libertarianism" label="Right-libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="6930" end="6941" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q631781" start="6962" end="6979" title="spontaneous order" label="spontaneous order"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="7113" end="7125" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q373177" start="7131" end="7141" title="monetarist" label="monetarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="7181" end="7196" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q379912" start="7345" end="7363" title="Bernard Mandeville" label="Bernard Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="7365" end="7375" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="7377" end="7389" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="7391" end="7401" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q183094" start="7403" end="7416" title="Adam Ferguson" label="Adam Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3186047" start="7418" end="7431" title="Josiah Tucker" label="Josiah Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q433739" start="7436" end="7449" title="William Paley" label="William Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q83368" start="7466" end="7476" title="empiricism" label="empiricism"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="7482" end="7492" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="7619" end="7627" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527" start="7629" end="7650" title="Jean-Jacques Rousseau" label="Jean-Jacques Rousseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="7652" end="7665" title="Denis Diderot" label="Denis Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="7667" end="7689" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27764" start="7691" end="7718" title="Louis Antoine de Saint-Just" label="Louis Antoine de Saint-Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q201477" start="7720" end="7740" title="Marquis de Condorcet" label="Marquis de Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q744738" start="7746" end="7760" title="Encyclopédistes" label="Encyclopedists"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="7769" end="7780" title="Physiocrats" label="Physiocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="7995" end="8006" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q123089" start="8008" end="8025" title="Benjamin Constant" label="Benjamin Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q309854" start="8027" end="8044" title="Joseph De Maistre" label="Joseph De Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="8049" end="8070" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="8125" end="8138" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="8140" end="8156" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q561101" start="8158" end="8171" title="Richard Price" label="Richard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="8173" end="8186" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="8188" end="8205" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="8207" end="8223" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="8228" end="8240" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="8315" end="8328" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779257" start="8421" end="8438" title="Guido De Ruggiero" label="Guido De Ruggiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q77906" start="9260" end="9274" title="Francis Lieber" label="Francis Lieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="9870" end="9881" title="physiocracy" label="physiocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108700" start="9961" end="9966" title="Whigs (British political party)" label="Whigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687668" start="9971" end="9979" title="Radicals (UK)" label="Radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="10035" end="10054" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q845132" start="10159" end="10174" title="landed property" label="landed property"/>
<link wikidata="Q19653946" start="10289" end="10309" title="ancient constitution" label="ancient constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635276" start="10324" end="10339" title="time immemorial" label="time immemorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q29677" start="10363" end="10377" title="natural rights" label="natural rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="10636" end="10646" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="10648" end="10658" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="10660" end="10670" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="10675" end="10687" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q561101" start="10922" end="10935" title="Richard Price" label="Richard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="10940" end="10956" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="11142" end="11163" title="English Dissenters" label="Protestant Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="11415" end="11422" title="Left-wing politics" label="leftism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602689" start="11904" end="11934" title="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829" label="Roman Catholic Relief Act 1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="11940" end="11955" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="11978" end="11987" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q574598" start="12001" end="12021" title="Anti-Corn Law League" label="Anti-Corn Law League"/>
<link wikidata="Q333072" start="12130" end="12144" title="Richard Cobden" label="Richard Cobden"/>
<link wikidata="Q176524" start="12149" end="12160" title="John Bright" label="John Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="12289" end="12295" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="12378" end="12395" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="12411" end="12438" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="12449" end="12463" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="12534" end="12547" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11480083" start="12649" end="12672" title="government intervention" label="government intervention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390816" start="12740" end="12752" title="Factory Acts" label="Factory Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888807" start="12823" end="12840" title="Manchester capitalism" label="Manchester School"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="12862" end="12875" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="13108" end="13122" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q271666" start="13127" end="13137" title="James Mill" label="James Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="13340" end="13354" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="13360" end="13372" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="13388" end="13405" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728959" start="13461" end="13475" title="Tory democracy" label="Tory democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q144535" start="13491" end="13506" title="Herbert Spencer" label="Herbert Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="13628" end="13641" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14023" end="14038" title="Two Treatises of Government#Second Treatise" label="Second Treatise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356390" start="14217" end="14238" title="William Graham Sumner" label="William Graham Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="14438" end="14457" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="14491" end="14517" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182667" start="14706" end="14722" title="Pareto principle" label="Pareto Principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="14872" end="14886" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="14891" end="14898" title="Economic liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728629" start="14956" end="14991" title="capitulations of the Ottoman Empire" label="capitulations of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q661305" start="15088" end="15101" title="Capitulation (treaty)" label="capitulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16687744" start="15133" end="15139" title="Duty (economics)" label="duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388348" start="15281" end="15296" title="J. R. McCulloch" label="J. R. McCulloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="15412" end="15426" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q82006" start="15427" end="15444" title="Benjamin Disraeli" label="Benjamin Disraeli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="15561" end="15570" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="16001" end="16017" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="16071" end="16098" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="16171" end="16187" title="Social liberalism" label="socially liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075797" start="16194" end="16236" title="Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness" label="Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q180490" start="16363" end="16371" title="Populism" label="populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="16372" end="16381" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="16383" end="16397" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040924" start="16467" end="16481" title="Jacksonian democracy" label="Jacksonian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="17177" end="17187" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q787055" start="17280" end="17301" title="Edwin Lawrence Godkin" label="Edwin Lawrence Godkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814941" start="17401" end="17412" title="Depression (economics)" label="depressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="17466" end="17485" title="classical economics" label="classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="17567" end="17589" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247561" start="17597" end="17649" title="Cross of Gold speech" label="You shall not crucify this nation on a cross of gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="17744" end="17760" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q696482" start="17766" end="17803" title="Great Depression in the United States" label="Great Depression in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="17892" end="17913" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="17921" end="17929" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="17959" end="17976" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="modern liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q435195" start="18018" end="18040" title="Arthur Schlesinger Jr." label="Arthur Schlesinger Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4708088" start="18044" end="18054" title="Alan Wolfe" label="Alan Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="18148" end="18158" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="18163" end="18182" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499772" start="18297" end="18308" title="James Kurth" label="James Kurth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307941" start="18310" end="18326" title="Robert E. Lerner" label="Robert E. Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248692" start="18328" end="18345" title="John Micklethwait" label="John Micklethwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685448" start="18347" end="18364" title="Adrian Wooldridge" label="Adrian Wooldridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="18479" end="18500" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="American conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182440" start="18515" end="18525" title="Deepak Lal" label="Deepak Lal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153120" start="18655" end="18676" title="American libertarians" label="American libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439848" start="18794" end="18827" title="Foundation for Economic Education" label="Foundation for Economic Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="19110" end="19120" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19134" end="19163" title="Two Treatises of Government#Second Treatise" label="Second Treatise of Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q914139" start="19180" end="19210" title="A Letter Concerning Toleration" label="A Letter Concerning Toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="19423" end="19442" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="19668" end="19685" title="constitutionalism" label="constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="19691" end="19711" title="separation of powers" label="separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q795071" start="19716" end="19734" title="limited government" label="limited government"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="19816" end="19829" title="Individualism" label="Individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="19842" end="19853" title="Rule of law" label="Rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q11917765" start="19898" end="19906" title="property rights" label="property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="19909" end="19929" title="Religious toleration" label="Religious toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229301" start="21040" end="21049" title="Dissenter" label="Dissenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="21113" end="21121" title="Atheism" label="atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21154" end="21163" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="21267" end="21277" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="21291" end="21312" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="21420" end="21436" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946782" start="21450" end="21481" title="Principles of Political Economy" label="Principles of Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q376644" start="21938" end="21952" title="invisible hand" label="invisible hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="22329" end="22342" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="22347" end="22368" title="Thomas Robert Malthus" label="Thomas Robert Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q282825" start="22384" end="22401" title="iron law of wages" label="iron law of wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228818" start="22952" end="22967" title="Poor Relief Act 1662" label="Poor Relief Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="23050" end="23068" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q626021" start="23153" end="23167" title="Say&amp;#x27;s law" label="Say&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526" start="23169" end="23190" title="Thomas Robert Malthus" label="Thomas Robert Malthus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="23224" end="23237" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q282825" start="23245" end="23262" title="iron law of wages" label="iron law of wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="23291" end="23310" title="classical economics" label="classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776980" start="23482" end="23496" title="dismal science" label="dismal science"/>
<link wikidata="Q13513" start="23505" end="23522" title="Jean-Baptiste Say" label="Jean-Baptiste Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="23702" end="23724" title="labour theory of value" label="labour theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q333076" start="24081" end="24095" title="overproduction" label="overproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q851988" start="24446" end="24485" title="An Essay on the Principle of Population" label="An Essay on the Principle of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245196" start="24522" end="24553" title="Principles of Political Economy (Malthus)" label="Principles of Political Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q584987" start="25561" end="25583" title="labour theory of value" label="labour theory of value"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="26153" end="26164" title="Capitalism" label="capitalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="26245" end="26259" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="26284" end="26298" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="26712" end="26731" title="economic liberalism" label="economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="26862" end="26878" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="26933" end="26946" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="27167" end="27176" title="Traditionalist conservatism" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27187" end="27221" title="Natural rights#John Locke" label="Lockean &amp;quot;natural rights&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131141" start="27924" end="27951" title="Poor Law Amendment Act 1834" label="Poor Law Amendment Act 1834"/>
<link wikidata="Q10637469" start="28039" end="28059" title="Poor Relief Act 1601" label="Poor Relief Act 1601"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="28301" end="28311" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q333072" start="28386" end="28400" title="Richard Cobden" label="Richard Cobden"/>
<link wikidata="Q574598" start="28409" end="28429" title="Anti-Corn Law League" label="Anti-Corn Law League"/>
<link wikidata="Q433093" start="28757" end="28768" title="Jane Marcet" label="Jane Marcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q234570" start="28773" end="28790" title="Harriet Martineau" label="Harriet Martineau"/>
<link wikidata="Q94765" start="28885" end="28897" title="James Wilson (UK politician)" label="James Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="29649" end="29661" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q333354" start="29786" end="29798" title="Charles Wood, 1st Viscount Halifax" label="Charles Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="29918" end="29927" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q238651" start="30295" end="30306" title="world peace" label="world peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q272224" start="30390" end="30403" title="Norman Angell" label="Norman Angell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431171" start="30409" end="30427" title="Richard Rosecrance" label="Richard Rosecrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="30454" end="30465" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q233562" start="30697" end="30718" title="The Wealth of Nations" label="The Wealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="31111" end="31122" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="31453" end="31472" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="31839" end="31852" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272224" start="32079" end="32092" title="Norman Angell" label="Norman Angell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3209508" start="32148" end="32166" title="The Great Illusion" label="The Great Illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="32359" end="32372" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q969183" start="32387" end="32403" title="James Harrington (author)" label="James Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q9353" start="32418" end="32428" title="John Locke" label="John Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="32443" end="32454" title="Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q37160" start="32469" end="32479" title="David Hume" label="David Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="32494" end="32502" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="32518" end="32535" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381" start="32550" end="32560" title="Adam Smith" label="Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q165792" start="32575" end="32587" title="Edmund Burke" label="Edmund Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q161841" start="32602" end="32615" title="Edward Gibbon" label="Edward Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="32630" end="32643" title="Immanuel Kant" label="Immanuel Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q490870" start="32658" end="32674" title="Anders Chydenius" label="Anders Chydenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q126462" start="32689" end="32701" title="Thomas Paine" label="Thomas Paine"/>
<link wikidata="Q223723" start="32716" end="32731" title="Cesare Beccaria" label="Cesare Beccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q201477" start="32746" end="32766" title="Marquis de Condorcet" label="Marquis de Condorcet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="32781" end="32797" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q60887" start="32812" end="32826" title="Jeremy Bentham" label="Jeremy Bentham"/>
<link wikidata="Q979054" start="32841" end="32859" title="Gaetano Filangieri" label="Gaetano Filangieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q123089" start="32874" end="32891" title="Benjamin Constant" label="Benjamin Constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q160270" start="32906" end="32919" title="David Ricardo" label="David Ricardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q140694" start="32934" end="32955" title="Alexis de Tocqueville" label="Alexis de Tocqueville"/>
<link wikidata="Q187336" start="32970" end="32986" title="Giuseppe Mazzini" label="Giuseppe Mazzini"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="33001" end="33017" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="33032" end="33055" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Ewart Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q436790" start="33070" end="33084" title="Horace Greeley" label="Horace Greeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q355447" start="33099" end="33115" title="Fukuzawa Yukichi" label="Fukuzawa Yukichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q355245" start="33130" end="33142" title="Henry George" label="Henry George"/>
<link wikidata="Q76811" start="33157" end="33174" title="Friedrich Naumann" label="Friedrich Naumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q84233" start="33189" end="33205" title="Ludwig Von Mises" label="Ludwig Von Mises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325" start="33220" end="33235" title="Friedrich Hayek" label="Friedrich Hayek"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="33250" end="33261" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q160640" start="33276" end="33288" title="Raymond Aron" label="Raymond Aron"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="33303" end="33318" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q205927" start="33333" end="33346" title="Robert Nozick" label="Robert Nozick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306657" start="33415" end="33426" title="List of libertarian political parties" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33428" end="33448" title="Liberal conservatism#Liberal-conservative parties or parties with liberal-conservative factions" label="liberal-conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="33458" end="33477" title="right-wing populist" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q108454548" start="33798" end="33814" title="La Libertad Avanza" label="Liberty Advances"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="33829" end="33855" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540624" start="33857" end="33881" title="Liberal Democratic Party (Australia)" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13564543" start="33893" end="33933" title="NEOS – The New Austria and Liberal Forum" label="NEOS – The New Austria and Liberal Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131692" start="33935" end="33959" title="Freedom Party of Austria" label="Freedom Party of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160192" start="33982" end="34017" title="Open Flemish Liberals and Democrats" label="Open Flemish Liberals and Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q533384" start="34019" end="34037" title="Reformist Movement" label="Reformist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q18552710" start="34048" end="34057" title="New Party (Brazil)" label="New Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q56612740" start="34068" end="34087" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party of Canada" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16565533" start="34097" end="34104" title="Evópoli" label="Evópoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q478180" start="34118" end="34134" title="Liberal Alliance (Denmark)" label="Liberal Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q738947" start="34146" end="34167" title="Estonian Reform Party" label="Estonian Reform Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23869988" start="34179" end="34212" title="Liberal Party – Freedom to Choose" label="Liberal Party – Freedom to Choose"/>
<link wikidata="Q23731823" start="34223" end="34234" title="Renaissance (French political party)" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q104521954" start="34246" end="34267" title="Girchi — More Freedom" label="Girchi — More Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q24817923" start="34269" end="34275" title="Girchi" label="Girchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="34287" end="34308" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23789296" start="34320" end="34328" title="Viðreisn" label="Viðreisn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633056" start="34338" end="34353" title="Lok Satta Party" label="Lok Satta Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654002" start="34363" end="34385" title="Swatantra Bharat Paksh" label="Swatantra Bharat Paksh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15379125" start="34396" end="34425" title="For Latvia&amp;#x27;s Development" label="For Latvia&amp;#x27;s Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q38674389" start="34427" end="34440" title="Movement For!" label="Movement For!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466907" start="34454" end="34477" title="Liberals&amp;#x27; Movement (Lithuania)" label="Liberals&amp;#x27; Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029792" start="34492" end="34508" title="Democratic Party (Luxembourg)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q239333" start="34524" end="34569" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party for Freedom and Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108765673" start="34571" end="34591" title="Belang van Nederland" label="Belang van Nederland"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="34607" end="34633" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q288838" start="34635" end="34650" title="ACT New Zealand" label="ACT New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q485665" start="34663" end="34677" title="Progress Party (Norway)" label="Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q20738981" start="34689" end="34695" title="Modern (political party)" label="Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q156868" start="34697" end="34711" title="Civic Platform" label="Civic Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q46122950" start="34724" end="34742" title="Liberal Initiative (Portugal)" label="Liberal Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q686228" start="34754" end="34776" title="National Liberal Party (Romania)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559990" start="34787" end="34793" title="People&amp;#x27;s Freedom Party (Russia)" label="PARNAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077031" start="34804" end="34838" title="Liberal Democratic Party of Serbia" label="Liberal Democratic Party of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220847" start="34851" end="34873" title="Freedom and Solidarity" label="Freedom and Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q761877" start="34890" end="34909" title="Democratic Alliance (South Africa)" label="Democratic Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q99263962" start="34911" end="34919" title="ActionSA" label="ActionSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393123" start="34929" end="34937" title="Citizens (Spanish political party)" label="Citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q110857" start="34948" end="34956" title="Liberals (Sweden)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366490" start="34958" end="34981" title="Classical Liberal Party (Sweden)" label="Classical Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q202638" start="34997" end="35013" title="FDP.The Liberals" label="FDP.The Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186248" start="35026" end="35040" title="Democrat Party (Thailand)" label="Democrat Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509049" start="35051" end="35075" title="Liberal Demokrat Parti" label="Liberal Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360801" start="35094" end="35107" title="Liberal Party (UK, 1989)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q126113033" start="35125" end="35142" title="Liberal Party USA" label="Liberal Party USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16645762" start="35156" end="35170" title="Come Venezuela" label="Come Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636334" start="35285" end="35298" title="Liberal Party (Belgium)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215286" start="35300" end="35330" title="Party for Freedom and Progress" label="Party for Freedom and Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711996" start="35332" end="35355" title="Liberal Reformist Party (Belgium)" label="Liberal Reformist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027776" start="35365" end="35378" title="Liberal Party (Chile, 1849)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16488420" start="35380" end="35389" title="Amplitude (political party)" label="Amplitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q328195" start="35401" end="35424" title="German Democratic Party" label="German Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002819" start="35434" end="35449" title="Swatantra Party" label="Swatantra Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020892" start="35451" end="35471" title="Indian Liberal Party" label="Indian Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q661973" start="35483" end="35504" title="Progressive Democrats" label="Progressive Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q60588" start="35514" end="35534" title="Liberal Party (Japan, 1998)" label="Liberal Party (1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148229" start="35536" end="35550" title="Liberal League (Japan)" label="Liberal League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251841" start="35566" end="35579" title="Freedom Party (Netherlands)" label="Freedom Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793808" start="35595" end="35620" title="New Zealand Liberal Party" label="New Zealand Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495287" start="35622" end="35634" title="United Party (New Zealand)" label="United Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015568" start="35636" end="35653" title="New Zealand Party" label="New Zealand Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q129634" start="35669" end="35689" title="New Democratic Party (South Korea)" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13850128" start="35705" end="35741" title="Free Democratic Party of Switzerland" label="Free Democratic Party of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q667785" start="35743" end="35771" title="Liberal Party of Switzerland" label="Liberal Party of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="35790" end="35803" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="35822" end="35842" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="35845" end="35860" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q895181" start="35863" end="35879" title="Bourbon Democrat" label="Bourbon Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10594775" start="35883" end="35908" title="National Democratic Party (United States)" label="National Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q271857" start="35911" end="35930" title="Classical economics" label="Classical economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q939214" start="35933" end="35952" title="Cultural liberalism" label="Cultural liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="35955" end="35975" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="Classical radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="35979" end="35996" title="Social liberalism" label="Modern liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128354" start="35999" end="36022" title="Classical republicanism" label="Classical republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194747" start="36025" end="36042" title="Constitutionalism" label="Constitutionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007647" start="36045" end="36070" title="Constitutional liberalism" label="Constitutional liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q617609" start="36073" end="36096" title="Conservative liberalism" label="Conservative liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172470" start="36099" end="36119" title="Corporate liberalism" label="Corporate liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q729119" start="36122" end="36141" title="Economic liberalism" label="Economic liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="36144" end="36163" title="Fiscal conservatism" label="Fiscal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q338433" start="36166" end="36194" title="Friedrich Naumann Foundation" label="Friedrich Naumann Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q679595" start="36197" end="36205" title="Georgism" label="Georgism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566365" start="36208" end="36230" title="Gladstonian liberalism" label="Gladstonian liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="36233" end="36255" title="Jeffersonian democracy" label="Jeffersonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="36258" end="36278" title="Liberal conservatism" label="Liberal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="36281" end="36298" title="Liberal democracy" label="Liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540900" start="36301" end="36321" title="Liberalism in Europe" label="Liberalism in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="36324" end="36338" title="Libertarianism" label="Libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831192" start="36342" end="36361" title="Left-libertarianism" label="Left-libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q250598" start="36365" end="36385" title="Right-libertarianism" label="Right-libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q831027" start="36388" end="36413" title="List of liberal theorists" label="List of liberal theorists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925897" start="36416" end="36439" title="Neoclassical liberalism" label="Neoclassical liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="36442" end="36455" title="Neoliberalism" label="Neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444611" start="36458" end="36478" title="Night-watchman state" label="Night-watchman state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318180" start="36481" end="36504" title="Opportunist Republicans" label="Opportunist Republicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q431192" start="36507" end="36516" title="Orléanist" label="Orléanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q183244" start="36519" end="36530" title="Physiocracy" label="Physiocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="36533" end="36556" title="Political individualism" label="Political individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="36559" end="36570" title="Rule of law" label="Rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q79896" start="36573" end="36593" title="Separation of powers" label="Separation of powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="36596" end="36608" title="Whig history" label="Whig history"/>
<link wikidata="Q335167" start="36697" end="36709" title="Alan Bullock" label="Alan Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793468" start="36714" end="36727" title="Maurice Shock" label="Maurice Shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3036060" start="37057" end="37072" title="Donald Markwell" label="Donald Markwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9317" start="37087" end="37106" title="John Maynard Keynes" label="John Maynard Keynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="37319" end="37329" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q787055" start="37368" end="37389" title="Edwin Lawrence Godkin" label="Edwin Lawrence Godkin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6678" wikidata="Q146" url="?curid=6678" title="Cat">
<text>The cat (Felis catus), also referred to as the domestic cat or house cat, is a small domesticated carnivorous mammal. It is the only domesticated species of the family Felidae. Advances in archaeology and genetics have shown that the domestication of the cat occurred in the Near East around 7500 BC. It is commonly kept as a pet and farm cat, but also ranges freely as a feral cat avoiding human contact. It is valued by humans for companionship and its ability to kill vermin. Its retractable claws are adapted to killing small prey species such as mice and rats. It has a strong, flexible body, quick reflexes, and sharp teeth, and its night vision and sense of smell are well developed. It is a social species, but a solitary hunter and a crepuscular predator. Cat communication includes vocalizations—including meowing, purring, trilling, , growling, and —as well as body language. It can hear sounds too faint or too high in frequency for human ears, such as those made by small mammals. It secretes and perceives pheromones.

Female domestic cats can have kittens from spring to late autumn in temperate zones and throughout the year in equatorial regions, with litter sizes often ranging from two to five kittens. Domestic cats are bred and shown at events as registered pedigreed cats, a hobby known as cat fancy. Animal population control of cats may be achieved by spaying and neutering, but their proliferation and the abandonment of pets has resulted in large numbers of feral cats worldwide, contributing to the extinction of bird, mammal, and reptile species.

 the domestic cat was the second most popular pet in the United States, with 73.8 million cats owned and around 42.2 million households owning at least one cat. In the United Kingdom, 26% of adults have a cat, with an estimated population of 10.9 million pet cats there were an estimated 220 million owned and 480 million stray cats in the world.

== Etymology and naming ==
The origin of the English word &quot;cat&quot;, Old English , is thought to be the Late Latin word , which was first used at the beginning of the 6th century. The Late Latin word may be derived from an unidentified African language. The Nubian word &#x27;wildcat&#x27; and Nobiin are possible sources or cognates.

The forms might also have derived from an ancient Germanic word that was absorbed into Latin and then into Greek, Syriac, and Arabic. The word may be derived from Germanic and Northern European languages, and ultimately be borrowed from Uralic, Northern Sámi , &#x27;female stoat&#x27;, and Hungarian , &#x27;lady, female stoat&#x27;; from Proto-Uralic , &#x27;female (of a furred animal)&#x27;.

The English &quot;&quot;, extended as &quot;pussy&quot; and &quot;pussycat&quot;, is attested from the 16th century and may have been introduced from Dutch or from Low German , related to Swedish , or Norwegian , . Similar forms exist in Lithuanian and Irish or . The etymology of this word is unknown, but it may have arisen from a sound used to attract a cat.

A male cat is called a &quot;tom&quot; or &quot;tomcat&quot; (or a &quot;gib&quot;, if neutered). A female is called a &quot;queen&quot; (or sometimes a &quot;molly&quot;, if spayed). A juvenile cat is referred to as a &quot;kitten&quot;. In Early Modern English, the word &quot;kitten&quot; was interchangeable with the now-obsolete word &quot;catling&quot;. A group of cats can be referred to as a &quot;clowder&quot;, a &quot;glaring&quot;, or a &quot;colony&quot;.

== Taxonomy ==
The scientific name &quot;Felis catus&quot; was proposed by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 for a domestic cat. &quot;Felis catus domesticus&quot; was proposed by Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben in 1777. &quot;Felis daemon&quot; proposed by Konstantin Satunin in 1904 was a black cat from the Transcaucasus, later identified as a domestic cat.

In 2003, the International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature ruled that the domestic cat is a distinct species, namely &quot;Felis catus&quot;. In 2007, the modern domesticated subspecies &quot;F. silvestris catus&quot; sampled worldwide was considered to have probably descended from the African wildcat (&quot;F. lybica&quot;), following results of phylogenetic research. In 2017, the IUCN Cat Classification Taskforce followed the recommendation of the ICZN in regarding the domestic cat as a distinct species, &quot;Felis catus&quot;.

== Evolution ==

The domestic cat is a member of the Felidae, a family that had a common ancestor about . The evolutionary radiation of the Felidae began in Asia during the Miocene around . Analysis of mitochondrial DNA of all Felidae species indicates a radiation at . The genus &quot;Felis&quot; genetically diverged from other Felidae around . Results of phylogenetic research shows that the wild members of this genus evolved through sympatric or parapatric speciation, whereas the domestic cat evolved through artificial selection. The domestic cat and its closest wild ancestor are diploid and both possess 38 chromosomes and roughly 20,000 genes.


=== Domestication ===
It was long thought that the domestication of the cat began in ancient Egypt, where cats were venerated from around 3100 BC. However, the earliest known indication for the taming of an African wildcat was excavated close by a human Neolithic grave in Shillourokambos, southern Cyprus, dating to about 7500–7200 BC. Since there is no evidence of native mammalian fauna on Cyprus, the inhabitants of this Neolithic village most likely brought the cat and other wild mammals to the island from the Middle Eastern mainland. Scientists therefore assume that African wildcats were attracted to early human settlements in the Fertile Crescent by rodents, in particular the house mouse (&quot;Mus musculus&quot;), and were tamed by Neolithic farmers. This mutual relationship between early farmers and tamed cats lasted thousands of years. As agricultural practices spread, so did tame and domesticated cats. Wildcats of Egypt contributed to the maternal gene pool of the domestic cat at a later time.

The earliest known evidence for the occurrence of the domestic cat in Greece dates to around 1200 BC. Greek, Phoenician, Carthaginian and Etruscan traders introduced domestic cats to southern Europe. By the 5th century BC, they were familiar animals around settlements in Magna Graecia and Etruria. During the Roman Empire, they were introduced to Corsica and Sardinia before the beginning of the 1st century AD. By the end of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century, the Egyptian domestic cat lineage had arrived in a Baltic Sea port in northern Germany.

The leopard cat (&quot;Prionailurus bengalensis&quot;) was tamed independently in China around 5500 BC. This line of partially domesticated cats leaves no trace in the domestic cat populations of today.

During domestication, cats have undergone only minor changes in anatomy and behavior, and they are still capable of surviving in the wild. Several natural behaviors and characteristics of wildcats may have pre-adapted them for domestication as pets. These traits include their small size, social nature, obvious body language, love of play, and high intelligence. Since they practice rigorous grooming habits and have an instinctual drive to bury and hide their urine and feces, they are generally much less messy than other domesticated animals. Captive &quot;Leopardus&quot; cats may also display affectionate behavior toward humans but were not domesticated. House cats often mate with feral cats. Hybridization between domestic and other Felinae species is also possible, producing hybrids such as the Kellas cat in Scotland.

Development of cat breeds started in the mid 19th century. An analysis of the domestic cat genome revealed that the ancestral wildcat genome was significantly altered in the process of domestication, as specific mutations were selected to develop cat breeds. Most breeds are founded on random-bred domestic cats. Genetic diversity of these breeds varies between regions, and is lowest in purebred populations, which show more than 20 deleterious genetic disorders.

== Characteristics ==
=== Size ===

The domestic cat has a smaller skull and shorter bones than the European wildcat. It averages about in head-to-body length and in height, with about long tails. Males are larger than females. Adult domestic cats typically weigh .

=== Skeleton ===
Cats have seven cervical vertebrae (as do most mammals); 13 thoracic vertebrae (humans have 12); seven lumbar vertebrae (humans have five); three sacral vertebrae (as do most mammals, but humans have five); and a variable number of caudal vertebrae in the tail (humans have only three to five vestigial caudal vertebrae, fused into an internal coccyx). The extra lumbar and thoracic vertebrae account for the cat&#x27;s spinal mobility and flexibility. Attached to the spine are 13 ribs, the shoulder, and the pelvis. Unlike human arms, cat forelimbs are attached to the shoulder by free-floating clavicle bones which allow them to pass their body through any space into which they can fit their head.

=== Skull ===
The cat skull is unusual among mammals in having very large eye sockets and a powerful specialized jaw. Within the jaw, cats have teeth adapted for killing prey and tearing meat. When it overpowers its prey, a cat delivers a lethal neck bite with its two long canine teeth, inserting them between two of the prey&#x27;s vertebrae and severing its spinal cord, causing irreversible paralysis and death. Compared to other felines, domestic cats have narrowly spaced canine teeth relative to the size of their jaw, which is an adaptation to their preferred prey of small rodents, which have small vertebrae.

The premolar and first molar together compose the carnassial pair on each side of the mouth, which efficiently shears meat into small pieces, like a pair of scissors. These are vital in feeding, since cats&#x27; small molars cannot chew food effectively, and cats are largely incapable of mastication. Cats tend to have better teeth than most humans, with decay generally less likely because of a thicker protective layer of enamel, a less damaging saliva, less retention of food particles between teeth, and a diet mostly devoid of sugar. Nonetheless, they are subject to occasional tooth loss and infection.

=== Claws ===

Cats have protractible and retractable claws. In their normal, relaxed position, the claws are sheathed with the skin and fur around the paw&#x27;s toe pads. This keeps the claws sharp by preventing wear from contact with the ground and allows for the silent stalking of prey. The claws on the forefeet are typically sharper than those on the hindfeet. Cats can voluntarily extend their claws on one or more paws. They may extend their claws in hunting or self-defense, climbing, kneading, or for extra traction on soft surfaces. Cats shed the outside layer of their claw sheaths when scratching rough surfaces.

Most cats have five claws on their front paws and four on their rear paws. The dewclaw is proximal to the other claws. More proximally is a protrusion which appears to be a sixth &quot;finger&quot;. This special feature of the front paws on the inside of the wrists has no function in normal walking but is thought to be an antiskidding device used while jumping. Some cat breeds are prone to having extra digits (&quot;polydactyly&quot;).

=== Ambulation ===
The cat is digitigrade. It walks on the toes, with the bones of the feet making up the lower part of the visible leg. Unlike most mammals, it uses a &quot;pacing&quot; gait and moves both legs on one side of the body before the legs on the other side. It registers directly by placing each hind paw close to the track of the corresponding fore paw, minimizing noise and visible tracks. This also provides sure footing for hind paws when navigating rough terrain. As it speeds up from walking to trotting, its gait changes to a &quot;diagonal&quot; gait: The diagonally opposite hind and fore legs move simultaneously.

=== Balance ===

Cats are generally fond of sitting in high places or &quot;perching&quot;. A higher place may serve as a concealed site from which to hunt; domestic cats strike prey by pouncing from a perch such as a tree branch. Another possible explanation is that height gives the cat a better observation point, allowing it to survey its territory. A cat falling from heights of up to can right itself and land on its paws.

During a fall from a high place, a cat reflexively twists its body and rights itself to land on its feet using its acute sense of balance and flexibility. This reflex is known as the cat righting reflex. A cat always rights itself in the same way during a fall, if it has enough time to do so, which is the case in falls of or more. How cats are able to right themselves when falling has been investigated as the &quot;falling cat problem&quot;.

=== Coats ===
The cat family (Felidae) can pass down many colors and patterns to their offspring. The domestic cat genes &quot;MC1R&quot; and &quot;ASIP&quot; allow color variety in their coats. The feline &quot;ASIP&quot; gene consists of three coding exons. Three novel microsatellite markers linked to &quot;ASIP&quot; were isolated from a domestic cat BAC clone containing this gene to perform linkage analysis on 89 domestic cats segregated for melanism. The domestic cat family demonstrated a cosegregation between the &quot;ASIP&quot; allele and coat black coloration.

== Senses ==
=== Vision ===
Cats have excellent night vision and can see at one sixth the light level required for human vision. This is partly the result of cat eyes having a &quot;tapetum lucidum&quot;, which reflects any light that passes through the retina back into the eye, thereby increasing the eye&#x27;s sensitivity to dim light. Large pupils are an adaptation to dim light. The domestic cat has slit pupils, which allow it to focus bright light without chromatic aberration. At low light, a cat&#x27;s pupils expand to cover most of the exposed surface of its eyes. The domestic cat has rather poor color vision and only two types of cone cells, optimized for sensitivity to blue and yellowish green; its ability to distinguish between red and green is limited. A response to middle wavelengths from a system other than the rod cells might be due to a third type of cone. This appears to be an adaptation to low light levels rather than representing true trichromatic vision. Cats also have a nictitating membrane, allowing them to blink without hindering their vision.

=== Hearing ===
The domestic cat&#x27;s hearing is most acute in the range of 500 Hz to 32 kHz. It can detect an extremely broad range of frequencies ranging from 55 Hz to 79 kHz, whereas humans can only detect frequencies between 20 Hz and 20 kHz. It can hear a range of 10.5 octaves, while humans and dogs can hear ranges of about 9 octaves. Its hearing sensitivity is enhanced by its large movable outer ears, the pinnae, which amplify sounds and help detect the location of a noise. It can detect ultrasound, which enables it to detect ultrasonic calls made by rodent prey. Recent research has shown that cats have socio-spatial cognitive abilities to create mental maps of owners&#x27; locations based on hearing owners&#x27; voices.

=== Smell ===
Cats have an acute sense of smell, due in part to their well-developed olfactory bulb and a large surface of olfactory mucosa, about in area, which is about twice that of humans. Cats and many other animals have a Jacobson&#x27;s organ in their mouths that is used in the behavioral process of flehmening. It allows them to sense certain aromas in a way that humans cannot. Cats are sensitive to pheromones such as 3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol, which they use to communicate through urine spraying and marking with scent glands. Many cats also respond strongly to plants that contain nepetalactone, especially catnip, as they can detect that substance at less than one part per billion. About 70–80% of cats are affected by nepetalactone. This response is also produced by other plants, such as silver vine (&quot;Actinidia polygama&quot;) and the herb valerian; it may be caused by the smell of these plants mimicking a pheromone and stimulating cats&#x27; social or sexual behaviors.

=== Taste ===
Cats have relatively few taste buds compared to humans (470 or so, compared to more than 9,000 on the human tongue). Domestic and wild cats share a taste receptor gene mutation that keeps their sweet taste buds from binding to sugary molecules, leaving them with no ability to taste sweetness. But they do have taste bud receptors specialized for acids, amino acids such as the constituents of protein, and bitter tastes.

Their taste buds possess the receptors needed to detect umami. However, these receptors contain molecular changes that make cats taste umami differently from humans. In humans, they detect the amino acids glutamic acid and aspartic acid; but in cats, they instead detect inosine monophosphate and histidine. These molecules are particularly enriched in tuna. This, it has been argued, is why cats find tuna so palatable: as put by researchers into cat taste, &quot;the specific combination of the high IMP and free histidine contents of tuna, which produces a strong umami taste synergy that is highly preferred by cats.&quot; One of the researchers in this research has stated, &quot;I think umami is as important for cats as sweet is for humans.&quot;

Cats also have a distinct temperature preference for their food, preferring food at a temperature around which is similar to that of a fresh kill; some cats reject cold food (which would signal to the cat that the &quot;prey&quot; item is long dead and therefore possibly toxic or decomposing).

=== Whiskers ===

To aid with navigation and sensation, cats have dozens of movable whiskers (vibrissae) over their body, especially their faces. These provide information on the width of gaps and on the location of objects in the dark, both by touching objects directly and by sensing air currents; they also trigger protective blink reflexes to protect the eyes from damage.

== Behavior ==
Outdoor cats are active both day and night, although they tend to be slightly more active at night. Domestic cats spend the majority of their time in the vicinity of their homes, but they can range many hundreds of meters from this central point. They establish territories that vary considerably in size, in one study ranging . The timing of cats&#x27; activity is quite flexible and varied; but being low-light predators, they are generally crepuscular, which means they tend to be more active near dawn and dusk. However, house cats&#x27; behavior is also influenced by human activity, and they may adapt to their owners&#x27; sleeping patterns to some extent.

Cats conserve energy by sleeping more than most animals, especially as they grow older. The daily duration of sleep varies, usually between 12 and 16 hours, with 13 to 14 being the average. Some cats can sleep as much as 20 hours. The term &quot;cat nap&quot; for a short rest refers to the cat&#x27;s tendency to fall asleep (lightly) for a brief period. While asleep, cats experience short periods of rapid eye movement sleep often accompanied by muscle twitches, which suggests they are dreaming.

A common misconception is that a cat&#x27;s behavioral and personality traits correspond to its coat color. These traits instead depend on a complex interplay between genetic and environmental factors.

=== Sociability ===
The social behavior of the domestic cat ranges from widely dispersed individuals to feral cat colonies that gather around a food source, based on groups of co-operating females. Within such groups, one cat is usually dominant over the others. Each cat in a colony holds a distinct territory, with sexually active males having the largest territories, which are about 10 times larger than those of female cats and may overlap with several females&#x27; territories. These territories are marked by urine spraying, rubbing objects at head height with secretions from facial glands, and by defecation. Between these territories are neutral areas where cats watch and greet one another without territorial conflicts. Outside these neutral areas, territory holders usually chase away stranger cats, at first by staring, hissing, and growling, and, if that does not work, by short and violent, noisy attacks. Although cats do not have a social survival strategy or herd behavior, they always hunt alone.

Life in proximity to humans and other domestic animals has led to a symbiotic social adaptation in cats, and cats may express great affection toward humans or other animals. Ethologically, a cat&#x27;s human keeper functions as a mother surrogate. Adult cats live their lives in a type of extended kittenhood, a form of behavioral neoteny. Their high-pitched sounds may mimic the cries of a hungry human infant, making them particularly difficult for humans to ignore. Some pet cats are poorly socialized. In particular, older cats show aggressiveness toward newly arrived kittens, which includes biting and scratching; this type of behavior is known as feline asocial aggression.

Redirected aggression is a common form of aggression which can occur in multiple cat households. In redirected aggression, there is usually something that agitates the cat: this could be a sight, sound, or another source of stimuli which causes a heightened level of anxiety or arousal. If the cat cannot attack the stimuli, it may direct anger elsewhere by attacking or directing aggression to the nearest cat, pet, human or other being.

Domestic cats&#x27; scent rubbing behavior toward humans or other cats is thought to be a feline means of social bonding.

=== Communication ===


Domestic cats use many vocalizations for communication, including purring, trilling, hissing, growling/snarling, grunting, and several different forms of meowing. Their body language, including position of ears and tail, relaxation of the whole body, and kneading of the paws, are all indicators of mood. The tail and ears are particularly important social signal mechanisms; a raised tail indicates a friendly greeting, and flattened ears indicate hostility. Tail-raising also indicates the cat&#x27;s position in the group&#x27;s social hierarchy, with dominant individuals raising their tails less often than subordinate ones. Feral cats are generally silent. Nose-to-nose touching is also a common greeting and may be followed by social grooming, which is solicited by one of the cats raising and tilting its head.

Purring may have developed as an evolutionary advantage as a signaling mechanism of reassurance between mother cats and nursing kittens, who are thought to use it as a care-soliciting signal. Post-nursing cats also often purr as a sign of contentment: when being petted, becoming relaxed, or eating. Although purring is popularly interpreted as indicative of pleasure, it has been recorded in a wide variety of circumstances, most of which involve physical contact between the cat and another, presumably trusted individual. Some cats have been observed to purr continuously when chronically ill or in apparent pain.

The exact mechanism by which cats purr has long been elusive, but it has been proposed that purring is generated via a series of sudden build-ups and releases of pressure as the glottis is opened and closed, which causes the vocal folds to separate forcefully. The laryngeal muscles in control of the glottis are thought to be driven by a neural oscillator which generates a cycle of contraction and release every 30–40 milliseconds (giving a frequency of 33 to 25 Hz).

Domestic cats observed in rescue facilities have 276 morphologically distinct facial expressions based on 26 facial movements; each facial expression corresponds to different social functions that are probably influenced by domestication. Facial expressions have helped researchers detect pain in cats. The feline grimace scale&#x27;s five criteria—ear position, orbital tightening, muzzle tension, whisker change, and head position—indicated the presence of acute pain in cats.

=== Grooming ===

Cats are known for spending considerable amounts of time licking their coats to keep them clean. The cat&#x27;s tongue has backward-facing spines about 0.5 millimeter long, called lingual papillae, which contain keratin making them rigid. The papillae act like a hairbrush, and some cats, particularly long-haired cats, occasionally regurgitate sausage-shaped long hairballs of fur that have collected in their stomachs from grooming. Hairballs can be prevented with remedies that ease elimination of the hair through the gut, as well as regular grooming of the coat with a comb or stiff brush.

=== Fighting ===

Among domestic cats, males are more likely to fight than females. Among feral cats, the most common reason for cat fighting is competition between two males to mate with a female. In such cases, most fights are won by the heavier male. Another common reason for fighting in domestic cats is the difficulty of establishing territories within a small home. Female cats also fight over territory or to defend their kittens. Neutering will decrease or eliminate this behavior in many cases, suggesting that the behavior is linked to sex hormones.

When cats become aggressive, they try to make themselves appear larger and more threatening by raising their fur, arching their backs, turning sideways, and hissing or spitting. Often, the ears are pointed down and back to avoid damage to the inner ear and potentially listen for any changes behind them while focused forward. Cats may also vocalize loudly and bare their teeth in an effort to further intimidate their opponents. Fights usually consist of grappling and delivering slaps to the face and body with the forepaws, as well as bites. Cats also throw themselves to the ground in a defensive posture to rake their opponent&#x27;s belly with their hind legs.

Serious damage is rare, as the fights are usually short in duration, with the loser running away with little more than a few scratches to the face and ears. Fights for mating rights are typically more severe, and injuries may include deep puncture wounds and lacerations. Normally, serious injuries from fighting are limited to infections from scratches and bites, although these can occasionally kill cats if untreated. In addition, bites are probably the main route of transmission of the feline immunodeficiency virus. Sexually active males are usually involved in many fights during their lives and often have decidedly battered faces with obvious scars and cuts to their ears and nose. Cats are willing to threaten animals larger than them to defend their territory, such as dogs and foxes.

=== Hunting and feeding ===
The shape and structure of cats&#x27; cheeks is insufficient to allow them to take in liquids using suction. Therefore, when drinking, they lap with the tongue to draw liquid upward into their mouths. Lapping at a rate of four times a second, the cat touches the smooth tip of its tongue to the surface of the water, and quickly retracts it like a corkscrew, drawing water upward.

Feral cats and free-fed house cats consume several small meals in a day. The frequency and size of meals varies between individuals. They select food based on its temperature, smell, and texture; they dislike chilled foods and respond most strongly to moist foods rich in amino acids, which are similar to meat. Cats reject novel flavors (a response termed neophobia) and learn quickly to avoid foods that have tasted unpleasant in the past. It is also a common misconception that cats like milk/cream, as they tend to avoid sweet food and milk. Most adult cats are lactose intolerant; the sugar in milk is not easily digested and may cause soft stools or diarrhea. Some also develop odd eating habits and like to eat or chew on things such as wool, plastic, cables, paper, string, aluminum foil, or even coal. This condition, pica, can threaten their health, depending on the amount and toxicity of the items eaten.

Cats hunt small prey, primarily birds and rodents, and are often used as a form of pest control. Other common small creatures, such as lizards and snakes, may also become prey. Cats use two hunting strategies, either stalking prey actively, or waiting in ambush until an animal comes close enough to be captured. The strategy used depends on the prey species in the area, with cats waiting in ambush outside burrows, but tending to actively stalk birds. Domestic cats are a major predator of wildlife in the United States, killing an estimated 1.3 to 4.0 billion birds and 6.3 to 22.3 billion mammals annually.

Certain species appear more susceptible than others; in one English village, for example, 30% of house sparrow mortality was linked to the domestic cat. In the recovery of ringed robins (&quot;Erithacus rubecula&quot;) and dunnocks (&quot;Prunella modularis&quot;) in Britain, 31% of deaths were a result of cat predation. In parts of North America, the presence of larger carnivores such as coyotes, which prey on cats and other small predators, reduces the effect of predation by cats and other small predators such as opossums and raccoons on bird numbers and variety.

Another poorly understood element of cat hunting behavior is the presentation of prey to human guardians. One explanation is that cats adopt humans into their social group and share excess kill with others in the group according to the dominance hierarchy, in which humans are reacted to as if they are at or near the top. Another explanation is that they attempt to teach their guardians to hunt or to help their human as if feeding &quot;an elderly cat, or an inept kitten&quot;. This hypothesis is inconsistent with the fact that male cats also bring home prey, despite males having negligible involvement in raising kittens.

=== Play ===
Domestic cats, especially young kittens, are known for their love of play. This behavior mimics hunting and is important in helping kittens learn to stalk, capture, and kill prey. Cats also engage in play fighting, both with each other and with humans. This behavior may be a way for cats to practice the skills needed for real combat, and it might also reduce the fear that they associate with launching attacks on other animals.

Cats also tend to play with toys more when they are hungry. Owing to the close similarity between play and hunting, cats prefer to play with objects that resemble prey, such as small furry toys that move rapidly, but rapidly lose interest. They become habituated to a toy they have played with before. String is often used as a toy, but if it is eaten, it can become caught at the base of the cat&#x27;s tongue and then move into the intestines, a medical emergency which can cause serious illness, even death.

=== Reproduction ===

The cat secretes and perceives pheromones. Female cats, called &quot;queens&quot;, are polyestrous with several estrus cycles during a year, lasting usually 21 days. They are usually ready to mate between early February and August in northern temperate zones and throughout the year in equatorial regions.

Several males, called tomcats, are attracted to a female in heat. They fight over her, and the victor wins the right to mate. At first, the female rejects the male, but eventually, the female allows the male to mate. The female utters a loud yowl as the male pulls out of her because a male cat&#x27;s penis has a band of about 120–150 backward-pointing penile spines, which are about long; upon withdrawal of the penis, the spines may provide the female with increased sexual stimulation, which acts to induce ovulation.
After mating, the female cleans her vulva thoroughly. If a male attempts to mate with her at this point, the female attacks him. After about 20 to 30 minutes, once the female is finished grooming, the cycle will repeat. Because ovulation is not always triggered by a single mating, females may not be impregnated by the first male with which they mate. Furthermore, cats are superfecund; that is, a female may mate with more than one male when she is in heat, with the result that different kittens in a litter may have different fathers.

The morula forms 124 hours after conception. At 148 hours, early blastocysts form. At 10–12 days, implantation occurs. The gestation of queens lasts between 64 and 67 days, with an average of 65 days.
Based on a study of 2,300 free-ranging queens conducted from May 1998 and October2000, they had one to six kittens per litter, with an average of three kittens. They produced a mean of 1.4 litters per year, but a maximum of three litters in a year. Of 169 kittens, 127 died before they were six months old due to a trauma caused in most cases by dog attacks and road accidents. The first litter is usually smaller than subsequent litters. Kittens are weaned between six and seven weeks of age. Queens normally reach sexual maturity at 5–10 months, and males at 5–7 months. This varies depending on breed. Kittens reach puberty at the age of 9–10 months.

Cats are ready to go to new homes at about 12 weeks of age, when they are ready to leave their mother. They can be surgically sterilized (spayed or castrated) as early as seven weeks to limit unwanted reproduction. This surgery also prevents undesirable sex-related behavior, such as aggression, territory marking (spraying urine) in males, and yowling (calling) in females. Traditionally, this surgery was performed at around six to nine months of age, but it is increasingly being performed before puberty, at about three to six months. In the United States, about 80% of household cats are neutered.

== Lifespan and health ==

The average lifespan of pet cats has risen in recent decades. In the early 1980s, it was about seven years, rising to 9.4 years in 1995 and an average of about 13 years as of 2014 and 2023.

Neutering increases life expectancy; one study found castrated male cats live twice as long as intact males, while spayed female cats live 62% longer than intact females. Having a cat neutered confers some health benefits, such as a greater life expectancy and a decreased incidence of reproductive neoplasia. However, neutering decreases metabolism and increases food intake, both of which can cause obesity in neutered cats. Pre-pubertal neutering (neutering at 4 months or earlier) was only recommended by 28% of American veterinarians in one study. Some concerns of early neutering were metabolic, retarded physeal closure, and urinary tract disease related.

=== Disease ===

About 250 heritable genetic disorders have been identified in cats; many are similar to human inborn errors of metabolism. The high level of similarity among the metabolism of mammals allows many of these feline diseases to be diagnosed using genetic tests that were originally developed for use in humans, as well as the use of cats as animal models in the study of the human diseases. Diseases affecting domestic cats include acute infections, parasitic infestations, injuries, and chronic diseases such as kidney disease, thyroid disease, and arthritis. Vaccinations are available for many infectious diseases, as are treatments to eliminate parasites such as worms, ticks, and fleas.

== Ecology ==
=== Habitats ===

The domestic cat is a cosmopolitan species and occurs across much of the world. It is adaptable and now present on all continents except Antarctica, and on 118 of the 131 main groups of islands, even on the remote Kerguelen Islands. Due to its ability to thrive in almost any terrestrial habitat, it is among the world&#x27;s most invasive species. It lives on small islands with no human inhabitants. Feral cats can live in forests, grasslands, tundra, coastal areas, agricultural land, scrublands, urban areas, and wetlands.

The unwantedness that leads to the domestic cat being treated as an invasive species is twofold. As it is little altered from the wildcat, it can readily interbreed with the wildcat. This hybridization poses a danger to the genetic distinctiveness of some wildcat populations, particularly in Scotland and Hungary, possibly also the Iberian Peninsula, and where protected natural areas are close to human-dominated landscapes, such as Kruger National Park in South Africa. However, its introduction to places where no native felines are present also contributes to the decline of native species.

=== Ferality ===
Feral cats are domestic cats that were born in or have reverted to a wild state. They are unfamiliar with and wary of humans and roam freely in urban and rural areas. The numbers of feral cats are not known, but estimates of the United States feral population range from 25 to 60 million. Feral cats may live alone, but most are found in large colonies, which occupy a specific territory and are usually associated with a source of food. Famous feral cat colonies are found in Rome around the Colosseum and Forum Romanum, with cats at some of these sites being fed and given medical attention by volunteers.

Public attitudes toward feral cats vary widely, from seeing them as free-ranging pets to regarding them as vermin.

=== Impact on wildlife ===
On islands, birds can contribute as much as 60% of a cat&#x27;s diet. In nearly all cases, the cat cannot be identified as the sole cause for reducing the numbers of island birds, and in some instances, eradication of cats has caused a &quot;mesopredator release&quot; effect; where the suppression of top carnivores creates an abundance of smaller predators that cause a severe decline in their shared prey. Domestic cats are a contributing factor to the decline of several species, a factor that has ultimately led, in some cases, to extinction. The South Island piopio, Chatham rail, and the New Zealand merganser are a few from a long list, with the most extreme case being the flightless Lyall&#x27;s wren, which was driven to extinction only a few years after its discovery. One feral cat in New Zealand killed 102 New Zealand lesser short-tailed bats in seven days. In the United States, feral and free-ranging domestic cats kill an estimated 6.3–22.3 billion mammals annually.

In Australia, one study found feral cats to kill 466 million reptiles per year. More than 258 reptile species were identified as being predated by cats. Cats have contributed to the extinction of the Navassa curly-tailed lizard and &quot;Chioninia coctei.&quot;

== Interaction with humans ==
Cats are common pets throughout the world, and their worldwide population as of 2007 exceeded 500 million. the domestic cat was the second most popular pet in the United States, with 73.8 million cats owned and around 42.2 million households owning at least one cat. In the United Kingdom, 26% of adults have a cat, with an estimated population of 10.9 million pet cats there were an estimated 220 million owned and 480 million stray cats in the world.

Cats have been used for millennia to control rodents, notably around grain stores and aboard ships, and both uses extend to the present day. Cats are also used in the international fur trade and leather industries for making coats, hats, blankets, stuffed toys, shoes, gloves, and musical instruments. About 24 cats are needed to make a cat-fur coat. This use has been outlawed in the United States since 2000 and in the European Union (as well as the United Kingdom) since 2007.

Cat pelts have been used for superstitious purposes as part of the practice of witchcraft, and they are still made into blankets in Switzerland as traditional medicines thought to cure rheumatism.
A few attempts to build a cat census have been made over the years, both through associations or national and international organizations (such as that of the Canadian Federation of Humane Societies) and over the Internet. General estimates for the global population of domestic cats range widely from anywhere between 200 million to 600 million. Walter Chandoha made his career photographing cats after his 1949 images of &quot;Loco&quot;, a stray cat, were published. He is reported to have photographed 90,000 cats during his career and maintained an archive of 225,000 images that he drew from for publications during his lifetime.

Pet humanization is a form of anthropomorphism in which cats are kept for companionship and treated more like human family members than traditional pets. This trend of pet culture involves providing cats with a higher level of care, attention and often even luxury, similar to the way humans are treated.

=== Shows ===

A cat show is a judged event in which the owners of cats compete to win titles in various cat-registering organizations by entering their cats to be judged after a breed standard. It is often required that a cat must be healthy and vaccinated to participate in a cat show. Both pedigreed and non-purebred companion (&quot;moggy&quot;) cats are admissible, although the rules differ depending on the organization. Competing cats are compared to the applicable breed standard, and assessed for temperament.

=== Infection ===

Cats can be infected or infested with viruses, bacteria, fungus, protozoans, arthropods or worms that can transmit diseases to humans. In some cases, the cat exhibits no symptoms of the disease. The same disease can then become evident in a human. The likelihood that a person will become diseased depends on the age and immune status of the person. Humans who have cats living in their home or in close association are more likely to become infected. Others might also acquire infections from cat feces and parasites exiting the cat&#x27;s body. Some of the infections of most concern include salmonella, cat-scratch disease, and toxoplasmosis.

=== History and mythology ===

In ancient Egypt, cats were revered, and the goddess Bastet often depicted in cat form, sometimes taking on the war-like aspect of a lioness. The Greek historian Herodotus reported that killing a cat was forbidden, and when a household cat died, the entire family mourned and shaved their eyebrows. Families took their dead cats to the sacred city of Bubastis, where they were embalmed and buried in sacred repositories. Herodotus expressed astonishment at the domestic cats in Egypt, because he had only ever seen wildcats.

Ancient Greeks and Romans kept weasels as pets, which were seen as the ideal rodent-killers. The earliest unmistakable evidence of the Greeks having domestic cats comes from two coins from Magna Graecia dating to the mid-fifth century BC showing Iokastos and Phalanthos, the legendary founders of Rhegion and Taras respectively, playing with their pet cats. The usual ancient Greek word for &#x27;cat&#x27; was , meaning &#x27;thing with the waving tail&#x27;. Cats are rarely mentioned in ancient Greek literature. Aristotle remarked in his &quot;History of Animals&quot; that &quot;female cats are naturally lecherous&quot;. The Greeks later syncretized their own goddess Artemis with the Egyptian goddess Bastet, adopting Bastet&#x27;s associations with cats and ascribing them to Artemis. In Ovid&#x27;s &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;, when the deities flee to Egypt and take animal forms, the goddess Diana turns into a cat.

Cats eventually displaced weasels as the pest control of choice because they were more pleasant to have around the house and were more enthusiastic hunters of mice. During the Middle Ages, many of Artemis&#x27;s associations with cats were grafted onto the Virgin Mary. Cats are often shown in icons of Annunciation and of the Holy Family and, according to Italian folklore, on the same night that Mary gave birth to Jesus, a cat in Bethlehem gave birth to a kitten. Domestic cats were spread throughout much of the rest of the world during the Age of Discovery, as ships&#x27; cats were carried on sailing ships to control shipboard rodents and as good-luck charms.

Several ancient religions believed cats are exalted souls, companions or guides for humans, that are all-knowing but mute so they cannot influence decisions made by humans. In Japan, the cat is a symbol of good fortune. In Norse mythology, Freyja, the goddess of love, beauty, and fertility, is depicted as riding a chariot drawn by cats. In Jewish legend, the first cat was living in the house of the first man Adam as a pet that got rid of mice. The cat was once partnering with the first dog before the latter broke an oath they had made which resulted in enmity between the descendants of these two animals. It is also written that neither cats nor foxes are represented in the water, while every other animal has an incarnation species in the water. Although no species are sacred in Islam, cats are revered by Muslims. Some Western writers have stated Muhammad had a favorite cat, &quot;Muezza&quot;. He is reported to have loved cats so much, &quot;he would do without his cloak rather than disturb one that was sleeping on it&quot;. The story has no origin in early Muslim writers, and seems to confuse a story of a later Sufi saint, Ahmed ar-Rifa&#x27;i, centuries after Muhammad. One of the companions of Muhammad was known as Abu Hurayrah (&quot;father of the kitten&quot;), in reference to his documented affection to cats.

=== Superstitions and rituals ===

Many cultures have negative superstitions about cats. An example would be the belief that encountering a black cat (&quot;crossing one&#x27;s path&quot;) leads to bad luck, or that cats are witches&#x27; familiar spirits used to augment a witch&#x27;s powers and skills. The killing of cats in medieval Ypres, Belgium, is commemorated in the innocuous present-day Kattenstoet (cat parade). In mid-16th century France, cats would allegedly be burnt alive as a form of entertainment, particularly during midsummer festivals. According to Norman Davies, the assembled people &quot;shrieked with laughter as the animals, howling with pain, were singed, roasted, and finally carbonized&quot;. The remaining ashes were sometimes taken back home by the people for good luck.

According to a myth in many cultures, cats have multiple lives. In many countries, they are believed to have nine lives, but in Italy, Germany, Greece, Brazil and some Spanish-speaking regions, they are said to have seven lives, while in Arabic traditions, the number of lives is six. An early mention of the myth can be found in John Heywood&#x27;s &quot;The Proverbs of John Heywood&quot; (1546):
The myth is attributed to the natural suppleness and swiftness cats exhibit to escape life-threatening situations. Also lending credence to this myth is the fact that falling cats often land on their feet, using an instinctive righting reflex to twist their bodies around. Nonetheless, cats can still be injured or killed by a high fall.
== See also ==
* Aging in cats
* Ailurophobia
* Animal testing on cats
* Cancer in cats
* Cat bite
* Cat café
* Cat collar
* Cat fancy
* Cat lady
* Cat food
* Cat meat
* Cat repeller
* Cats and the Internet
* Cats in Australia
* Cats in New Zealand
* Cats in the United States
* Cat–dog relationship
* Dog
* Dried cat
* Feral cats in Istanbul
* List of cat breeds
* List of cat documentaries, television series and cartoons
* List of individual cats
* List of fictional felines
* List of feline diseases
* Neko-dera
* Perlorian
* Pet door
* Pet first aid
* Popular cat names
== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* 
* 
* Biodiversity Heritage Library bibliography for &quot;Felis catus&quot;
* View the cat genome in Ensembl
* High-resolution images of the cat&#x27;s brain
* &quot;Scientific American&quot;. &quot;The Origin of the Cat&quot;. 1881. p. 120.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="4" end="7" title="Cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="47" end="59" title="Cat" label="domestic cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="63" end="72" title="Cat" label="house cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="85" end="97" title="Domestication" label="domesticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="146" end="153" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q25265" start="168" end="175" title="Felidae" label="Felidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="189" end="200" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="205" end="213" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091662" start="234" end="258" title="domestication of the cat" label="domestication of the cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="275" end="284" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="326" end="329" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115915" start="334" end="342" title="farm cat" label="farm cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="372" end="381" title="feral cat" label="feral cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q987269" start="471" end="477" title="vermin" label="vermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="495" end="499" title="claw" label="claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="551" end="555" title="mice" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="560" end="563" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q179405" start="604" end="610" title="reflex" label="reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="639" end="651" title="night vision" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="656" end="670" title="sense of smell" label="sense of smell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307505" start="699" end="713" title="social species" label="social species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="743" end="754" title="crepuscular" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="755" end="763" title="predator" label="predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q386791" start="765" end="782" title="Cat communication" label="Cat communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307942" start="816" end="820" title="meow" label="meow"/>
<link wikidata="Q662750" start="825" end="829" title="purr" label="purr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188507" start="846" end="854" title="growling" label="growling"/>
<link wikidata="Q386791" start="872" end="885" title="cat body language" label="body language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="931" end="940" title="frequency" label="frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q772517" start="979" end="991" title="small mammal" label="small mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="1020" end="1029" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q147" start="1063" end="1069" title="kitten" label="kitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312" start="1076" end="1082" title="Spring (season)" label="spring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314" start="1091" end="1097" title="autumn" label="autumn"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="1101" end="1116" title="temperate zones" label="temperate zones"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1144" end="1161" title="equatorial region" label="equatorial region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479906" start="1169" end="1175" title="Litter (zoology)" label="litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="1279" end="1292" title="pedigreed cat" label="pedigreed cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793147" start="1312" end="1321" title="cat fancy" label="cat fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764961" start="1323" end="1348" title="Animal population control" label="Animal population control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="1376" end="1383" title="spaying" label="spaying"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="1388" end="1397" title="neutering" label="neutering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="1540" end="1544" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="1546" end="1552" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="1558" end="1565" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1999" end="2010" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="2034" end="2044" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="2166" end="2182" title="Languages of Africa" label="African language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517194" start="2188" end="2194" title="Nubian languages" label="Nubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36503" start="2224" end="2230" title="Nobiin language" label="Nobiin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="2503" end="2509" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33947" start="2511" end="2524" title="Northern Sámi" label="Northern Sámi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="2540" end="2545" title="stoat" label="stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="2557" end="2566" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q288765" start="2606" end="2618" title="Proto-Uralic language" label="Proto-Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2813" end="2818" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="2827" end="2837" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="2851" end="2858" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="2864" end="2873" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="2901" end="2911" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="2916" end="2921" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170239" start="2982" end="3001" title="Onomatopoeia" label="arisen from a sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="3113" end="3121" title="Neutering" label="neutered"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="3201" end="3207" title="Spaying" label="spayed"/>
<link wikidata="Q147" start="3251" end="3257" title="kitten" label="kitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472196" start="3268" end="3288" title="Early Modern English" label="Early Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="3515" end="3530" title="scientific name" label="scientific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="3571" end="3584" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60938" start="3664" end="3698" title="Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben" label="Johann Christian Polycarp Erxleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q4409061" start="3745" end="3763" title="Konstantin Satunin" label="Konstantin Satunin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200173" start="3797" end="3810" title="Transcaucasus" label="Transcaucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071346" start="3862" end="3913" title="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature" label="International Commission on Zoological Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q47482585" start="4142" end="4157" title="African wildcat" label="African wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="4204" end="4216" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="4457" end="4463" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="4475" end="4490" title="common ancestor" label="common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q946437" start="4503" end="4525" title="evolutionary radiation" label="evolutionary radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="4566" end="4573" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="4595" end="4612" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="4667" end="4672" title="Genus (biology)" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="4691" end="4711" title="Genetic divergence" label="genetically diverged"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="4751" end="4763" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240247" start="4831" end="4840" title="sympatric speciation" label="sympatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q200722" start="4844" end="4865" title="parapatric speciation" label="parapatric speciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q995745" start="4908" end="4928" title="artificial selection" label="artificial selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="4981" end="4988" title="diploid" label="diploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="5009" end="5019" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091662" start="5100" end="5124" title="domestication of the cat" label="domestication of the cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="5134" end="5147" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q247285" start="5243" end="5249" title="taming" label="taming"/>
<link wikidata="Q959782" start="5276" end="5285" title="Excavation (archaeology)" label="excavated"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5303" end="5312" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959474" start="5322" end="5337" title="Shillourokambos" label="Shillourokambos"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="5348" end="5354" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="5433" end="5438" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="5566" end="5577" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="5690" end="5706" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83310" start="5737" end="5748" title="house mouse" label="house mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="5819" end="5825" title="Mutualism (biology)" label="mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="5906" end="5928" title="agricultural practices" label="agricultural practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q189800" start="6018" end="6027" title="gene pool" label="gene pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="6136" end="6142" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="6175" end="6184" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="6187" end="6198" title="Carthaginia" label="Carthaginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="6204" end="6211" title="Etrusca" label="Etrusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="6338" end="6351" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="6356" end="6363" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6376" end="6388" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="6414" end="6421" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462" start="6426" end="6434" title="Sardinia" label="Sardinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="6589" end="6599" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6617" end="6624" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q42627" start="6631" end="6642" title="leopard cat" label="leopard cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q247285" start="6686" end="6691" title="tamed" label="tamed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356572" start="7037" end="7048" title="Preadaptation" label="pre-adapted"/>
<link wikidata="Q318414" start="7392" end="7401" title="Leopardus" label="Leopardus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7532" end="7588" title="Felid hybrid#Domestic cat and hybridization" label="Hybridization between domestic and other Felinae species"/>
<link wikidata="Q387278" start="7637" end="7647" title="Kellas cat" label="Kellas cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="7651" end="7659" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="7677" end="7687" title="cat breeds" label="cat breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="7753" end="7759" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="7874" end="7882" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="7975" end="7992" title="Genetic diversity" label="Genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="8108" end="8124" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="8195" end="8200" title="skull" label="skull"/>
<link wikidata="Q43576" start="8228" end="8244" title="European wildcat" label="European wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q900457" start="8428" end="8446" title="cervical vertebrae" label="cervical vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="8459" end="8465" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q578786" start="8472" end="8490" title="thoracic vertebrae" label="thoracic vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q405478" start="8515" end="8531" title="lumbar vertebrae" label="lumbar vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q233316" start="8558" end="8574" title="sacrum" label="sacral vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131319751" start="8644" end="8660" title="caudal vertebrae" label="caudal vertebrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q193176" start="8756" end="8762" title="coccyx" label="coccyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="8922" end="8928" title="pelvis" label="pelvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16343" start="9009" end="9017" title="clavicle" label="clavicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q156075" start="9189" end="9199" title="eye socket" label="eye socket"/>
<link wikidata="Q19625" start="9389" end="9401" title="Canine tooth" label="canine teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q180323" start="9449" end="9457" title="vertebra" label="vertebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q9606" start="9476" end="9487" title="spinal cord" label="spinal cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="9510" end="9519" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q839483" start="9739" end="9747" title="premolar" label="premolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="9758" end="9763" title="Molar (tooth)" label="molar"/>
<link wikidata="Q280781" start="9785" end="9795" title="carnassial" label="carnassial"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="9953" end="9959" title="molar (tooth)" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q143942" start="10160" end="10166" title="Tooth enamel" label="enamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q33202086" start="10841" end="10849" title="kneading (cats)" label="kneading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302901" start="11053" end="11060" title="dewclaw" label="dewclaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q488415" start="11064" end="11072" title="proximal" label="proximal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575002" start="11394" end="11405" title="Polydactyl cat" label="polydactyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q184503" start="11445" end="11456" title="digitigrade" label="digitigrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370000" start="11602" end="11606" title="gait" label="gait"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454738" start="12666" end="12685" title="cat righting reflex" label="cat righting reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432366" start="12902" end="12921" title="falling cat problem" label="falling cat problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q265193" start="13202" end="13216" title="microsatellite" label="microsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q843863" start="13328" end="13344" title="linkage analysis" label="linkage analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q725450" start="13380" end="13388" title="melanism" label="melanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353651" start="13555" end="13567" title="night vision" label="night vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045562" start="13689" end="13704" title="tapetum lucidum" label="tapetum lucidum"/>
<link wikidata="Q169342" start="13761" end="13767" title="retina" label="retina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13913" end="13924" title="Pupil#In other animals" label="slit pupils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087688" start="13971" end="13991" title="chromatic aberration" label="chromatic aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q374259" start="14117" end="14129" title="color vision" label="color vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q147298" start="14152" end="14161" title="cone cell" label="cone cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q505544" start="14342" end="14350" title="rod cell" label="rod cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317719" start="14473" end="14485" title="Trichromacy" label="trichromatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48306" start="14511" end="14531" title="nictitating membrane" label="nictitating membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q386025" start="14866" end="14872" title="octave" label="octave"/>
<link wikidata="Q379858" start="15006" end="15012" title="Pinna (anatomy)" label="pinnae"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="15090" end="15100" title="ultrasound" label="ultrasound"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="15154" end="15160" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q644945" start="15414" end="15428" title="olfactory bulb" label="olfactory bulb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7086517" start="15452" end="15468" title="olfactory mucosa" label="olfactory mucosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q336484" start="15557" end="15578" title="Jacobson&amp;#x27;s organ" label="Jacobson&amp;#x27;s organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q925671" start="15637" end="15647" title="Flehmen response" label="flehmening"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051104" start="15739" end="15749" title="Cat pheromone" label="pheromones"/>
<link wikidata="Q14201168" start="15758" end="15787" title="3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol" label="3-mercapto-3-methylbutan-1-ol"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="15827" end="15841" title="urine spraying" label="urine spraying"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264033" start="15859" end="15870" title="scent gland" label="scent gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q414257" start="15928" end="15941" title="nepetalactone" label="nepetalactone"/>
<link wikidata="Q161139" start="15954" end="15960" title="catnip" label="catnip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357333" start="16158" end="16176" title="Actinidia polygama" label="Actinidia polygama"/>
<link wikidata="Q157819" start="16197" end="16205" title="Valerian (herb)" label="valerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q862867" start="16370" end="16379" title="taste bud" label="taste bud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16493" end="16521" title="Taste receptor#Loss of function" label="taste receptor gene mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q460453" start="16628" end="16637" title="sweetness" label="sweetness"/>
<link wikidata="Q11158" start="16692" end="16696" title="acid" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="16699" end="16709" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q202637" start="16824" end="16829" title="umami" label="umami"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="16973" end="16986" title="glutamic acid" label="glutamic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q178450" start="16991" end="17004" title="aspartic acid" label="aspartic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q255933" start="17039" end="17060" title="inosine monophosphate" label="inosine monophosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="17065" end="17074" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="17121" end="17125" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3361262" start="17178" end="17187" title="Palatability" label="palatable"/>
<link wikidata="Q913572" start="17903" end="17923" title="vibrissa" label="whiskers (vibrissae)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785965" start="18148" end="18160" title="blink reflex" label="blink reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="18474" end="18485" title="Territory (animal)" label="territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="18655" end="18666" title="Crepuscular animal" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q211402" start="19280" end="19304" title="rapid eye movement sleep" label="rapid eye movement sleep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="19685" end="19703" title="Feral cat colony" label="feral cat colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="20098" end="20112" title="urine spraying" label="urine spraying"/>
<link wikidata="Q204015" start="20188" end="20198" title="defecation" label="defecation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188507" start="20429" end="20437" title="growling" label="growling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609678" start="20560" end="20573" title="herd behavior" label="herd behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="20774" end="20787" title="Ethology" label="Ethologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q603178" start="20931" end="20938" title="neoteny" label="neoteny"/>
<link wikidata="Q112980584" start="21282" end="21303" title="Redirected aggression" label="Redirected aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q55632661" start="21742" end="21755" title="scent rubbing" label="scent rubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434121" start="21892" end="21905" title="Animal communication" label="vocalizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q662750" start="21935" end="21939" title="purr" label="purr"/>
<link wikidata="Q51611" start="21944" end="21952" title="Trill consonant" label="trilling"/>
<link wikidata="Q386791" start="22038" end="22051" title="Cat body language" label="body language"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="22401" end="22417" title="social hierarchy" label="social hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q616914" start="22603" end="22618" title="social grooming" label="social grooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q662750" start="22689" end="22696" title="Purring" label="Purring"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="22809" end="22816" title="Breastfeeding" label="nursing"/>
<link wikidata="Q374418" start="23485" end="23492" title="glottis" label="glottis"/>
<link wikidata="Q215558" start="23532" end="23543" title="vocal folds" label="vocal folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q9637" start="23572" end="23589" title="Larynx" label="laryngeal muscles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60442" start="23646" end="23663" title="neural oscillation" label="neural oscillator"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="23727" end="23738" title="millisecond" label="millisecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q327968" start="23856" end="23873" title="facial expression" label="facial expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908762" start="24092" end="24105" title="grimace scale" label="grimace scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553990" start="24456" end="24471" title="lingual papilla" label="lingual papilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="24488" end="24495" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q126478118" start="24578" end="24594" title="Domestic long-haired cat" label="long-haired cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q2360566" start="24641" end="24649" title="hairball" label="hairball"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="24798" end="24801" title="gut (anatomy)" label="gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q386791" start="25001" end="25013" title="Catfight (animal behavior)" label="cat fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q422812" start="25419" end="25430" title="sex hormone" label="sex hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129598" start="26593" end="26622" title="feline immunodeficiency virus" label="feline immunodeficiency virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="26891" end="26896" title="Red fox" label="foxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678024" start="27666" end="27675" title="neophobia" label="neophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473723" start="27698" end="27737" title="conditioned taste aversion" label="avoid foods that have tasted unpleasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q219223" start="27875" end="27893" title="lactose intolerant" label="lactose intolerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q40878" start="27965" end="27973" title="diarrhea" label="diarrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134891" start="28136" end="28140" title="pica (disorder)" label="pica"/>
<link wikidata="Q445478" start="28471" end="28488" title="Ambush predator" label="waiting in ambush"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304826" start="28707" end="28727" title="Cat predation on wildlife" label="predator of wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q25334" start="29032" end="29050" title="Erithacus rubecula" label="Erithacus rubecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q26698" start="29078" end="29096" title="Prunella modularis" label="Prunella modularis"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="29231" end="29237" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q21834" start="29360" end="29367" title="opossum" label="opossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="29373" end="29380" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438403" start="29648" end="29667" title="dominance hierarchy" label="dominance hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104817380" start="30255" end="30268" title="Rough-and-tumble play" label="play fighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136816" start="30739" end="30749" title="habituation" label="habituated"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="30921" end="30930" title="intestine" label="intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="31052" end="31061" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="31108" end="31119" title="polyestrous" label="polyestrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="31133" end="31139" title="estrus" label="estrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58" start="31630" end="31635" title="penis" label="penis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29625363" start="31682" end="31695" title="penile spines" label="penile spines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18208041" start="31832" end="31848" title="Induced ovulation (animals)" label="induce ovulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2192288" start="31886" end="31891" title="vulva" label="vulva"/>
<link wikidata="Q333428" start="32225" end="32236" title="Superfecundation" label="superfecund"/>
<link wikidata="Q376172" start="32394" end="32400" title="morula" label="morula"/>
<link wikidata="Q227717" start="32455" end="32465" title="blastocyst" label="blastocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="32513" end="32522" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479906" start="32710" end="32716" title="Litter (animal)" label="litter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101065" start="33210" end="33217" title="puberty" label="puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="33372" end="33382" title="neutering" label="sterilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q58929" start="33394" end="33403" title="castration" label="castrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="33542" end="33559" title="spraying (animal behavior)" label="territory marking"/>
<link wikidata="Q101065" start="33746" end="33753" title="puberty" label="puberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482590" start="34252" end="34260" title="Neutering" label="neutered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216998" start="34367" end="34376" title="neoplasia" label="neoplasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347293" start="34679" end="34694" title="Epiphyseal plate" label="physeal closure"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="34769" end="34785" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758393" start="34843" end="34870" title="inborn errors of metabolism" label="inborn errors of metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057" start="34911" end="34921" title="metabolism" label="metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="34992" end="35005" title="Genetic testing" label="genetic tests"/>
<link wikidata="Q64732998" start="35086" end="35098" title="animal model" label="animal model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601794" start="35195" end="35216" title="parasitic disease" label="parasitic infestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088049" start="35258" end="35272" title="Chronic kidney disease in cats" label="kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673122" start="35274" end="35289" title="thyroid disease" label="thyroid disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q170990" start="35295" end="35304" title="arthritis" label="arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441916" start="35306" end="35318" title="Feline vaccination" label="Vaccinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q215402" start="35492" end="35512" title="cosmopolitan species" label="cosmopolitan species"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="35607" end="35617" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q46772" start="35684" end="35701" title="Kerguelen Islands" label="Kerguelen Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="35801" end="35817" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36052" end="36082" title="Cat predation on wildlife#Impact by location" label="treated as an invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="36186" end="36199" title="hybrid (biology)" label="hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="36291" end="36299" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="36304" end="36311" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="36331" end="36348" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q24451" start="36433" end="36453" title="Kruger National Park" label="Kruger National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="36457" end="36469" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="36956" end="36964" title="feral cat colonies" label="colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="37105" end="37114" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="37119" end="37132" title="Forum Romanum" label="Forum Romanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q987269" start="37328" end="37334" title="vermin" label="vermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10328964" start="37606" end="37626" title="mesopredator release" label="mesopredator release"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587161" start="37912" end="37935" title="Turnagra capensis" label="The South Island piopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q540547" start="37937" end="37949" title="Rallus modestus" label="Chatham rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q758668" start="37959" end="37980" title="New Zealand merganser" label="New Zealand merganser"/>
<link wikidata="Q507428" start="38057" end="38074" title="Lyall&amp;#x27;s wren" label="Lyall&amp;#x27;s wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q955340" start="38185" end="38220" title="New Zealand lesser short-tailed bat" label="New Zealand lesser short-tailed bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q310820" start="38550" end="38577" title="Navassa curly-tailed lizard" label="Navassa curly-tailed lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q615761" start="38588" end="38604" title="Chioninia coctei" label="Chioninia coctei"/>
<link wikidata="Q39201" start="38659" end="38662" title="pet" label="pet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="38806" end="38819" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="38917" end="38931" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115915" start="39159" end="39178" title="Farm cat" label="around grain stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961496" start="39183" end="39195" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s cat" label="aboard ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q878138" start="39278" end="39287" title="fur trade" label="fur trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q259745" start="39657" end="39667" title="witchcraft" label="witchcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="39710" end="39721" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q771035" start="39725" end="39745" title="traditional medicine" label="traditional medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="39763" end="39773" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955263" start="39934" end="39973" title="Canadian Federation of Humane Societies" label="Canadian Federation of Humane Societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q60691543" start="40122" end="40137" title="Walter Chandoha" label="Walter Chandoha"/>
<link wikidata="Q122182086" start="40412" end="40428" title="Pet humanization" label="Pet humanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="40442" end="40458" title="anthropomorphism" label="anthropomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q96398903" start="40580" end="40591" title="pet culture" label="pet culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q42703" start="40735" end="40743" title="cat show" label="cat show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328072" start="41011" end="41020" title="Pedigree (cat)" label="pedigreed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320143" start="41029" end="41037" title="purebred" label="purebred"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304826" start="41270" end="41278" title="Cat predation on wildlife" label="infected"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="41296" end="41301" title="virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="41305" end="41313" title="pathogenic bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="41315" end="41321" title="fungus" label="fungus"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="41323" end="41333" title="protozoans" label="protozoans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="41335" end="41344" title="arthropod" label="arthropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="41428" end="41436" title="symptoms" label="symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149136" start="41579" end="41592" title="Immunocompetence" label="immune status"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="41756" end="41761" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q186517" start="41766" end="41774" title="parasite" label="parasite"/>
<link wikidata="Q150839" start="41852" end="41862" title="salmonella" label="salmonella"/>
<link wikidata="Q639776" start="41864" end="41883" title="cat-scratch disease" label="cat-scratch disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q154878" start="41889" end="41902" title="toxoplasmosis" label="toxoplasmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="41939" end="41952" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q184576" start="41964" end="41971" title="animal worship" label="revered"/>
<link wikidata="Q129106" start="41989" end="41995" title="Bastet" label="Bastet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="42098" end="42107" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q603841" start="42287" end="42295" title="Bubastis" label="Bubastis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28521" start="42493" end="42499" title="weasel" label="weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184313" start="42651" end="42664" title="Magna Graecia" label="Magna Graecia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="42759" end="42766" title="Reggio Calabria" label="Rhegion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="42771" end="42776" title="Taranto" label="Taras"/>
<link wikidata="Q657246" start="42952" end="42976" title="ancient Greek literature" label="ancient Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="42978" end="42987" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620799" start="43010" end="43028" title="History of Animals" label="History of Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="43072" end="43081" title="Promiscuity" label="lecherous"/>
<link wikidata="Q125587" start="43106" end="43117" title="Interpretatio graeca" label="syncretized"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="43136" end="43143" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="43258" end="43262" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="43276" end="43289" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q132543" start="43363" end="43368" title="Diana (mythology)" label="Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q28521" start="43414" end="43420" title="weasel" label="weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="43564" end="43575" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="43645" end="43656" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q154326" start="43691" end="43703" title="Annunciation" label="Annunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q618057" start="43715" end="43726" title="Holy Family" label="Holy Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747040" start="43745" end="43761" title="Folklore of Italy" label="Italian folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="43805" end="43810" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="43821" end="43830" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="43933" end="43949" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961496" start="43954" end="43970" title="Ship&amp;#x27;s cat" label="ships&amp;#x27; cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q170483" start="43987" end="43999" title="sailing ship" label="sailing ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="44279" end="44294" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647325" start="44296" end="44302" title="Freyja" label="Freyja"/>
<link wikidata="Q30641627" start="44398" end="44411" title="Legends of the Jews" label="Jewish legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="44468" end="44472" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751034" start="44498" end="44502" title="mice" label="mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="44709" end="44712" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624912" start="44852" end="44879" title="Islam and cats" label="cats are revered by Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="44914" end="44922" title="Muhammad" label="Muhammad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14624912" start="44949" end="44955" title="Muezza" label="Muezza"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="45186" end="45190" title="Sufi" label="Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="Q401463" start="45198" end="45218" title="Ahmed ar-Rifa&amp;#x27;i" label="Ahmed ar-Rifa&amp;#x27;i"/>
<link wikidata="Q69326" start="45293" end="45305" title="Abu Hurayrah" label="Abu Hurayrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q133182" start="45456" end="45468" title="superstition" label="superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327677" start="45533" end="45542" title="black cat" label="black cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q386905" start="45632" end="45647" title="familiar spirit" label="familiar spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q102728" start="45731" end="45736" title="Ypres" label="Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="45738" end="45745" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378338" start="45792" end="45803" title="Kattenstoet" label="Kattenstoet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050984" start="45846" end="45881" title="Cat-burning" label="cats would allegedly be burnt alive"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="45964" end="45977" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630655" start="46098" end="46108" title="Carbonization" label="carbonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q977389" start="46527" end="46539" title="John Heywood" label="John Heywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454738" start="46823" end="46838" title="cat righting reflex" label="righting reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051118" start="46951" end="46964" title="Aging in cats" label="Aging in cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q405385" start="46967" end="46979" title="Ailurophobia" label="Ailurophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38344" start="46982" end="47004" title="Animal testing on cats" label="Animal testing on cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031441" start="47007" end="47021" title="Cancer in cats" label="Cancer in cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q30325669" start="47024" end="47032" title="Cat bite" label="Cat bite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785359" start="47035" end="47043" title="Cat café" label="Cat café"/>
<link wikidata="Q106590127" start="47046" end="47056" title="Cat collar" label="Cat collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793147" start="47059" end="47068" title="Cat fancy" label="Cat fancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051098" start="47071" end="47079" title="Cat lady" label="Cat lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1736906" start="47082" end="47090" title="Cat food" label="Cat food"/>
<link wikidata="Q18226" start="47093" end="47101" title="Cat meat" label="Cat meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051106" start="47104" end="47116" title="Cat repeller" label="Cat repeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907113" start="47119" end="47140" title="Cats and the Internet" label="Cats and the Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054005" start="47143" end="47160" title="Cats in Australia" label="Cats in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054006" start="47163" end="47182" title="Cats in New Zealand" label="Cats in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054009" start="47185" end="47210" title="Cats in the United States" label="Cats in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288528" start="47213" end="47233" title="Cat–dog relationship" label="Cat–dog relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="47236" end="47239" title="Dog" label="Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962817" start="47242" end="47251" title="Dried cat" label="Dried cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q107713288" start="47254" end="47276" title="Feral cats in Istanbul" label="Feral cats in Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q42707" start="47279" end="47297" title="List of cat breeds" label="List of cat breeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037045" start="47300" end="47357" title="List of cat documentaries, television series and cartoons" label="List of cat documentaries, television series and cartoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q587529" start="47360" end="47383" title="List of individual cats" label="List of individual cats"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247826" start="47386" end="47411" title="List of fictional felines" label="List of fictional felines"/>
<link wikidata="Q56230137" start="47414" end="47437" title="List of feline diseases" label="List of feline diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q11572011" start="47440" end="47449" title="Neko-dera" label="Neko-dera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169169" start="47452" end="47461" title="Perlorian" label="Perlorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q943110" start="47464" end="47472" title="Pet door" label="Pet door"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254763" start="47475" end="47488" title="Pet first aid" label="Pet first aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229749" start="47491" end="47508" title="Popular cat names" label="Popular cat names"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344256" start="47666" end="47673" title="Ensembl" label="Ensembl"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="47731" end="47750" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6681" wikidata="Q413376" url="?curid=6681" title="Crank">
<text>Crank may refer to:

==Mechanisms==
* Crank (mechanism), in mechanical engineering, a bent portion of an axle or shaft, or an arm keyed at right angles to the end of a shaft, by which motion is imparted to or received from it
* Crankset, the component of a bicycle drivetrain that converts the reciprocating motion of the rider&#x27;s legs into rotational motion
* Crankshaft, the part of a piston engine which translates reciprocating linear piston motion into rotation
* Crank machine, a machine used to deliver hard labour in early Victorian prisons in the United Kingdom

==Places==
* Crank, Merseyside, a village near Rainford, England
** Crank Halt railway station in the village of Crank
* Cranks, Kentucky, United States

==Popular culture==
* &quot;Crank&quot; (film), a 2006 film starring Jason Statham
** &quot;&quot;, the 2009 sequel
* &quot;Crank&quot; (Hoodoo Gurus album), 1994
* &quot;Crank&quot; (novel), a 2004 book written by Ellen Hopkins
* &quot;Crank&quot; (song), a 1993 song by the alternative rock band Catherine Wheel
* &quot;Crank&quot; (The Almighty album), the fourth studio album released by Scottish heavy metal band The Almighty
* Crank! A Record Company, a record label that released albums by indie bands Mineral, The Gloria Record, and Bright Eyes
* Cranks, creatures in &quot;The Maze Runner&quot; series by James Dashner

==Slang==
* Crank (person), a pejorative term used for a person who holds an unshakable belief that most of his or her contemporaries consider to be false.
* Prank call or crank call, a false telephone call
* Crank, slang term for powdered substituted amphetamines, especially methamphetamine

== Other uses ==
* Cranks (restaurant), a chain of English wholefood vegetarian restaurants
* Crank (surname), a surname, notable people with the surname see there
* Crank conjecture, a term coined by Freeman Dyson to explain congruence patterns in integer partitions
* Crank of a partition, of a partition of an integer is a certain integer associated with the partition

==See also==
* 
* Cranky (disambiguation)
* Krank (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q413376" start="0" end="5" title="Crank" label="Crank"/>
<link wikidata="Q857558" start="38" end="55" title="Crank (mechanism)" label="Crank (mechanism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q49717" start="228" end="236" title="Crankset" label="Crankset"/>
<link wikidata="Q49718" start="365" end="375" title="Crankshaft" label="Crankshaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q28135012" start="473" end="486" title="Crank machine" label="Crank machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182161" start="589" end="606" title="Crank, Merseyside" label="Crank, Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182172" start="644" end="670" title="Crank Halt railway station" label="Crank Halt railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182192" start="697" end="713" title="Cranks, Kentucky" label="Cranks, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q150047" start="752" end="776" title="Crank (film)" label="&amp;quot;Crank&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182165" start="848" end="886" title="Crank (Hoodoo Gurus album)" label="&amp;quot;Crank&amp;quot; (Hoodoo Gurus album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182166" start="895" end="920" title="Crank (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Crank&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182167" start="961" end="985" title="Crank (song)" label="&amp;quot;Crank&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182164" start="1046" end="1084" title="Crank (The Almighty album)" label="&amp;quot;Crank&amp;quot; (The Almighty album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182163" start="1163" end="1186" title="Crank! A Record Company" label="Crank! A Record Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669965" start="1306" end="1340" title="The Maze Runner (book series)" label="&amp;quot;The Maze Runner&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138434" start="1371" end="1385" title="Crank (person)" label="Crank (person)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394256" start="1517" end="1527" title="Prank call" label="Prank call"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445303" start="1599" end="1622" title="substituted amphetamine" label="substituted amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="1636" end="1651" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182195" start="1672" end="1691" title="Cranks (restaurant)" label="Cranks (restaurant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865842" start="1747" end="1762" title="Crank (surname)" label="Crank (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182182" start="1819" end="1835" title="Crank conjecture" label="Crank conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182182" start="1923" end="1943" title="Crank of a partition" label="Crank of a partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182202" start="2044" end="2067" title="Cranky (disambiguation)" label="Cranky (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6436100" start="2070" end="2092" title="Krank (disambiguation)" label="Krank (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6682" wikidata="Q713623" url="?curid=6682" title="Clade">
<text>In biological phylogenetics, a clade (), also known as a monophyletic group or natural group, is a grouping of organisms that are monophyletic – that is, composed of a common ancestor and all its lineal descendants – on a phylogenetic tree. In the taxonomical literature, sometimes the Latin form &quot;cladus&quot; (plural &quot;cladi&quot;) is used rather than the English form. Clades are the fundamental unit of cladistics, a modern approach to taxonomy adopted by most biological fields.

The common ancestor may be an individual, a population, or a species (extinct or extant). Clades are nested, one in another, as each branch in turn splits into smaller branches. These splits reflect evolutionary history as populations diverged and evolved independently. Clades are termed monophyletic (Greek: &quot;one clan&quot;) groups.

Over the last few decades, the cladistic approach has revolutionized biological classification and revealed surprising evolutionary relationships among organisms. Increasingly, taxonomists try to avoid naming taxa that are not clades; that is, taxa that are not monophyletic. Some of the relationships between organisms that the molecular biology arm of cladistics has revealed include that fungi are closer relatives to animals than they are to plants, archaea are now considered different from bacteria, and multicellular organisms may have evolved from archaea.

The term &quot;clade&quot; is also used with a similar meaning in other fields besides biology, such as historical linguistics; see Cladistics § In disciplines other than biology.

==Naming and etymology==
The term &quot;clade&quot; was coined in 1957 by the biologist Julian Huxley to refer to the result of cladogenesis, the evolutionary splitting of a parent species into two distinct species, a concept Huxley borrowed from Bernhard Rensch.

Many commonly named groups – rodents and insects, for example – are clades because, in each case, the group consists of a common ancestor with all its descendant branches. Rodents, for example, are a branch of mammals that split off after the end of the period when the clade Dinosauria stopped being the dominant terrestrial vertebrates 66 million years ago. The original population and all its descendants are a clade. The rodent clade corresponds to the order Rodentia, and insects to the class Insecta. These clades include smaller clades, such as chipmunk or ant, each of which consists of even smaller clades. The clade &quot;rodent&quot; is in turn included in the mammal, vertebrate and animal clades.

== History of nomenclature and taxonomy ==
The idea of a clade did not exist in pre-Darwinian Linnaean taxonomy, which was based by necessity only on internal or external morphological similarities between organisms. Many of the better known animal groups in Linnaeus&#x27;s original &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; (mostly vertebrate groups) do represent clades. The phenomenon of convergent evolution is responsible for many cases of misleading similarities in the morphology of groups that evolved from different lineages.

With the increasing realization in the first half of the 19th century that species had changed and split through the ages, classification increasingly came to be seen as branches on the evolutionary tree of life. The publication of Darwin&#x27;s theory of evolution in 1859 gave this view increasing weight. In 1876 Thomas Henry Huxley, an early advocate of evolutionary theory, proposed a revised taxonomy based on a concept strongly resembling clades, although the term &quot;clade&quot; itself would not be coined until 1957 by his grandson, Julian Huxley.

German biologist Emil Hans Willi Hennig (1913–1976) is considered to be the founder of cladistics.
He proposed a classification system that represented repeated branchings of the family tree, as opposed to the previous systems, which put organisms on a &quot;ladder&quot;, with supposedly more &quot;advanced&quot; organisms at the top.

Taxonomists have increasingly worked to make the taxonomic system reflect evolution. When it comes to naming, this principle is not always compatible with the traditional rank-based nomenclature (in which only taxa associated with a rank can be named) because not enough ranks exist to name a long series of nested clades. For these and other reasons, phylogenetic nomenclature has been developed; it is still controversial.

As an example, see the full current classification of &quot;Anas platyrhynchos&quot; (the mallard duck) with 40 clades from &quot;Eukaryota&quot; down by following and clicking on &quot;Expand&quot;.

The name of a clade is conventionally a plural, where the singular refers to each member individually. A unique exception is the reptile clade Dracohors, which was made by haplology from Latin &quot;draco&quot; and &quot;cohors&quot;, i.e. &quot;the dragon cohort&quot;; its form with a suffix added should be e.g. &quot;dracohortian&quot;.

==Definition==

A clade is by definition monophyletic, meaning that it contains one ancestor which can be an organism, a population, or a species and all its descendants. The ancestor can be known or unknown; any and all members of a clade can be extant or extinct.

==Clades and phylogenetic trees==
The science that tries to reconstruct phylogenetic trees and thus discover clades is called phylogenetics or cladistics, the latter term coined by Ernst Mayr (1965), derived from &quot;clade&quot;. The results of phylogenetic/cladistic analyses are tree-shaped diagrams called &quot;cladograms&quot;; they, and all their branches, are phylogenetic hypotheses.

Three methods of defining clades are featured in phylogenetic nomenclature: node-, stem-, and apomorphy-based (see Phylogenetic nomenclature§Phylogenetic definitions of clade names for detailed definitions).

== Terminology ==

The relationship between clades can be described in several ways:
* A clade located within a clade is said to be &quot;nested&quot; within that clade. In the diagram, the hominoid clade, i.e. the apes and humans, is nested within the primate clade.
* Two clades are &quot;sisters&quot; if they have an immediate common ancestor. In the diagram, lemurs and lorises are sister clades, while humans and tarsiers are not.
* A clade &quot;A&quot; is &quot;basal&quot; to a clade &quot;B&quot; if &quot;A&quot; branches off the lineage leading to &quot;B&quot; before the first branch leading only to members of &quot;B&quot;. In the adjacent diagram, the strepsirrhine/prosimian clade, is basal to the hominoids/ape clade. In this example, both Haplorrhine as prosimians should be considered as most basal groupings. It is better to say that the prosimians are the sister group to the rest of the primates. This way one also avoids unintended and misconceived connotations about evolutionary advancement, complexity, diversity and ancestor status, e.g. due to impact of sampling diversity and extinction. Basal clades should not be confused with stem groupings, as the latter is associated with paraphyletic or unresolved groupings.

=== Age ===
The age of a clade can be described based on two different reference points, crown age and stem age. The crown age of a clade refers to the age of the most recent common ancestor of all of the species in the clade. The stem age of a clade refers to the time that the ancestral lineage of the clade diverged from its sister clade. A clade&#x27;s stem age is either the same as or older than its crown age. Ages of clades cannot be directly observed. They are inferred, either from stratigraphy of fossils, or from molecular clock estimates.

==Viruses==

Viruses, and particularly RNA viruses form clades. These are useful in tracking the spread of viral infections. HIV, for example, has clades called subtypes, which vary in geographical prevalence. HIV subtype (clade) B, for example is predominant in Europe, the Americas and Japan, whereas subtype A is more common in east Africa.

== See also ==

* Adaptive radiation
* Binomial nomenclature
* Biological classification
* Cladistics
* Crown group
* Grade
* Monophyly
* Paraphyly
* Phylogenetic network
* Phylogenetic nomenclature
* Phylogenetics
* Polyphyly
==Notes==
==References==
== Bibliography ==


==External links==

* Evolving Thoughts: &quot;Clade&quot;
* DM Hillis, D Zwickl &amp; R Gutell. &quot;Tree of life&quot;. An unrooted cladogram depicting around 3000 species.
* &quot;Phylogenetic systematics, an introductory slide-show on evolutionary trees&quot; – University of California, Berkeley</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="14" end="27" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="31" end="36" title="Clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="57" end="75" title="Clade" label="monophyletic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="79" end="92" title="Clade" label="natural group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="111" end="119" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="130" end="142" title="monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q333018" start="168" end="183" title="common ancestor" label="common ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332985" start="196" end="214" title="lineage (evolution)" label="lineal descendants"/>
<link wikidata="Q242125" start="222" end="239" title="phylogenetic tree" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="248" end="259" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomical"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="286" end="291" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="416" end="426" title="cladistics" label="cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="538" end="548" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="555" end="562" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="564" end="571" title="extinct" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898509" start="575" end="581" title="Extant taxon" label="extant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098275" start="693" end="713" title="evolutionary history" label="evolutionary history"/>
<link wikidata="Q16521" start="1044" end="1048" title="Taxon" label="taxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="1097" end="1109" title="Monophyly" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="1226" end="1231" title="fungi" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="1289" end="1296" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1331" end="1339" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q190375" start="1505" end="1527" title="historical linguistics" label="historical linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1533" end="1579" title="Cladistics#In disciplines other than biology" label="Cladistics § In disciplines other than biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="1670" end="1683" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q631768" start="1710" end="1722" title="cladogenesis" label="cladogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q68731" start="1829" end="1844" title="Bernhard Rensch" label="Bernhard Rensch"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="1876" end="1882" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="1888" end="1894" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="2057" end="2063" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="2123" end="2131" title="Dinosaur" label="Dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="2173" end="2183" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752125" start="2399" end="2407" title="chipmunk" label="chipmunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="2411" end="2414" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="2527" end="2537" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="2642" end="2651" title="Charles Darwin" label="Darwinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="2652" end="2669" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="Linnaean taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="2729" end="2742" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="2848" end="2863" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="2878" end="2888" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="2936" end="2956" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="3021" end="3031" title="Morphology (biology)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247497" start="3280" end="3292" title="tree of life (biology)" label="tree of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="3327" end="3346" title="Evolution" label="theory of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q184366" start="3397" end="3416" title="Thomas Henry Huxley" label="Thomas Henry Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q243419" start="3626" end="3639" title="Julian Huxley" label="Julian Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q57999" start="3659" end="3681" title="Emil Hans Willi Hennig" label="Emil Hans Willi Hennig"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="3729" end="3739" title="cladistics" label="cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4082" end="4088" title="Nomenclature#Biology" label="naming"/>
<link wikidata="Q10372154" start="4151" end="4174" title="Linnaean taxonomy" label="rank-based nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="4213" end="4217" title="Taxonomic rank" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="4332" end="4357" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="4466" end="4484" title="Anas platyrhynchos" label="Anas platyrhynchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="4536" end="4545" title="Eukaryota" label="Eukaryota"/>
<link wikidata="Q616657" start="4750" end="4759" title="Dracohors" label="Dracohors"/>
<link wikidata="Q572088" start="4779" end="4788" title="haplology" label="haplology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="4857" end="4863" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q427626" start="4864" end="4870" title="Cohort (taxonomy)" label="cohort"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="4990" end="5002" title="monophyletic" label="monophyletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="5342" end="5355" title="phylogenetics" label="phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="5359" end="5369" title="cladistics" label="cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354" start="5397" end="5407" title="Ernst Mayr" label="Ernst Mayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="5533" end="5542" title="cladogram" label="cladogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="5660" end="5685" title="phylogenetic nomenclature" label="phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5726" end="5791" title="Phylogenetic nomenclature#Phylogenetic definitions of clade names" label="Phylogenetic nomenclature§Phylogenetic definitions of clade names"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="6010" end="6018" title="Ape" label="hominoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="6111" end="6118" title="Sister group" label="sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="6290" end="6295" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q82265" start="6489" end="6502" title="Strepsirrhini" label="strepsirrhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q841759" start="6503" end="6512" title="prosimian" label="prosimian"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="6536" end="6545" title="Hominoidea" label="hominoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="6546" end="6549" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="7157" end="7162" title="crown group" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567633" start="7396" end="7402" title="sister group" label="sister"/>
<link wikidata="Q134783" start="7560" end="7572" title="stratigraphy" label="stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="7576" end="7582" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q827541" start="7593" end="7608" title="molecular clock" label="molecular clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q808" start="7634" end="7641" title="Viruses" label="Viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q92190862" start="7660" end="7671" title="RNA viruses" label="RNA viruses"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="7705" end="7744" title="epidemiology" label="tracking the spread of viral infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="7746" end="7749" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q216818" start="7984" end="8002" title="Adaptive radiation" label="Adaptive radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="8005" end="8026" title="Binomial nomenclature" label="Binomial nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="8029" end="8054" title="Biological classification" label="Biological classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q192210" start="8057" end="8067" title="Cladistics" label="Cladistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462809" start="8070" end="8081" title="Crown group" label="Crown group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612572" start="8084" end="8089" title="Evolutionary grade" label="Grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="8092" end="8101" title="Monophyly" label="Monophyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q208755" start="8104" end="8113" title="Paraphyly" label="Paraphyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142246" start="8116" end="8136" title="Phylogenetic network" label="Phylogenetic network"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976606" start="8139" end="8164" title="Phylogenetic nomenclature" label="Phylogenetic nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="8167" end="8180" title="Phylogenetics" label="Phylogenetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q217743" start="8183" end="8192" title="Polyphyly" label="Polyphyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="8506" end="8540" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6684" wikidata="Q2658920" url="?curid=6684" title="Communications in Afghanistan">
<text>Communications in Afghanistan is under the control of the Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT). It has rapidly expanded after the Karzai administration was formed in late 2001, and has embarked on wireless companies, internet, radio stations and television channels.

The Afghan government signed a $64.5 million agreement in 2006 with China&#x27;s ZTE on the establishment of a countrywide optical fiber telecommunications network. The project began to improve telephone, internet, television and radio services throughout Afghanistan. About 90% of the country&#x27;s population had access to communication services by the end of 2013.

Afghanistan uses its own space satellite called Afghansat 1. There are about 18 million mobile phone users in the country. Telecom companies include Afghan Telecom, Afghan Wireless, Etisalat, MTN, Roshan, Salaam. Around 20% of the population has access to the Internet.

==Internet==


Afghanistan was given legal control of the &quot;.af&quot; domain in 2003, and the Afghanistan Network Information Center (AFGNIC) was established to administer domain names. The country has 327,000 IP addresses and around 6,000 .af domains. Internet in Afghanistan is accessed by over 9 million users today. According to a 2020 estimate, over 7 million residents, which is roughly 18% of the population, had access to the internet. There are over a dozen different internet service providers in Afghanistan.

==Postal service==

In 1870, a central post office was established at Bala Hissar in Kabul and a post office in the capital of each province. The service was slowly being expanded over the years as more postal offices were established in each large city by 1918. Afghanistan became a member of the Universal Postal Union in 1928, and the postal administration elevated to the Ministry of Communication in 1934. Civil war caused a disruption in issuing official stamps during the 1980s–90s war but in 1999 postal service was operating again. Postal services to/from Kabul worked remarkably well all throughout the war years. Postal services to/from Herat resumed in 1997. The Afghan government has reported to the UPU several times about illegal stamps being issued and sold in 2003 and 2007.

Afghanistan Post has been reorganizing the postal service in 2000s with assistance from Pakistan Post. The Afghanistan Postal commission was formed to prepare a written policy for the development of the postal sector, which will form the basis of a new postal services law governing licensing of postal services providers. The project was expected to finish by 2008.

==Radio==

Radio broadcasting in Afghanistan began in 1925 with Radio Kabul being the first station. The country currently has over 200 AM, FM and shortwave radio stations. They broadcast in Dari, Pashto, English, Uzbeki and a number of other languages.

== Satellite ==

In January 2014 the Afghan Ministry of Communications and Information Technology signed an agreement with Eutelsat for the use of satellite resources to enhance deployment of Afghanistan&#x27;s national broadcasting and telecommunications infrastructure as well as its international connectivity. Afghansat 1 was officially launched in May 2014, with expected service for at least seven years in Afghanistan. The Afghan government plans to launch Afghansat 2 after the lease of Afghansat 1 ends.

==Telephone==

According to 2013 statistics, there were 20,521,585 GSM mobile phone subscribers and 177,705 CDMA subscribers in Afghanistan. Mobile communications have improved because of the introduction of wireless carriers. The first was Afghan Wireless and the second Roshan, which began providing services to all major cities within Afghanistan. There are also a number of VSAT stations in major cities such as Kabul, Kandahar, Herat, Mazari Sharif, and Jalalabad, providing international and domestic voice/data connectivity. The international calling code for Afghanistan is +93. The following is a partial list of mobile phone companies in the country:

*Afghan Telecom (provides 4G services)
*Afghan Wireless (provides 4G services)
*Etisalat (provides 4G services)
*MTN Group (provides 4G services)
*Roshan (provides 4G services)
*Salaam Network (provides 3G services)

All the companies providing communication services are obligated to deliver 2.5% of their income to the communication development fund annually. According to the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology there are 4760 active towers throughout the country which covers 85% of the population. The Ministry of Communication and Information Technology plans to expand its services in remote parts of the country where the remaining 15% of the population will be covered with the installation of 700 new towers. According to WikiLeaks, phone calls in Afghanistan have been monitored by the National Security Agency.

==Television==

There are over 106 television operators in Afghanistan and 320 television transmitters, many of which are based Kabul, while others are broadcast from other provinces. Selected foreign channels are also shown to the public in Afghanistan, but with the use of the internet, over 3,500 international TV channels may be accessed in Afghanistan.

==References==
==External links==
*Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (archived)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2658920" start="0" end="29" title="Communications in Afghanistan" label="Communications in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866675" start="58" end="111" title="Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (Afghanistan)" label="Ministry of Communications and Information Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241098" start="154" end="175" title="Presidency of Hamid Karzai" label="Karzai administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250587" start="221" end="239" title="Telephone numbers in Afghanistan" label="wireless companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202090" start="241" end="249" title="Internet in Afghanistan" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281202" start="251" end="265" title="List of radio stations in Afghanistan" label="radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q126176" start="270" end="289" title="Television in Afghanistan" label="television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q20978159" start="296" end="313" title="Afghan government" label="Afghan government"/>
<link wikidata="Q136484" start="373" end="376" title="ZTE" label="ZTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="415" end="428" title="optical fiber" label="optical fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068715" start="429" end="455" title="telecommunications network" label="telecommunications network"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="548" end="559" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075999" start="578" end="603" title="demographics of Afghanistan" label="country&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="693" end="702" title="satellite" label="satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303008" start="710" end="721" title="Afghansat 1" label="Afghansat 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q201353" start="811" end="825" title="Afghan Telecom" label="Afghan Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q383046" start="827" end="842" title="Afghan Wireless" label="Afghan Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q543449" start="844" end="852" title="Etisalat" label="Etisalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813361" start="854" end="857" title="MTN Group" label="MTN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127519" start="859" end="865" title="Roshan (Telecom)" label="Roshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37407" start="997" end="1000" title=".af" label=".af"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="1109" end="1120" title="domain name" label="domain name"/>
<link wikidata="Q37407" start="1177" end="1180" title=".af" label=".af"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202090" start="1190" end="1213" title="Internet in Afghanistan" label="Internet in Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075999" start="1341" end="1351" title="demographics of Afghanistan" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="1414" end="1439" title="internet service provider" label="internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q804581" start="1528" end="1539" title="Bala Hissar, Kabul" label="Bala Hissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17495" start="1756" end="1778" title="Universal Postal Union" label="Universal Postal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866675" start="1834" end="1859" title="Afghan Ministry of Communications" label="Ministry of Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046330" start="2339" end="2352" title="Pakistan Post" label="Pakistan Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="2630" end="2648" title="Radio broadcasting" label="Radio broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q142900" start="2683" end="2694" title="Radio Kabul" label="Radio Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377707" start="2755" end="2757" title="AM broadcasting" label="AM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368380" start="2759" end="2761" title="FM broadcasting" label="FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="2766" end="2775" title="shortwave radio" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="2810" end="2814" title="Dari" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q58680" start="2816" end="2822" title="Pashto" label="Pashto"/>
<link wikidata="Q9264" start="2833" end="2839" title="Uzbek language" label="Uzbeki"/>
<link wikidata="Q848336" start="2997" end="3005" title="Eutelsat" label="Eutelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303008" start="3188" end="3199" title="Afghansat 1" label="Afghansat 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="3455" end="3458" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="3496" end="3500" title="code division multiple access" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q383046" start="3629" end="3644" title="Afghan Wireless" label="Afghan Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127519" start="3660" end="3666" title="Roshan (telco)" label="Roshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434308" start="3766" end="3770" title="VSAT" label="VSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="3804" end="3809" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q45604" start="3811" end="3819" title="Kandahar" label="Kandahar"/>
<link wikidata="Q45313" start="3821" end="3826" title="Herat" label="Herat"/>
<link wikidata="Q130469" start="3828" end="3841" title="Mazari Sharif" label="Mazari Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q183303" start="3847" end="3856" title="Jalalabad" label="Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250587" start="3970" end="3973" title="Telephone numbers in Afghanistan" label="+93"/>
<link wikidata="Q201353" start="4051" end="4065" title="Afghan Telecom" label="Afghan Telecom"/>
<link wikidata="Q79697" start="4076" end="4078" title="4G" label="4G"/>
<link wikidata="Q383046" start="4090" end="4105" title="Afghan Wireless" label="Afghan Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q543449" start="4130" end="4138" title="Etisalat" label="Etisalat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813361" start="4163" end="4172" title="MTN Group" label="MTN Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127519" start="4197" end="4203" title="Roshan (telco)" label="Roshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="4253" end="4255" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q359" start="4799" end="4808" title="WikiLeaks" label="WikiLeaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="4864" end="4888" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6689" wikidata="Q861344" url="?curid=6689" title="Christian of Oliva">
<text>Christian of Oliva (), also Christian of Prussia () (died 4 December(?) 1245) was the first missionary bishop of Prussia. 

== History ==
Christian was born about 1180 in the Duchy of Pomerania, possibly in the area of Chociwel (according to Johannes Voigt). Probably as a juvenile he joined the Cistercian Order at newly established Kołbacz (&quot;Kolbatz&quot;) Abbey and in 1209 entered Oliwa Abbey near Gdańsk, founded in 1178 by the Samboride dukes of Pomerelia. At this time the Piast duke Konrad I of Masovia with the consent of Pope Innocent III had started the first of several unsuccessful Prussian Crusades into the adjacent Chełmno Land and Christian acted as a missionary among the Prussians east of the Vistula River.
In 1209, Christian was commissioned by the Pope to be responsible for the Prussian missions between the Vistula and Neman Rivers and in 1212 he was appointed bishop. In 1215 he went to Rome in order to report to the Curia on the condition and prospects of his mission, and was consecrated first &quot;Bishop of Prussia&quot; at the Fourth Council of the Lateran. His seat as a bishop remained at Oliwa Abbey on the western side of the Vistula, whereas the pagan Prussian (later East Prussian) territory was on the eastern side of it.

The attempts by Konrad of Masovia to subdue the Prussian lands had picked long-term and intense border quarrels, whereby the Polish lands of Masovia, Cuyavia and even Greater Poland became subject to continuous Prussian raids. Bishop Christian asked the new Pope Honorius III for the consent to start another Crusade, however a first campaign in 1217 proved a failure and even the joint efforts by Duke Konrad with the Polish High Duke Leszek I the White and Duke Henry I the Bearded of Silesia in 1222/23 only led to the reconquest of Chełmno Land but did not stop the Prussian invasions. At least Christian was able to establish the Diocese of Chełmno east of the Vistula, adopting the episcopal rights from the Masovian Bishop of Płock, confirmed by both Duke Konrad and the Pope.

Duke Konrad of Masovia still was not capable to end the Prussian attacks on his territory and in 1226 began to conduct negotiations with the Teutonic Knights under Grand Master Hermann von Salza in order to strengthen his forces. As von Salza initially hesitated to offer his services, Christian created the military Order of Dobrzyń (&quot;Fratres Milites Christi&quot;) in 1228, however to little avail.

Meanwhile, von Salza had to abandon his hope to establish an Order&#x27;s State in the Burzenland region of Transylvania, which had led to an éclat with King Andrew II of Hungary. He obtained a charter by Emperor Frederick II issued in the 1226 Golden Bull of Rimini, whereby Chełmno Land would be the unshared possession of the Teutonic Knights, which was confirmed by Duke Konrad of Masovia in the 1230 Treaty of Kruszwica. Christian ceded his possessions to the new State of the Teutonic Order and in turn was appointed Bishop of Chełmno the next year.

Bishop Christian continued his mission in Sambia (&quot;Samland&quot;), where from 1233 to 1239 he was held captive by pagan Prussians, and freed in trade for five other hostages who then in turn were released for a ransom of 800 Marks, granted to him by Pope Gregory IX. He had to deal with the constant cut-back of his autonomy by the Knights and asked the Roman Curia for mediation. In 1243, the Papal legate William of Modena divided the Prussian lands of the Order&#x27;s State into four dioceses, whereby the bishops retained the secular rule over about on third of the diocesan territory:
*Bishopric of Chełmno (Chełmno Land, Ziemia Chełminska)
*Bishopric of Pomesania (Pomesania)
*Bishopric of Warmia (Ermland) (state)/ Diocese of Warmia (ecclesiastical ambit)
*Bishopric of Samland (Sambia)
all suffragan dioceses under the Archbishopric of Riga. Christian was supposed to choose one of them, but did not agree to the division. He possibly retired to the Cistercians Abbey in Sulejów, where he died before the conflict was solved.

== See also ==
*Baldwin of Alna
== References ==

== External links ==
* Article in Catholic Encyclopedia at newadvent.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q861344" start="0" end="18" title="Christian of Oliva" label="Christian of Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q861344" start="28" end="48" title="Christian of Oliva" label="Christian of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="92" end="102" title="Mission (Christianity)" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q918723" start="113" end="120" title="Prussia (region)" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696640" start="175" end="193" title="Duchy of Pomerania" label="Duchy of Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021263" start="219" end="227" title="Chociwel" label="Chociwel"/>
<link wikidata="Q519939" start="242" end="256" title="Johannes Voigt" label="Johannes Voigt"/>
<link wikidata="Q166861" start="296" end="306" title="Cistercians" label="Cistercian"/>
<link wikidata="Q983996" start="334" end="341" title="Kołbacz" label="Kołbacz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775766" start="390" end="401" title="Oliwa Abbey" label="Oliwa Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="407" end="413" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q316796" start="438" end="447" title="Samborides" label="Samboride"/>
<link wikidata="Q326188" start="457" end="466" title="Pomerelia" label="Pomerelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201615" start="485" end="490" title="Piast dynasty" label="Piast"/>
<link wikidata="Q53460" start="496" end="515" title="Konrad I of Masovia" label="Konrad I of Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="536" end="553" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665664" start="600" end="616" title="Prussian Crusade" label="Prussian Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q672344" start="636" end="648" title="Chełmno Land" label="Chełmno Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q109073" start="695" end="704" title="Old Prussians" label="Prussians"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="717" end="724" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q5622" start="848" end="853" title="Neman River" label="Neman"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="917" end="921" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="948" end="953" title="Roman Curia" label="Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q719992" start="1064" end="1093" title="Fourth Council of the Lateran" label="Fourth Council of the Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="1210" end="1222" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q577867" start="1392" end="1398" title="Kingdom of Poland (1025–1385)" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361927" start="1408" end="1415" title="Duchy of Masovia" label="Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836693" start="1417" end="1424" title="Kujawy" label="Cuyavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160182" start="1525" end="1542" title="Pope Honorius III" label="Pope Honorius III"/>
<link wikidata="Q53991" start="1703" end="1721" title="Leszek I the White" label="Leszek I the White"/>
<link wikidata="Q53445" start="1731" end="1750" title="Henry I the Bearded" label="Henry I the Bearded"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738192" start="1902" end="1920" title="Bishopric of Culm (Chełmno)" label="Diocese of Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q874721" start="1990" end="2005" title="Roman Catholic Diocese of Płock" label="Bishop of Płock"/>
<link wikidata="Q48189" start="2193" end="2209" title="Teutonic Knights" label="Teutonic Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q57994" start="2229" end="2246" title="Hermann von Salza" label="Hermann von Salza"/>
<link wikidata="Q668021" start="2369" end="2385" title="Order of Dobrzyń" label="Order of Dobrzyń"/>
<link wikidata="Q592762" start="2546" end="2556" title="Burzenland" label="Burzenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="2567" end="2579" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q271104" start="2617" end="2637" title="Andrew II of Hungary" label="Andrew II of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q130221" start="2672" end="2684" title="Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick II"/>
<link wikidata="Q651836" start="2704" end="2725" title="Golden Bull of Rimini" label="Golden Bull of Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q156020" start="2928" end="2955" title="State of the Teutonic Order" label="State of the Teutonic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q329676" start="3058" end="3064" title="Sambia Peninsula" label="Sambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4281830" start="3246" end="3251" title="mark (money)" label="Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q124831" start="3271" end="3286" title="Pope Gregory IX" label="Pope Gregory IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q715613" start="3428" end="3445" title="William of Modena" label="William of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738192" start="3613" end="3633" title="Bishopric of Culm (Chełmno)" label="Bishopric of Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q672344" start="3635" end="3647" title="Chełmno Land" label="Chełmno Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q371152" start="3669" end="3691" title="Bishopric of Pomesania" label="Bishopric of Pomesania"/>
<link wikidata="Q586101" start="3693" end="3702" title="Pomesania" label="Pomesania"/>
<link wikidata="Q506218" start="3705" end="3734" title="Prince-Bishopric of Warmia" label="Bishopric of Warmia (Ermland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364478" start="3744" end="3761" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Warmia" label="Diocese of Warmia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176805" start="3786" end="3806" title="Bishopric of Samland" label="Bishopric of Samland"/>
<link wikidata="Q373074" start="3820" end="3837" title="suffragan diocese" label="suffragan diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q15471939" start="3849" end="3870" title="Archbishopric of Riga" label="Archbishopric of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480940" start="3980" end="4008" title="Cistercians Abbey in Sulejów" label="Cistercians Abbey in Sulejów"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741310" start="4073" end="4088" title="Baldwin of Alna" label="Baldwin of Alna"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6690" wikidata="Q2813" url="?curid=6690" title="Coca-Cola">
<text>Coca-Cola, or Coke, is a cola soft drink manufactured by the Coca-Cola Company. In 2013, Coke products were sold in over 200 countries and territories worldwide, with consumers drinking more than 1.8 billion company beverage servings each day. Coca-Cola ranked No. 94 in the 2024 &quot;Fortune&quot; 500 list of the largest United States corporations by revenue. Based on Interbrand&#x27;s &quot;best global brand&quot; study of 2023, Coca-Cola was the world&#x27;s sixth most valuable brand.

Originally marketed as a temperance drink and intended as a patent medicine, Coca-Cola was invented in the late 19th century by John Stith Pemberton in Atlanta, Georgia. In 1888, Pemberton sold the ownership rights to Asa Griggs Candler, a businessman, whose marketing tactics led Coca-Cola to its dominance of the global soft-drink market throughout the 20th and 21st century. The name refers to two of its original ingredients: coca leaves and kola nuts (a source of caffeine). The formula of Coca-Cola remains a trade secret; however, a variety of reported recipes and experimental recreations have been published. The secrecy around the formula has been used by Coca-Cola as a marketing aid because only a handful of anonymous employees know the formula. The drink has inspired imitators and created a whole classification of soft drink: colas.

The Coca-Cola Company produces concentrate, which is then sold to licensed Coca-Cola bottlers throughout the world. The bottlers, who hold exclusive territory contracts with the company, produce the finished product in cans and bottles from the concentrate, in combination with filtered water and sweeteners. A typical can contains of sugar (usually in the form of high-fructose corn syrup in North America). The bottlers then sell, distribute, and merchandise Coca-Cola to retail stores, restaurants, and vending machines throughout the world. The Coca-Cola Company also sells concentrate for soda fountains of major restaurants and foodservice distributors.

The Coca-Cola Company has on occasion introduced other cola drinks under the Coke name. The most common of these is Diet Coke, along with others including Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola, Diet Coke Caffeine-Free, Coca-Cola Zero Sugar, Coca-Cola Cherry, Coca-Cola Vanilla, and special versions with lemon, lime, and coffee. Coca-Cola was called &quot;Coca-Cola Classic&quot; from July 1985 to 2009, to distinguish it from &quot;New Coke&quot;.

== History ==
===19th century origins===

Confederate Colonel John Pemberton, wounded in the American Civil War and addicted to morphine, also had a medical degree and began a quest to find a substitute for the problematic drug. In 1885 at Pemberton&#x27;s Eagle Drug and Chemical House, his drugstore in Columbus, Georgia, he registered Pemberton&#x27;s French Wine Coca nerve tonic. Pemberton&#x27;s tonic may have been inspired by the formidable success of Vin Mariani, a French-Corsican coca wine, but his recipe additionally included the African kola nut, the beverage&#x27;s source of caffeine. A Spanish drink called &quot;Kola Coca&quot; was presented at a contest in Philadelphia in 1885, a year before the official birth of Coca-Cola. The rights for this Spanish drink were bought by Coca-Cola in 1953.

In 1886, when Atlanta and Fulton County passed prohibition legislation, Pemberton responded by developing Coca-Cola, a non-alcoholic version of Pemberton&#x27;s French Wine Coca. It was marketed as &quot;Coca-Cola: The temperance drink&quot;, which appealed to many people as the temperance movement enjoyed wide support during this time. The first sales were at Jacob&#x27;s Pharmacy in Atlanta, Georgia, on May 8, 1886, where it initially sold for five cents a glass. Drugstore soda fountains were popular in the United States at the time due to the belief that carbonated water was good for the health, and Pemberton&#x27;s new drink was marketed and sold as a patent medicine, Pemberton claiming it a cure for many diseases, including morphine addiction, indigestion, nerve disorders, headaches, and impotence. Pemberton ran the first advertisement for the beverage on May 29 of the same year in the &quot;Atlanta Journal&quot;.

By 1888, three versions of Coca-Cola – sold by three separate businesses – were on the market. A co-partnership had been formed on January 14, 1888, between Pemberton and four Atlanta businessmen: J.C. Mayfield, A.O. Murphey, C.O. Mullahy, and E.H. Bloodworth. Not codified by any signed document, a verbal statement given by Asa Candler years later asserted under testimony that he had acquired a stake in Pemberton&#x27;s company as early as 1887. John Pemberton declared that the &quot;Coca-Cola&quot; belonged to his son, Charley, but the other two manufacturers could continue to use the .

Charley Pemberton&#x27;s record of control over the &quot;Coca-Cola&quot; name was the underlying factor that allowed for him to participate as a major shareholder in the March 1888 Coca-Cola Company incorporation filing made in his father&#x27;s place. Charley&#x27;s exclusive control over the &quot;Coca-Cola&quot; name became a continual thorn in Asa Candler&#x27;s side. Candler&#x27;s oldest son, Charles Howard Candler, authored a book in 1950 published by Emory University. In this definitive biography about his father, Candler specifically states: &quot;on April 14, 1888, the young druggist Asa Griggs Candler purchased a one-third interest in the formula of an almost completely unknown proprietary elixir known as Coca-Cola.&quot; The deal was actually between John Pemberton&#x27;s son Charley and Walker, Candler &amp; Co. – with John Pemberton acting as cosigner for his son. For $50 down and $500 in 30 days, Walker, Candler &amp; Co. obtained all of the one-third interest in the Coca-Cola Company that Charley held, all while Charley still held on to the name. After the April 14 deal, on April 17, 1888, one-half of the Walker/Dozier interest shares were acquired by Candler for an additional $750.

===Company===
After Candler had gained a better foothold on Coca-Cola in April 1888, he nevertheless was forced to sell the beverage he produced with the recipe he had under the names &quot;Yum Yum&quot; and &quot;Koke&quot;. This was while Charley Pemberton was selling the elixir, although a cruder mixture, under the name &quot;Coca-Cola&quot;, all with his father&#x27;s blessing. After both names failed to catch on for Candler, by the middle of 1888, the Atlanta pharmacist was quite anxious to establish a firmer legal claim to Coca-Cola, and hoped he could force his two competitors, Walker and Dozier, completely out of the business, as well.

John Pemberton died suddenly on August 16, 1888. Asa Candler then decided to move swiftly forward to attain full control of the entire Coca-Cola operation.

Charley Pemberton, an alcoholic and opium addict, unnerved Asa Candler more than anyone else. Candler is said to have quickly maneuvered to purchase the exclusive rights to the name &quot;Coca-Cola&quot; from Pemberton&#x27;s son Charley immediately after he learned of Dr. Pemberton&#x27;s death. One of several stories states that Candler approached Charley&#x27;s mother at John Pemberton&#x27;s funeral and offered her $300 in cash for the rights to the name.

In Charles Howard Candler&#x27;s 1950 book about his father, he stated: &quot;On August 30 [1888], he became the sole proprietor of Coca-Cola, a fact which was stated on letterheads, invoice blanks and advertising copy.&quot;

With this action on August 30, 1888, Candler&#x27;s sole control became technically all true. Candler had negotiated with Margaret Dozier and her brother Woolfolk Walker a full payment amounting to $1,000, which all agreed Candler could pay off with a series of notes over a specified time span. By May 1, 1889, Candler was claiming full ownership of the Coca-Cola beverage, with a total investment outlay by Candler for the drink enterprise over the years amounting to $2,300.

In 1914, Margaret Dozier, as co-owner of the original Coca-Cola Company in 1888, came forward to claim that her signature on the 1888 Coca-Cola Company bill of sale had been forged. Subsequent analysis of other similar transfer documents had also indicated John Pemberton&#x27;s signature had most likely been forged as well, which some accounts claim was precipitated by his son Charley.

In 1892, Candler set out to incorporate a second company, the Coca-Cola Company (the modern corporation). When Candler had the earliest records of the &quot;Coca-Cola Company&quot; destroyed in 1910, the action was claimed to have been made during a move to new corporation offices around this time.

On June 23, 1894, Charley Pemberton was found unconscious with a stick of opium by his side. Ten days later, Charley died at Atlanta&#x27;s Grady Hospital at the age of 40.

On September 12, 1919, Coca-Cola Co. was purchased by a group of investors led by Ernest Woodruff&#x27;s Trust Company for $25 million and reincorporated under the Delaware General Corporation Law. The company publicly offered 500,000 shares of the company for $40 a share. In 1923, his son Robert W. Woodruff was elected President of the company. Woodruff expanded the company and brought Coca-Cola to the rest of the world. Coca-Cola began distributing bottles as &quot;Six-packs&quot;, encouraging customers to purchase the beverage for their home.

During its first several decades, Coca-Cola officially wanted to be known by its full-name despite being commonly known as &quot;Coke&quot;. This was due to company fears that the term &quot;coke&quot; would eventually become a generic trademark, which to an extent became true in the Southern United States where &quot;coke&quot; is used even for non Coca-Cola products. The company also didn&#x27;t want to confuse its drink with the similarly named coal byproduct that clearly wasn&#x27;t safe to consume. Eventually, out for fears that another company may claim the trademark for &quot;Coke&quot;, Coca-Cola finally embraced it and officially endorsed the name &quot;Coke&quot; in 1941. &quot;Coke&quot; eventually became a registered trademark of the Coca-Cola Company in 1945.

In 1986, the Coca-Cola Company merged with two of their bottling operators (owned by JTL Corporation and BCI Holding Corporation) to form Coca-Cola Enterprises Inc. (CCE).

In December 1991, Coca-Cola Enterprises merged with the Johnston Coca-Cola Bottling Group, Inc.

===Origins of bottling===

The first bottling of Coca-Cola occurred in Vicksburg, Mississippi, at the Biedenharn Candy Company on March 12, 1894. The proprietor of the bottling works was Joseph A. Biedenharn. The original bottles were Hutchinson bottles, very different from the much later hobble-skirt design of 1915 now so familiar.

A few years later two entrepreneurs from Chattanooga, Tennessee, namely Benjamin F. Thomas and Joseph B. Whitehead, proposed the idea of bottling and were so persuasive that Candler signed a contract giving them control of the procedure for only one dollar. Candler later realized that he had made a grave mistake. Candler never collected his dollar, but in 1899, Chattanooga became the site of the first Coca-Cola bottling company. Candler remained very content just selling his company&#x27;s syrup. The loosely termed contract proved to be problematic for the Coca-Cola Company for decades to come. Legal matters were not helped by the decision of the bottlers to subcontract to other companies, effectively becoming parent bottlers. This contract specified that bottles would be sold at 5¢ each and had no fixed duration, leading to the fixed price of Coca-Cola from 1886 to 1959.

===20th century===
The first outdoor wall advertisement that promoted the Coca-Cola drink was painted in 1894 in Cartersville, Georgia. Cola syrup was sold as an over-the-counter dietary supplement for upset stomach. By the time of its 50th anniversary, the soft drink had reached the status of a national icon in the US. In 1935, it was certified kosher by Atlanta rabbi Tobias Geffen. With the help of Harold Hirsch, Geffen was the first person outside the company to see the top-secret ingredients list after Coke faced scrutiny from the American Jewish population regarding the drink&#x27;s kosher status. Consequently, the company made minor changes in the sourcing of some ingredients so it could continue to be consumed by America&#x27;s Jewish population, including during Passover. A yellow cap on a Coca-Cola drink indicates that it is kosher for Passover.

The longest running commercial Coca-Cola soda fountain anywhere was Atlanta&#x27;s Fleeman&#x27;s Pharmacy, which first opened its doors in 1914. Jack Fleeman took over the pharmacy from his father and ran it until 1995; closing it after 81 years. On July 12, 1944, the one-billionth gallon of Coca-Cola syrup was manufactured by the Coca-Cola Company. Cans of Coke first appeared in 1955.

===Sugar replaced with high-fructose corn syrup===

Sugar prices spiked in the 1970s because of Soviet demand/hoarding and possible futures contracts market manipulation. The Soviet Union was the largest producer of sugar at the time. In 1974 Coca-Cola switched over to high-fructose corn syrup because of the elevated prices.
===New Coke===

On April 23, 1985, Coca-Cola, amid much publicity, changed the formula of the drink with &quot;New Coke&quot;. Follow-up taste tests revealed most consumers preferred the taste of New Coke to both old Coke and Pepsi but Coca-Cola management was unprepared for the public&#x27;s nostalgia for the old drink, leading to a backlash. The company gave in to protests and returned to the old formula under the name Coca-Cola Classic, on July 10, 1985. &quot;New Coke&quot; remained available and was renamed Coke II in 1992; it was discontinued in 2002.

===21st century===
On July 5, 2005, it was revealed that Coca-Cola would resume operations in Iraq for the first time since the Arab League boycotted the company in 1968.

In April 2007, in Canada, the name &quot;Coca-Cola Classic&quot; was changed back to &quot;Coca-Cola&quot;. The word &quot;Classic&quot; was removed because &quot;New Coke&quot; was no longer in production, eliminating the need to differentiate between the two. The formula remained unchanged. In January 2009, Coca-Cola stopped printing the word &quot;Classic&quot; on the labels of bottles sold in parts of the southeastern United States. The change was part of a larger strategy to rejuvenate the product&#x27;s image. The word &quot;Classic&quot; was removed from all Coca-Cola products by 2011.

In November 2009, due to a dispute over wholesale prices of Coca-Cola products, Costco stopped restocking its shelves with Coke and Diet Coke for two months; a separate pouring rights deal in 2013 saw Coke products removed from Costco food courts in favor of Pepsi. Some Costco locations (such as the ones in Tucson, Arizona) additionally sell imported Coca-Cola from Mexico with cane sugar instead of corn syrup from separate distributors. Coca-Cola introduced the 7.5-ounce mini-can in 2009, and on September 22, 2011, the company announced price reductions, asking retailers to sell eight-packs for $2.99. That same day, Coca-Cola announced the 12.5-ounce bottle, to sell for 89 cents. A 16-ounce bottle has sold well at 99 cents since being re-introduced, but the price was going up to $1.19.

In 2012, Coca-Cola resumed business in Myanmar after 60 years of absence due to US-imposed investment sanctions against the country. Coca-Cola&#x27;s bottling plant is located in Yangon and is part of the company&#x27;s five-year plan and $200 million investment in Myanmar. Coca-Cola with its partners is to invest US$5 billion in its operations in India by 2020.

In February 2021, as a plan to combat plastic waste, Coca-Cola said that it would start selling its sodas in bottles made from 100% recycled plastic material in the United States, and by 2030 planned to recycle one bottle or can for each one it sold. Coca-Cola started by selling 2000 paper bottles to see if they held up due to the risk of safety and of changing the taste of the drink.

==Production==
===Listed ingredients===
* Carbonated water
* Sugar (sucrose or high-fructose corn syrup (HFCS) depending on country of origin)
* Caffeine
* Phosphoric acid
* Caramel color (E150d)
* Natural flavorings
A typical can of Coca-Cola (12 fl ounces/355 ml) contains 39 grams of sugar, 46 mg of caffeine, 50 mg of sodium, no fat, no potassium, and 140 calories.

===Formula of natural flavorings===
The exact formula for Coca-Cola&#x27;s natural flavorings is a trade secret. (All of its other ingredients are listed on the side of the bottle or can, and are not secret.) The original copy of the formula was held in Truist Financial&#x27;s main vault in Atlanta for 86 years. Its predecessor, the Trust Company, was the underwriter for the Coca-Cola Company&#x27;s initial public offering in 1919. On December 8, 2011, the original secret formula was moved from the vault at SunTrust Banks into a new vault; this vault will be on display for visitors to its World of Coca-Cola museum in downtown Atlanta.

According to Snopes, a popular myth states that only two executives have access to the formula, with each executive having only half the formula. However, several sources state that while Coca-Cola does have a rule restricting access to only two executives, each of them knows the entire formula, and that persons other than the prescribed duo have known the formulation process.

On February 11, 2011, Ira Glass said on his PRI radio show, &quot;This American Life&quot;, that his staffers had found a recipe in &quot;Everett Beal&#x27;s Recipe Book&quot;, reproduced in the February 28, 1979 issue of &quot;The Atlanta Journal-Constitution&quot;, that they believed was either Pemberton&#x27;s original formula for Coca-Cola or a version that he made either before or after the product hit the market in 1886. The formula basically matched the one found in Pemberton&#x27;s diary. Coca-Cola archivist Phil Mooney acknowledged that the recipe &quot;could be a precursor&quot; to the formula used in the original 1886 product, but emphasized that Pemberton&#x27;s original formula is not the same as the one used in the modern product.

===Use of stimulants in formula===

When launched, Coca-Cola&#x27;s two key ingredients were cocaine and caffeine. The cocaine was derived from the coca leaf and the caffeine from kola nut (also spelled &quot;cola nut&quot; at the time), leading to the name Coca-Cola.

====Coca leaf ====
Pemberton called for five ounces of coca leaf per gallon of syrup (approximately 37 g/L), a significant dose; in 1891, Candler claimed his formula (altered extensively from Pemberton&#x27;s original) contained only a tenth of this amount. Coca-Cola once contained an estimated nine milligrams of cocaine per glass. (For comparison, a typical dose or &quot;line&quot; of cocaine is 50–75 mg.) In 1903, the fresh coca leaves were removed from the formula.

After 1904, instead of using fresh leaves, Coca-Cola started using &quot;spent&quot; leaves – the leftovers of the cocaine-extraction process with trace levels of cocaine. Since then (by 1929), Coca-Cola has used a cocaine-free coca leaf extract. Today, that extract is prepared at a Stepan Company plant in Maywood, New Jersey, the only manufacturing plant authorized by the federal government to import and process coca leaves, which it obtains from Peru and Bolivia. Stepan Company extracts cocaine from the coca leaves, which it then sells to Mallinckrodt, the only company in the United States licensed to purify cocaine for medicinal use.

Long after the syrup had ceased to contain any significant amount of cocaine, in North Carolina &quot;dope&quot; remained a common colloquialism for Coca-Cola, and &quot;dope-wagons&quot; were trucks that transported it.

====Kola nuts for caffeine====
The kola nut acts as a flavoring and the original source of caffeine in Coca-Cola. It contains about 2.0 to 3.5% caffeine, and has a bitter flavor.

In 1911, the US government sued in &quot;United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola&quot;, hoping to force the Coca-Cola Company to remove caffeine from its formula. The court found that the syrup, when diluted as directed, would result in a beverage containing 1.21 grains (or 78.4 mg) of caffeine per serving. The case was decided in favor of the Coca-Cola Company at the district court, but subsequently in 1912, the US Pure Food and Drug Act was amended, adding caffeine to the list of &quot;habit-forming&quot; and &quot;deleterious&quot; substances which must be listed on a product&#x27;s label. In 1913 the case was appealed to the Sixth Circuit in Cincinnati, where the ruling was affirmed, but then appealed again in 1916 to the Supreme Court, where the government effectively won as a new trial was ordered. The company then voluntarily reduced the amount of caffeine in its product, and offered to pay the government&#x27;s legal costs to settle and avoid further litigation.

Coca-Cola contains 46 mg of caffeine per 12 US fluid ounces (or 30.7 mg per serving).

===Franchised production model===
The production and distribution of Coca-Cola follows a franchising model. The Coca-Cola Company only produces a syrup concentrate, which it sells to bottlers throughout the world, who hold Coca-Cola franchises for one or more geographical areas. The bottlers produce the final drink by mixing the syrup with filtered water and sweeteners, putting the mixture into cans and bottles, and carbonating it, which the bottlers then sell and distribute to retail stores, vending machines, restaurants, and foodservice distributors.

The Coca-Cola Company owns minority shares in some of its largest franchises, such as Coca-Cola Enterprises, Coca-Cola Amatil, Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling Company, and Coca-Cola FEMSA, as well as some smaller ones, such as Coca-Cola Bottlers Uzbekistan, but fully independent bottlers produce almost half of the volume sold in the world.
Independent bottlers are allowed to sweeten the drink according to local tastes.

==Geographic spread==
Coca-Cola has been sold outside the United States as early as 1900, when the Cuba Libre (a mix between Coca-Cola and rum) was created in Havana shortly after the Spanish-American War of 1898. However, the international reach of the product became mostly limited to North and Central America, the Caribbean, the Netherlands, Germany and parts of Asia until the 1940s, when the brand was introduced throughout South America and then Europe after the end of World War II (Fanta was initially conceived by the German Coca-Cola subsidiary as an emergency replacement as the wartime trade embargo prevented the import of syrup). As a result, Coca-Cola eventually became regarded as one of the major symbols of American soft power as well as of globalization.

Since it announced its intention to begin distribution in Myanmar in June 2012, Coca-Cola has been officially available in every country in the world except Cuba (where it stopped being available officially since 1960—ironically, Coca-Cola&#x27;s first bottling plant outside the United States was established there in 1906) and North Korea. However, it is reported to be available in both countries as a grey import. As of 2022, Coca-Cola has suspended its operations in Russia due to the invasion of Ukraine.

Coca-Cola has been a point of legal discussion in the Middle East. In the early 20th century, a fatwa was created in Egypt to discuss the question of &quot;whether Muslims were permitted to drink Coca-Cola and Pepsi cola.&quot; The fatwa states: &quot;According to the Muslim Hanefite, Shafi&#x27;ite, etc., the rule in Islamic law of forbidding or allowing foods and beverages is based on the presumption that such things are permitted unless it can be shown that they are forbidden on the basis of the Qur&#x27;an.&quot; The Muslim jurists stated that, unless the Qur&#x27;an specifically prohibits the consumption of a particular product, it is permissible to consume. Another clause was discussed, whereby the same rules apply if a person is unaware of the condition or ingredients of the item in question.

Coca-Cola first entered the Chinese market in the 1920s with no localized representation of its name. While the company researched a satisfactory translation, local shopkeepers created their own. These produced the desired &quot;ko-ka ko-la&quot; sound, but with odd meanings such as &quot;female horse fastened with wax&quot; or &quot;bite the wax tadpole&quot;. In the 1930s, the company settled on the name &quot;（）&quot; (Ke-kou ke-le) taking into account the effects of syllable and meaning translations. The phrase means roughly &quot;to allow the mouth to be able to rejoice&quot;. The story introduction from Coca-Cola mentions that Chiang Yee provided the new localized name, but there are also sources that the localized name appeared before 1935, or that it was given by someone named Jerome T. Lieu who studied at Columbia University in New York.

==Brand portfolio==

This is a list of variants of Coca-Cola introduced around the world. In addition to the caffeine-free version of the original, additional fruit flavors have been included over the years. Not included here are versions of Diet Coke and Coca-Cola Zero Sugar; these variant versions of those no-calorie colas can be found in their respective articles.

=== Logo design===
The Coca-Cola logo was created by John Pemberton&#x27;s bookkeeper, Frank Mason Robinson, in 1885. Robinson came up with the name and chose the logo&#x27;s distinctive cursive script. The writing style used, known as Spencerian script, was developed in the mid-19th century and was the dominant form of formal handwriting in the United States during that period.

Robinson also played a significant role in early Coca-Cola advertising. His promotional suggestions to Pemberton included giving away thousands of free drink coupons and plastering the city of Atlanta with publicity banners and streetcar signs.

Coca-Cola came under scrutiny in Egypt in 1951 because of a conspiracy theory that the Coca-Cola logo, when reflected in a mirror, spells out &quot;No Mohammed no Mecca&quot; in Arabic.

===Contour bottle design===


The Coca-Cola bottle, called the &quot;contour bottle&quot; within the company, was created by bottle designer Earl R. Dean and Coca-Cola&#x27;s general counsel, Harold Hirsch. In 1915, the Coca-Cola Company was represented by their general counsel to launch a competition among its bottle suppliers as well as any competition entrants to create a new bottle for their beverage that would distinguish it from other beverage bottles, &quot;a bottle which a person could recognize even if they felt it in the dark, and so shaped that, even if broken, a person could tell at a glance what it was.&quot;

Chapman J. Root, president of the Root Glass Company of Terre Haute, Indiana, turned the project over to members of his supervisory staff, including company auditor T. Clyde Edwards, plant superintendent Alexander Samuelsson, and Earl R. Dean, bottle designer and supervisor of the bottle molding room. Root and his subordinates decided to base the bottle&#x27;s design on one of the soda&#x27;s two ingredients, the coca leaf or the kola nut, but were unaware of what either ingredient looked like. Dean and Edwards went to the Emeline Fairbanks Memorial Library and were unable to find any information about coca or kola. Instead, Dean was inspired by a picture of the gourd-shaped cocoa pod in the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;. Dean made a rough sketch of the pod and returned to the plant to show Root. He explained to Root how he could transform the shape of the pod into a bottle. Root gave Dean his approval.

Faced with the upcoming scheduled maintenance of the mold-making machinery, over the next 24 hours Dean sketched out a concept drawing which was approved by Root the next morning. Chapman Root approved the prototype bottle and a design patent was issued on the bottle in November 1915. The prototype never made it to production since its middle diameter was larger than its base, making it unstable on conveyor belts. Dean resolved this issue by decreasing the bottle&#x27;s middle diameter. During the 1916 bottler&#x27;s convention, Dean&#x27;s contour bottle was chosen over other entries and was on the market the same year. By 1920, the contour bottle became the standard for the Coca-Cola Company. A revised version was also patented in 1923. Because the Patent Office releases the &quot;Patent Gazette&quot; on Tuesday, the bottle was patented on December 25, 1923, and was nicknamed the &quot;Christmas bottle&quot;. Today, the contour Coca-Cola bottle is one of the most recognized packages on the planet.

As a reward for his efforts, Dean was offered a choice between a $500 bonus or a lifetime job at The Root Glass Company. He chose the lifetime job and kept it until the Owens-Illinois Glass Company bought out The Root Glass Company in the mid-1930s. Dean went on to work in other Midwestern glass factories.

Raymond Loewy updated the design in 1955 to accommodate larger formats. Misinterpretations of comments Loewy made on his involvement have given rise to a popular misconception, misattributing him as the original designer of the coke bottle.

Others have attributed inspiration for the design not to the cocoa pod, but to a Victorian hooped dress.

In 1944, Associate Justice Roger J. Traynor of the Supreme Court of California took advantage of a case involving a waitress injured by an exploding Coca-Cola bottle to articulate the doctrine of strict liability for defective products. Traynor&#x27;s concurring opinion in &quot;Escola v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co.&quot; is widely recognized as a landmark case in US law today.

====Examples====
===Designer bottles===
Karl Lagerfeld is the latest designer to have created a collection of aluminum bottles for Coca-Cola. Lagerfeld is not the first fashion designer to create a special version of the famous Coca-Cola Contour bottle. A number of other limited edition bottles by fashion designers for Coca-Cola Light soda have been created in the last few years, including Jean Paul Gaultier.

In 2009, in Italy, Coca-Cola Light had a Tribute to Fashion to celebrate 100 years of the recognizable contour bottle. Well known Italian designers Alberta Ferretti, Blumarine, Etro, Fendi, Marni, Missoni, Moschino, and Versace each designed limited edition bottles.

In 2019, Coca-Cola shared the first beverage bottle made with ocean plastic.
==Competitors==
Pepsi, the flagship product of PepsiCo, the Coca-Cola Company&#x27;s main rival in the soft drink industry, is usually second to Coke in sales, and outsells Coca-Cola in some markets. RC Cola, now owned by the Dr Pepper Snapple Group, the third-largest soft drink manufacturer, is also widely available.

Around the world, many local brands compete with Coke. In South and Central America Kola Real, also known as Big Cola, is a growing competitor to Coca-Cola. On the French island of Corsica, Corsica Cola, made by brewers of the local Pietra beer, is a growing competitor to Coca-Cola. In the French region of Brittany, Breizh Cola is available. In Peru, Inca Kola outsells Coca-Cola, which led the Coca-Cola Company to purchase the brand in 1999. In Sweden, Julmust outsells Coca-Cola during the Christmas season. In Scotland, the locally produced Irn-Bru was more popular than Coca-Cola until 2005, when Coca-Cola and Diet Coke began to outpace its sales. In the former East Germany, Vita Cola, invented during communist rule, is gaining popularity.

While Coca-Cola does not have the majority of the market share in India, The Coca-Cola Company&#x27;s other brands like Thums Up and Sprite perform well. The Coca-Cola Company purchased Thums Up in 1993 when they re-entered the Indian market. , Coca-Cola held a 9% market-share in India while Thums Up and Sprite had a 16% and 20% market share respectively.

Tropicola, a domestic drink, is served in Cuba instead of Coca-Cola, due to a United States embargo. French brand Mecca-Cola and British brand Qibla Cola are competitors to Coca-Cola in the Middle East.

In Turkey, Cola Turka, in Iran and the Middle East, Zamzam and Parsi Cola, in some parts of China, Future Cola, in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, Kofola, in Slovenia, Cockta, and the inexpensive Mercator Cola, sold only in the country&#x27;s biggest supermarket chain, Mercator, are some of the brand&#x27;s competitors.

In 2021, Coca-Cola petitioned to cancel registrations for the marks Thums Up and Limca issued to Meenaxi Enterprise, Inc. based on misrepresentation of source. The Trademark Trial and Appeal Board concluded that &quot;Meenaxi engaged in blatant misuse in a manner calculated to trade on the goodwill and reputation of Coca-Cola in an attempt to confuse consumers in the United States that its Thums Up and Limca marks were licensed or produced by the source of the same types of cola and lemon-lime soda sold under these marks for decades in India.&quot;

==Advertising==


Coca-Cola&#x27;s advertising has significantly affected American culture, and it is frequently credited with inventing the modern image of Santa Claus as an old man in a red-and-white suit. Although the company did start using the red-and-white Santa image in the 1930s, with its winter advertising campaigns illustrated by Haddon Sundblom, the motif was already common. Coca-Cola was not even the first soft drink company to use the modern image of Santa Claus in its advertising: White Rock Beverages used Santa in advertisements for its ginger ale in 1923, after first using him to sell mineral water in 1915. Before Santa Claus, Coca-Cola relied on images of smartly dressed young women to sell its beverages. Coca-Cola&#x27;s first such advertisement appeared in 1895, featuring the young Bostonian actress Hilda Clark as its spokeswoman.

1941 saw the first use of the nickname &quot;Coke&quot; as an official trademark for the product, with a series of advertisements informing consumers that &quot;Coke means Coca-Cola&quot;. In 1971, a song from a Coca-Cola commercial called &quot;I&#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing&quot;, produced by Billy Davis, became a hit single. During the 1950s the term &quot;cola wars&quot; emerged, describing the on-going battle between Coca-Cola and Pepsi for supremacy in the soft drink industry. Coca-Cola and Pepsi were competing with new products, global expansion, US marketing initiatives and sport sponsorships.

Coke&#x27;s advertising is pervasive, as one of Woodruff&#x27;s stated goals was to ensure that everyone on Earth drank Coca-Cola as their preferred beverage. This is especially true in southern areas of the United States, such as Atlanta, where Coke was born.

Some Coca-Cola television commercials between 1960 through 1986 were written and produced by former Atlanta radio veteran Don Naylor (WGST 1936–1950, WAGA 1951–1959) during his career as a producer for the McCann Erickson advertising agency. Many of these early television commercials for Coca-Cola featured movie stars, sports heroes, and popular singers.

During the 1980s, Pepsi ran a series of television advertisements showing people participating in taste tests demonstrating that, according to the commercials, &quot;fifty percent of the participants who said they preferred Coke chose the Pepsi.&quot; Coca-Cola ran ads to combat Pepsi&#x27;s ads in an incident sometimes referred to as the &quot;cola wars&quot;; one of Coke&#x27;s ads compared the so-called Pepsi challenge to two chimpanzees deciding which tennis ball was furrier. Thereafter, Coca-Cola regained its leadership in the market.

Selena was a spokesperson for Coca-Cola from 1989 until the time of her death. She filmed three commercials for the company. During 1994, to commemorate her five years with the company, Coca-Cola issued special Selena coke bottles.

The Coca-Cola Company purchased Columbia Pictures in 1982, and began inserting Coke-product images into many of its films. After a few early successes during Coca-Cola&#x27;s ownership, Columbia began to underperform, and the studio was sold to Sony in 1989.

Coca-Cola has gone through a number of different advertising slogans in its long history, including &quot;It&#x27;s the real thing&quot;, &quot;The pause that refreshes&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;d like to buy the world a Coke&quot;, and &quot;Coke is it&quot;.

In 1999, the Coca-Cola Company introduced the Coke Card, a loyalty program that offered deals on items like clothes, entertainment and food when the cardholder purchased a Coca-Cola Classic. The scheme was cancelled after three years, with a Coca-Cola spokesperson declining to state why.

The company then introduced another loyalty campaign in 2006, My Coke Rewards. This allows consumers to earn points by entering codes from specially marked packages of Coca-Cola products into a website. These points can be redeemed for various prizes or sweepstakes entries.

In Australia in 2011, Coca-Cola began the &quot;share a Coke&quot; campaign, where the Coca-Cola logo was replaced on the bottles and replaced with first names. Coca-Cola used the 150 most popular names in Australia to print on the bottles. The campaign was paired with a website page, Facebook page, and an online &quot;share a virtual Coke&quot;. The same campaign was introduced to Coca-Cola, Diet Coke and Coke Zero bottles and cans in the UK in 2013.

Coca-Cola has also advertised its product to be consumed as a breakfast beverage, instead of coffee or tea for the morning caffeine.

===5 cents===
From 1886 to 1959, the price of Coca-Cola was fixed at five cents, in part due to an advertising campaign.

===Holiday campaigns===
Throughout the years, Coca-Cola has released limited-time collector bottles for Christmas.

Debuted in 1995, the &quot;Holidays are coming!&quot; advertisement featured a train of red delivery trucks, emblazoned with the Coca-Cola name and decorated with Christmas lights, driving through a snowy landscape and causing everything that they pass to light up and people to watch as they pass through.

The advertisement fell into disuse in 2001, as the Coca-Cola Company restructured its advertising campaigns so that advertising around the world was produced locally in each country, rather than centrally in the company&#x27;s headquarters in Atlanta, Georgia. In 2007, the company brought back the campaign after, according to the company, many consumers telephoned its information center saying that they considered it to mark the beginning of Christmas. The advertisement was created by US advertising agency Doner, and has been part of the company&#x27;s global advertising campaign for many years.

Keith Law, a producer and writer of commercials for Belfast CityBeat, was not convinced by Coca-Cola&#x27;s reintroduction of the advertisement in 2007, saying that &quot;I do not think there&#x27;s anything Christmassy about HGVs and the commercial is too generic.&quot;

In 2001, singer Melanie Thornton recorded the campaign&#x27;s advertising jingle as a single, &quot;Wonderful Dream (Holidays Are Coming)&quot;, which entered the pop-music charts in Germany at no. 9. In 2005, Coca-Cola expanded the advertising campaign to radio, employing several variations of the jingle.

In 2011, Coca-Cola launched a campaign for the Indian holiday Diwali. The campaign included commercials, a song, and an integration with Shah Rukh Khan&#x27;s film &quot;Ra.One&quot;.

In November 2024, Coca-Cola released three short AI-generated videos as its Christmas ads, reviving the original 1995 &quot;Holidays are Coming&quot; ads. The ads were created by three AI studios: Secret Level, Silverside AI, and the Wild Card. Upon its release, the commercials drew backlash on social media. Alex Hirsch, the creator of &quot;Gravity Falls&quot;, wrote on Twitter: &quot;FUN FACT: @CocaCola is &#x27;red&#x27; because it&#x27;s made from the blood of out-of-work artists! #HolidayFactz&quot;. The company defended ads, writing to &quot;The New York Times&quot; &quot;Coca-Cola will always remain dedicated to creating the highest level of work at the intersection of human creativity and technology&quot;.

===Sports sponsorship===

Coca-Cola was the first commercial sponsor of the Olympic Games, at the 1928 games in Amsterdam, and has been an Olympics sponsor ever since. This corporate sponsorship included the 1996 Summer Olympics hosted in Atlanta, which allowed Coca-Cola to spotlight its hometown. Most recently, Coca-Cola has released localized commercials for the 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver; one Canadian commercial referred to Canada&#x27;s hockey heritage and was modified after Canada won the gold medal game on February 28, 2010, by changing the ending line of the commercial to say &quot;Now they know whose game they&#x27;re playing&quot;.

Since 1978, Coca-Cola has sponsored the FIFA World Cup, and other competitions organized by FIFA. One FIFA tournament trophy, the FIFA World Youth Championship from Tunisia in 1977 to Malaysia in 1997, was called &quot;FIFA – Coca-Cola Cup&quot;. In addition, Coca-Cola sponsors NASCAR&#x27;s annual Coca-Cola 600 and Coke Zero Sugar 400 at Charlotte Motor Speedway in Concord, North Carolina and Daytona International Speedway in Daytona, Florida, respectively; since 2020, Coca-Cola has served as a premier partner of the NASCAR Cup Series, which includes holding the naming rights to the series&#x27; regular season championship trophy. Coca-Cola is also the sponsor of the iRacing Pro Series.

Coca-Cola has a long history of sports marketing relationships, which over the years have included Major League Baseball, the National Football League, the National Basketball Association, and the National Hockey League, as well as with many teams within those leagues. Coca-Cola has had a longtime relationship with the NFL&#x27;s Pittsburgh Steelers, due in part to the now-famous 1979 television commercial featuring &quot;Mean Joe&quot; Greene, leading to the two opening the Coca-Cola Great Hall at Heinz Field in 2001 and a more recent Coca-Cola Zero commercial featuring Troy Polamalu.

Coca-Cola is the official soft drink of many collegiate football teams throughout the nation, partly due to Coca-Cola providing those schools with upgraded athletic facilities in exchange for Coca-Cola&#x27;s sponsorship. This is especially prevalent at the high school level, which is more dependent on such contracts due to tighter budgets.

Coca-Cola was one of the official sponsors of the 1996 Cricket World Cup held on the Indian subcontinent. Coca-Cola is also one of the associate sponsors of Delhi Capitals in the Indian Premier League.

In England, Coca-Cola was the main sponsor of The Football League between 2004 and 2010, a name given to the three professional divisions below the Premier League in soccer. In 2005, Coca-Cola launched a competition for the 72 clubs of The Football League – it was called &quot;Win a Player&quot;. This allowed fans to place one vote per day for their favorite club, with one entry being chosen at random earning £250,000 for the club; this was repeated in 2006. The &quot;Win A Player&quot; competition was very controversial, as at the end of the 2 competitions, Leeds United A.F.C. had the most votes by more than double, yet they did not win any money to spend on a new player for the club. In 2007, the competition changed to &quot;Buy a Player&quot;. This competition allowed fans to buy a bottle of Coca-Cola or Coca-Cola Zero and submit the code on the wrapper on the Coca-Cola website. This code could then earn anything from 50p to £100,000 for a club of their choice. This competition was favored over the old &quot;Win a Player&quot; competition, as it allowed all clubs to win some money. Between 1992 and 1998, Coca-Cola was the title sponsor of the Football League Cup (Coca-Cola Cup), the secondary cup tournament of England. Starting in 2019–20 season, Coca-Cola has agreed its biggest UK sponsorship deal by becoming Premier League soccer&#x27;s seventh and final commercial partner for the UK and Ireland, China, Malaysia, Indonesia, Singapore, Egyptian and the West African markets.

Between 1994 and 1997, Coca-Cola was also the title sponsor of the Scottish League Cup, renaming it to the Coca-Cola Cup like its English counterpart. From 1998 to 2001, the company was the title sponsor of the Irish League Cup in Northern Ireland, where it was named the Coca-Cola League Cup.

Coca-Cola is the presenting sponsor of the Tour Championship, the final event of the PGA Tour held each year at East Lake Golf Club in Atlanta, Georgia.

Introduced March 1, 2010, in Canada, to celebrate the 2010 Winter Olympics, Coca-Cola sold gold colored cans in packs of 12 each, in select stores.

Coca-Cola which has been a partner with UEFA since 1988.

=== In mass media ===
Coca-Cola has been prominently featured in many films and television programs. It was a major plot element in films such as &quot;One, Two, Three&quot;, &quot;The Coca-Cola Kid&quot;, and &quot;The Gods Must Be Crazy&quot;, among many others. In music, such as in the Beatles&#x27; song, &quot;Come Together&quot;, the lyrics say, &quot;He shoot Coca-Cola&quot;. The Beach Boys also referenced Coca-Cola in their 1964 song &quot;All Summer Long&quot;, singing &quot;Member when you spilled Coke all over your blouse?&quot;

The best selling solo artist of all time Elvis Presley, promoted Coca-Cola during his last tour of 1977. The Coca-Cola Company used Presley&#x27;s image to promote the product. For example, the company used a song performed by Presley, &quot;A Little Less Conversation&quot;, in a Japanese Coca-Cola commercial.

Other artists that promoted Coca-Cola include David Bowie, George Michael, Elton John, and Whitney Houston, who appeared in the Diet Coke commercial, among many others.

Not all musical references to Coca-Cola went well. A line in &quot;Lola&quot; by the Kinks was originally recorded as &quot;You drink champagne and it tastes just like Coca-Cola.&quot; When the British Broadcasting Corporation refused to play the song because of the commercial reference, lead singer Ray Davies re-recorded the lyric as &quot;it tastes just like cherry cola&quot; to get airplay for the song.

Political cartoonist Michel Kichka satirized a famous Coca-Cola billboard in his 1982 poster &quot;And I Love New York.&quot; On the billboard, the Coca-Cola wave is accompanied by the words &quot;Enjoy Coke.&quot; In Kichka&#x27;s poster, the lettering and script above the Coca-Cola wave instead read &quot;Enjoy Cocaine.&quot;

==Use as political and corporate symbol==
Coca-Cola has a high degree of identification with the United States, being considered by some an &quot;American Brand&quot; or as an item representing America, criticized as Cocacolonization. After World War II, this gave rise to the brief production of White Coke at the request of and for Soviet Marshal Georgy Zhukov, who did not want to be seen drinking a symbol of American imperialism. The bottles were given by the President Eisenhower during a conference, and Marshal Zhukov enjoyed the drink. The bottles were disguised as vodka bottles, with the cap having a red star design, to avoid suspicion of Soviet officials.

Coca-Cola was introduced to China in 1927, and was very popular until 1949. After the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949, the beverage was no longer imported into China, as it was perceived to be a symbol of decadent Western culture and capitalist lifestyle. Importation and sales of the beverage resumed in 1979, after diplomatic relations between the United States and China were restored. The agreement to allow Coca-Cola into the Chinese market was reached during Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s visit to the United States.

There are some consumer boycotts of Coca-Cola in Arab countries due to Coke&#x27;s early investment in Israel during the Arab League boycott of Israel (its competitor Pepsi stayed out of Israel). Mecca-Cola and Pepsi are popular alternatives in the Middle East.

A Coca-Cola fountain dispenser (officially a Fluids Generic Bioprocessing Apparatus or FGBA) was developed for use on the Space Shuttle as a test bed to determine if carbonated beverages can be produced from separately stored carbon dioxide, water, and flavored syrups and determine if the resulting fluids can be made available for consumption without bubble nucleation and resulting foam formation. FGBA-1 flew on STS-63 in 1995 and dispensed pre-mixed beverages, followed by FGBA-2 on STS-77 the next year. The latter mixed CO₂, water, and syrup to make beverages. It supplied 1.65 liters each of Coca-Cola and Diet Coke.

The drink is also often a metonym for the Coca-Cola Company.

== Medicinal application ==
Coca-Cola is sometimes used for the treatment of gastric phytobezoars. In about 50% of cases studied, Coca-Cola alone was found to be effective in gastric phytobezoar dissolution. This treatment can however result in the potential of developing small bowel obstruction in a minority of cases, necessitating surgical intervention.

==Criticism==
Criticism of Coca-Cola has arisen from various groups around the world, concerning a variety of issues, including health effects, environmental issues, and business practices. The drink&#x27;s coca flavoring, and the nickname &quot;Coke&quot;, remain a common theme of criticism due to the relationship with the illegal drug cocaine. In 1911, the US government seized 40 barrels and 20 kegs of Coca-Cola syrup in Chattanooga, Tennessee, alleging the caffeine in its drink was &quot;injurious to health&quot;, leading to amended food safety legislation.

Beginning in the 1940s, PepsiCo started marketing their drinks to African Americans, a niche market that was largely ignored by white-owned manufacturers in the US, and was able to use its anti-racism stance as a selling point, attacking Coke&#x27;s reluctance to hire blacks and support by the chairman of the Coca-Cola Company for segregationist Governor of Georgia Herman Talmadge. As a result of this campaign, PepsiCo&#x27;s market share as compared to Coca-Cola&#x27;s shot up dramatically in the 1950s with African American soft-drink consumers three times more likely to purchase Pepsi over Coke.

The Coca-Cola Company, its subsidiaries and products have been subject to sustained criticism by consumer groups, environmentalists, and watchdogs, particularly since the early 2000s. In 2019, BreakFreeFromPlastic named Coca-Cola the single biggest plastic polluter in the world. After 72,541 volunteers collected 476,423 pieces of plastic waste from around where they lived, a total of 11,732 pieces were found to be labeled with a Coca-Cola brand (including the Dasani, Sprite, and Fanta brands) in 37 countries across four continents. At the 2020 World Economic Forum in Davos, Coca-Cola&#x27;s head of sustainability, Bea Perez, said customers like them because they reseal and are lightweight, and &quot;business won&#x27;t be in business if we don&#x27;t accommodate consumers.&quot; In February 2022, Coca-Cola announced that it will aim to make 25 percent of its packaging reusable by 2030.

Coca-Cola Classic is rich in sugars, especially sucrose, which causes dental caries when consumed regularly. Besides this, the high caloric value of the sugars themselves can contribute to obesity. Both are major health issues in the developed world.

In February 2021, Coca-Cola received criticism after a video of a training session, which told employees to &quot;try to be less white&quot;, was leaked by an employee. The session also said in order to be &quot;less white&quot; employees had to be less &quot;arrogant&quot; and &quot;defensive&quot;.

The company, along with Pepsico and other American conglomerates, has faced criticism and an ongoing boycott by the pro-Palestine movement, especially amidst the Israel–Hamas war. Critics pointed to the company&#x27;s ties with Israel, including its donations to far-right Zionist organization Im Tirtzu, to justify the boycott. In June 2024, Coca-Cola&#x27;s Bangladesh distributor ran an ad in Bangladesh—where it faced a heavy boycott—attempting to distance the company from Israel.

===Colombian death-squad allegations===

In July 2001, the Coca-Cola Company was sued over its alleged use of far-right death squads (the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia) to kidnap, torture, and kill Colombian bottler workers that were linked with trade union activity. Coca-Cola was sued in a US federal court in Miami by the Colombian food and drink union Sinaltrainal. The suit alleged that Coca-Cola was indirectly responsible for having &quot;contracted with or otherwise directed paramilitary security forces that utilized extreme violence and murdered, tortured, unlawfully detained or otherwise silenced trade union leaders&quot;. This sparked campaigns to boycott Coca-Cola in the UK, US, Germany, Italy, and Australia. Javier Correa, the president of Sinaltrainal, said the campaign aimed to put pressure on Coca-Cola &quot;to mitigate the pain and suffering&quot; that union members had suffered.

Speaking from the Coca-Cola Company&#x27;s headquarters in Atlanta, company spokesperson Rafael Fernandez Quiros said &quot;Coca-Cola denies any connection to any human-rights violation of this type&quot; and added &quot;We do not own or operate the plants&quot;.

==Other uses==
Coca-Cola can be used to remove grease and oil stains from concrete, metal, and clothes. It is also used to delay concrete from setting.

==See also==
* The Coca-Cola Company
* Coca-Cola HBC AG
* Coca-Cola treatment of phytobezoars
* Colalife
* Fanta
* List of Coca-Cola brands
* List of soft drink flavors
* Mexican Coke
* Neiman Marcus
* OpenCola (drink)
* Premix and postmix
==References==
===Works cited===
* Elmore, Bartow J. &quot;Citizen Coke: An Environmental and Political History of the Coca-Cola Company,&quot; &quot;Enterprise &amp; Society&quot; (2013) 14#4 pp 717–731 online.

==Further reading==
* Allen, Frederick. &quot;Secret Formula: How Brilliant Marketing and Relentless Salesmanship Made Coca-Cola the Best-Known Product in the World&quot;. New York: Harper Business, 1994.
* Blanding, Michael. &quot;The Coke Machine: The Dirty Truth Behind the World&#x27;s Favorite Soft Drink.&quot; New York: Avery, 2010.
* 
* Hays, Constance L. &quot;The Real Thing: Truth and Power at the Coca-Cola Company.&quot; New York: Random House, 2004.
* Kahn, Ely J. Jr. &quot;The Big Drink: The Story of Coca-Cola.&quot; New York: Random House, 1960.
* Louis, Jill Chen and Harvey Z. Yazijian. &quot;The Cola Wars.&quot; New York: Everest House Publishers, 1980.
* Oliver, Thomas. &quot;The Real Coke, The Real Story.&quot; New York: Random House, 1986.
* Pendergrast, Mark. &quot;For God, Country, and Coca-Cola: The Unauthorized History of the Great American Soft Drink And the Company That Makes It.&quot; New York: Basic Books, 2000.

===Primary sources===
* Isdell, Neville. &quot;Inside Coca-Cola: A CEO&#x27;s Life Story of Building the World&#x27;s Most Popular Brand. With the assistance of David Beasley.&quot; New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press, 2011.

==External links==
* Kinescope of a live 1954 TV commercial for Coca-Cola (Internet Archive)
* Coca-Cola Advertising History. .
* The Contour Bottle
* Coca-Cola: Refreshing Memories – slideshow by &quot;Life&quot;
* China Advisory: Avoiding the Wax Tadpole – Effective Chinese Language Trademark Strategy – Chinese language trademark for Coca-Cola</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="0" end="9" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="14" end="18" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q134041" start="25" end="29" title="cola" label="cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="30" end="40" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="57" end="78" title="the Coca-Cola Company" label="the Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q76615" start="280" end="303" title="Fortune 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860802" start="316" end="361" title="List of largest companies in the United States by revenue" label="largest United States corporations by revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q253427" start="466" end="491" title="List of most valuable brands" label="sixth most valuable brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698315" start="519" end="535" title="temperance bar" label="temperance drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480271" start="554" end="569" title="patent medicine" label="patent medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q215959" start="622" end="642" title="John Stith Pemberton" label="John Stith Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="646" end="653" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q744866" start="712" end="730" title="Asa Griggs Candler" label="Asa Griggs Candler"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="924" end="928" title="coca" label="coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="940" end="948" title="kola nut" label="kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="963" end="971" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661372" start="978" end="998" title="Coca-Cola formula" label="formula of Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q602938" start="1009" end="1021" title="trade secret" label="trade secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355665" start="1375" end="1386" title="concentrate" label="concentrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="1709" end="1733" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q211584" start="1850" end="1865" title="vending machine" label="vending machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419253" start="1938" end="1951" title="soda fountain" label="soda fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465569" start="1978" end="2001" title="foodservice distributor" label="foodservice distributor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="2121" end="2130" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017165" start="2160" end="2183" title="Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola" label="Caffeine-Free Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q5017165" start="2185" end="2208" title="Diet Coke Caffeine-Free" label="Diet Coke Caffeine-Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127283" start="2210" end="2230" title="Coca-Cola Zero Sugar" label="Coca-Cola Zero Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609070" start="2232" end="2248" title="Coca-Cola Cherry" label="Coca-Cola Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q868130" start="2250" end="2267" title="Coca-Cola Vanilla" label="Coca-Cola Vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533646" start="2295" end="2300" title="Coca-Cola with Lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3681889" start="2302" end="2306" title="Coca-Cola with Lime" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q122929434" start="2312" end="2318" title="Coca-Cola with Coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41084" start="2424" end="2432" title="New Coke" label="New Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q215959" start="2503" end="2517" title="John Pemberton" label="John Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="2534" end="2552" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="2557" end="2577" title="Morphine addiction" label="addicted to morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="2746" end="2763" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992699" start="2779" end="2812" title="Pemberton&amp;#x27;s French Wine Coca" label="Pemberton&amp;#x27;s French Wine Coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665382" start="2901" end="2912" title="Vin Mariani" label="Vin Mariani"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="2923" end="2930" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139116" start="2932" end="2941" title="coca wine" label="coca wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="2992" end="3000" title="kola nut" label="kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q486633" start="3281" end="3294" title="Fulton County, Georgia" label="Fulton County"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="3302" end="3313" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992699" start="3399" end="3432" title="Pemberton&amp;#x27;s French Wine Coca" label="Pemberton&amp;#x27;s French Wine Coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q333247" start="3535" end="3554" title="temperance movement" label="temperance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q58093" start="3710" end="3715" title="Cent (currency)" label="cents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419253" start="3735" end="3748" title="soda fountain" label="soda fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q264554" start="3819" end="3835" title="carbonated water" label="carbonated water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480271" start="3919" end="3934" title="patent medicine" label="patent medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184674" start="4059" end="4068" title="impotence" label="impotence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="4165" end="4180" title="Atlanta Journal" label="Atlanta Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105000" start="4386" end="4399" title="J. C. Mayfield" label="J.C. Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919271" start="5188" end="5210" title="Charles Howard Candler Sr." label="Charles Howard Candler"/>
<link wikidata="Q621043" start="5249" end="5265" title="Emory University" label="Emory University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394038" start="8933" end="8948" title="Ernest Woodruff" label="Ernest Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q181507" start="8956" end="8969" title="Trust Company of Georgia" label="Trust Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253299" start="9015" end="9047" title="Delaware General Corporation Law" label="Delaware General Corporation Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658180" start="9142" end="9160" title="Robert W. Woodruff" label="Robert W. Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q765270" start="9632" end="9649" title="generic trademark" label="generic trademark"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="9689" end="9711" title="Southern United States" label="Southern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148337" start="9718" end="9774" title="Names for soft drinks in the United States" label="&amp;quot;coke&amp;quot; is used even for non Coca-Cola products"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="9840" end="9870" title="Coke (fuel)" label="similarly named coal byproduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q493787" start="10529" end="10551" title="Vicksburg, Mississippi" label="Vicksburg, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430734" start="10645" end="10665" title="Joseph A. Biedenharn" label="Joseph A. Biedenharn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950701" start="10693" end="10703" title="Hutchinson Patent Stopper" label="Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="10835" end="10857" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058882" start="10866" end="10884" title="Benjamin Thomas (Coca-Cola bottler)" label="Benjamin F. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287924" start="10889" end="10908" title="Joseph B. Whitehead" label="Joseph B. Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150578" start="11635" end="11677" title="fixed price of Coca-Cola from 1886 to 1959" label="fixed price of Coca-Cola from 1886 to 1959"/>
<link wikidata="Q932346" start="11793" end="11814" title="Cartersville, Georgia" label="Cartersville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q645858" start="11859" end="11877" title="dietary supplement" label="dietary supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q355552" start="12018" end="12034" title="Kosher certification" label="certified kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7811629" start="12052" end="12065" title="Tobias Geffen" label="Tobias Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="12461" end="12469" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060878" start="12526" end="12545" title="kosher for Passover" label="kosher for Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13035" end="13041" title="Soviet" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="13209" end="13233" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661372" start="13341" end="13352" title="Coca-Cola formula" label="the formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="13492" end="13497" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="13560" end="13569" title="nostalgia" label="nostalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q798455" start="13602" end="13610" title="Backlash (sociology)" label="backlash"/>
<link wikidata="Q41084" start="13784" end="13791" title="Coke II" label="Coke II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172" start="13959" end="13970" title="Arab League" label="Arab League"/>
<link wikidata="Q715583" start="14684" end="14690" title="Costco" label="Costco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="14913" end="14928" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825758" start="14948" end="14978" title="Mexican Coke" label="imported Coca-Cola from Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="15581" end="15587" title="Yangon" label="Yangon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="15806" end="15819" title="plastic waste" label="plastic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="16225" end="16232" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="16236" end="16260" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="16302" end="16310" title="Caffeine" label="Caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184782" start="16313" end="16328" title="Phosphoric acid" label="Phosphoric acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16331" end="16352" title="Caramel E-150d#Classification" label="Caramel color (E150d)"/>
<link wikidata="Q602938" start="16627" end="16639" title="trade secret" label="trade secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q795486" start="16782" end="16798" title="Truist Financial" label="Truist Financial"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="16820" end="16827" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q30641590" start="16863" end="16876" title="Trust Company of America" label="Trust Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="16886" end="16897" title="underwriter" label="underwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="16931" end="16954" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q181507" start="17041" end="17055" title="SunTrust Banks" label="SunTrust Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201410" start="17124" end="17142" title="World of Coca-Cola" label="World of Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287154" start="17185" end="17191" title="Snopes" label="Snopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672322" start="17575" end="17584" title="Ira Glass" label="Ira Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116341" start="17597" end="17600" title="Public Radio International" label="PRI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421465" start="17619" end="17637" title="This American Life" label="This American Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092348" start="17781" end="17813" title="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution" label="The Atlanta Journal-Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="18402" end="18409" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60235" start="18414" end="18422" title="caffeine" label="caffeine"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="18457" end="18461" title="coca" label="coca"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="18489" end="18497" title="kola nut" label="kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q48013" start="18624" end="18629" title="ounce" label="ounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208192" start="19337" end="19351" title="Stepan Company" label="Stepan Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093465" start="19361" end="19380" title="Maywood, New Jersey" label="Maywood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744211" start="19600" end="19612" title="Mallinckrodt" label="Mallinckrodt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19683" end="19696" title="Cocaine#Medical" label="medicinal use"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="19780" end="19794" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893287" start="20142" end="20201" title="United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola" label="United States v. Forty Barrels and Twenty Kegs of Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q693944" start="20385" end="20391" title="Grain (unit)" label="grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029367" start="20541" end="20563" title="Pure Food and Drug Act" label="Pure Food and Drug Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q250472" start="20758" end="20771" title="Sixth Circuit" label="Sixth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981188" start="21840" end="21861" title="Coca-Cola Enterprises" label="Coca-Cola Enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981189" start="21863" end="21879" title="Coca-Cola Amatil" label="Coca-Cola Amatil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104910" start="21881" end="21916" title="Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling Company" label="Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714863" start="21922" end="21937" title="Coca-Cola FEMSA" label="Coca-Cola FEMSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829814" start="21977" end="22006" title="Coca-Cola Bottlers Uzbekistan" label="Coca-Cola Bottlers Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q471753" start="22273" end="22283" title="Cuba Libre" label="Cuba Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="22333" end="22339" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="22358" end="22378" title="Spanish-American War" label="Spanish-American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="22507" end="22518" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="22520" end="22527" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="22541" end="22545" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="22604" end="22617" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="22627" end="22633" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="22651" end="22663" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="22665" end="22670" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="23008" end="23015" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="23107" end="23111" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="23279" end="23290" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317708" start="23355" end="23366" title="grey import" label="grey import"/>
<link wikidata="Q111048401" start="23394" end="23418" title="Boycott of Russia and Belarus" label="suspended its operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="23422" end="23428" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="23440" end="23448" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="23452" end="23459" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="23516" end="23527" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221452" start="23556" end="23563" title="Coke Fatwa" label="a fatwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="23579" end="23584" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="23626" end="23633" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="23966" end="23977" title="Quran" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q209380" start="24302" end="24316" title="Chinese market" label="Chinese market"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543" start="24338" end="24347" title="Language localisation" label="localized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497110" start="24915" end="24925" title="Chiang Yee" label="Chiang Yee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="25100" end="25119" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="25123" end="25131" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815345" start="25376" end="25385" title="Diet Coke" label="Diet Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127283" start="25390" end="25410" title="Coca-Cola Zero Sugar" label="Coca-Cola Zero Sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488032" start="25592" end="25612" title="Frank Mason Robinson" label="Frank Mason Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576239" start="25741" end="25758" title="Spencerian script" label="Spencerian script"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="26081" end="26088" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="26116" end="26125" title="streetcar" label="streetcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221452" start="26155" end="26180" title="Coke Fatwa" label="scrutiny in Egypt in 1951"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="26194" end="26211" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9458" start="26285" end="26293" title="Mohammed" label="Mohammed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="26297" end="26302" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326050" start="26462" end="26474" title="Earl R. Dean" label="Earl R. Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q564612" start="26496" end="26511" title="general counsel" label="general counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661049" start="26513" end="26526" title="Harold Hirsch" label="Harold Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761505" start="26982" end="27004" title="the Root Glass Company" label="the Root Glass Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q492478" start="27008" end="27028" title="Terre Haute, Indiana" label="Terre Haute, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326050" start="27182" end="27194" title="Earl R. Dean" label="Earl R. Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q66793593" start="27369" end="27378" title="coca leaf" label="coca leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q912522" start="27386" end="27394" title="kola nut" label="kola nut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370352" start="27481" end="27515" title="Emeline Fairbanks Memorial Library" label="Emeline Fairbanks Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q42385" start="27636" end="27645" title="cocoa pod" label="cocoa pod"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="27659" end="27682" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264361" start="28105" end="28118" title="design patent" label="design patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q770135" start="28278" end="28291" title="conveyor belt" label="conveyor belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459541" start="28637" end="28650" title="US Patent Office" label="Patent Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q180106" start="29061" end="29089" title="Owens-Illinois Glass Company" label="Owens-Illinois Glass Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q435509" start="29201" end="29214" title="Raymond Loewy" label="Raymond Loewy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186174" start="29355" end="29376" title="List of common misconceptions" label="popular misconception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070623" start="29524" end="29533" title="Victorian fashion" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17130629" start="29534" end="29546" title="Hoop skirt" label="hooped dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439116" start="29576" end="29592" title="Roger J. Traynor" label="Roger J. Traynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629503" start="29600" end="29627" title="Supreme Court of California" label="Supreme Court of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="29745" end="29761" title="strict liability" label="strict liability"/>
<link wikidata="Q525271" start="29766" end="29784" title="product liability" label="defective products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087840" start="29801" end="29819" title="concurring opinion" label="concurring opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397371" start="29829" end="29861" title="Escola v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co." label="Escola v. Coca-Cola Bottling Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q76716" start="29966" end="29980" title="Karl Lagerfeld" label="Karl Lagerfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q242868" start="30319" end="30337" title="Jean Paul Gaultier" label="Jean Paul Gaultier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338161" start="30488" end="30504" title="Alberta Ferretti" label="Alberta Ferretti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641225" start="30506" end="30515" title="Blufin" label="Blumarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371677" start="30517" end="30521" title="Etro" label="Etro"/>
<link wikidata="Q926575" start="30523" end="30528" title="Fendi" label="Fendi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650853" start="30530" end="30535" title="Marni (fashion house)" label="Marni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400977" start="30537" end="30544" title="Missoni" label="Missoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q659863" start="30546" end="30554" title="Moschino" label="Moschino"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="30560" end="30567" title="Versace" label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="30701" end="30706" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q334800" start="30732" end="30739" title="PepsiCo" label="PepsiCo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342742" start="30885" end="30892" title="RC Cola" label="RC Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254149" start="30911" end="30934" title="Dr Pepper Snapple Group" label="Dr Pepper Snapple Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027181" start="31090" end="31099" title="Kola Real" label="Kola Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q14112" start="31187" end="31194" title="Corsica" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093320" start="31196" end="31208" title="Corsica Cola" label="Corsica Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132183" start="31239" end="31250" title="Pietra Brewery" label="Pietra beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="31314" end="31322" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633706" start="31324" end="31335" title="Breizh Cola" label="Breizh Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q593369" start="31359" end="31368" title="Inca Kola" label="Inca Kola"/>
<link wikidata="Q251113" start="31463" end="31470" title="Julmust" label="Julmust"/>
<link wikidata="Q938806" start="31553" end="31560" title="Irn-Bru" label="Irn-Bru"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="31676" end="31688" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948" start="31690" end="31699" title="Vita Cola" label="Vita Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q672465" start="31877" end="31885" title="Thums Up" label="Thums Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="31890" end="31896" title="Sprite (drink)" label="Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136551" start="32230" end="32240" title="Mecca-Cola" label="Mecca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q977491" start="32259" end="32269" title="Qibla Cola" label="Qibla Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107571" start="32331" end="32341" title="Cola Turka" label="Cola Turka"/>
<link wikidata="Q668954" start="32372" end="32378" title="Zamzam (soft drink)" label="Zamzam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504021" start="32383" end="32393" title="Parsi Cola" label="Parsi Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2013273" start="32419" end="32430" title="Future Cola" label="Future Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955" start="32468" end="32474" title="Kofola" label="Kofola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538656" start="32489" end="32495" title="Cockta" label="Cockta"/>
<link wikidata="Q738412" start="32591" end="32599" title="Mercator (retail)" label="Mercator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549094" start="32725" end="32730" title="Limca" label="Limca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832129" start="32808" end="32840" title="Trademark Trial and Appeal Board" label="Trademark Trial and Appeal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044835" start="33274" end="33290" title="Culture of the United States" label="American culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q315796" start="33357" end="33368" title="Santa Claus" label="Santa Claus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081735" start="33542" end="33557" title="Haddon Sundblom" label="Haddon Sundblom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516752" start="33700" end="33720" title="White Rock Beverages" label="White Rock Beverages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162763" start="33758" end="33768" title="ginger ale" label="ginger ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q178921" start="33808" end="33821" title="mineral water" label="mineral water"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226448" start="34030" end="34041" title="Hilda Clark (model)" label="Hilda Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359154" start="34309" end="34349" title="I&amp;#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing" label="I&amp;#x27;d Like to Teach the World to Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912440" start="34369" end="34380" title="Roquel Billy Davis" label="Billy Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="34391" end="34401" title="hit single" label="hit single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107563" start="34435" end="34444" title="cola wars" label="cola wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394038" start="34731" end="34746" title="Ernest Woodruff" label="Woodruff&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="34914" end="34921" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="34960" end="34982" title="Television advertisement" label="television commercials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293207" start="35067" end="35077" title="Don Naylor" label="Don Naylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949791" start="35079" end="35083" title="WGKA" label="WGST"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946400" start="35095" end="35099" title="WAGA (TV)" label="WAGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779040" start="35151" end="35166" title="McCann Erickson" label="McCann Erickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q216931" start="35167" end="35185" title="advertising agency" label="advertising agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="35321" end="35326" title="Pepsi" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107563" start="35650" end="35659" title="cola wars" label="cola wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166486" start="35713" end="35728" title="Pepsi challenge" label="Pepsi challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="35736" end="35747" title="common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzees"/>
<link wikidata="Q246514" start="35763" end="35774" title="tennis ball" label="tennis ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q23543" start="35850" end="35856" title="Selena" label="Selena"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="36115" end="36132" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="36328" end="36332" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094729" start="36392" end="36410" title="advertising slogan" label="advertising slogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945173" start="36951" end="36966" title="My Coke Rewards" label="My Coke Rewards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653073" start="38157" end="38173" title="Christmas lights" label="Christmas lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265644" start="38958" end="38974" title="Belfast CityBeat" label="Belfast CityBeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449732" start="39132" end="39136" title="HGVs" label="HGVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q235243" start="39195" end="39211" title="Melanie Thornton" label="Melanie Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370847" start="39279" end="39316" title="Wonderful Dream (Holidays Are Coming)" label="Wonderful Dream (Holidays Are Coming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q10244" start="39550" end="39556" title="Diwali" label="Diwali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9535" start="39625" end="39646" title="Shah Rukh Khan" label="Shah Rukh Khan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q284184" start="39658" end="39664" title="Ra.One" label="Ra.One"/>
<link wikidata="Q117246174" start="39722" end="39734" title="Generative artificial intelligence" label="AI-generated"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="39969" end="39981" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717190" start="39983" end="39994" title="Alex Hirsch" label="Alex Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q550555" start="40017" end="40030" title="Gravity Falls" label="Gravity Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="40227" end="40245" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q152478" start="40459" end="40466" title="sponsor (commercial)" label="sponsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="40474" end="40487" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8138" start="40496" end="40506" title="1928 Summer Olympics" label="1928 games"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="40510" end="40519" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8531" start="40606" end="40626" title="1996 Summer Olympics" label="1996 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="40637" end="40644" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="40765" end="40785" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="40789" end="40798" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q46943" start="41061" end="41065" title="1978 FIFA World Cup" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q19317" start="41095" end="41109" title="FIFA World Cup" label="FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q253414" start="41147" end="41151" title="FIFA" label="FIFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201891" start="41185" end="41214" title="FIFA U-20 World Cup" label="FIFA World Youth Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044090" start="41231" end="41235" title="1977 FIFA World Youth Championship" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q610894" start="41251" end="41255" title="1997 FIFA World Youth Championship" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="41334" end="41340" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104915" start="41355" end="41368" title="Coca-Cola 600" label="Coca-Cola 600"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094440" start="41373" end="41392" title="Coke Zero Sugar 400" label="Coke Zero Sugar 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067286" start="41396" end="41420" title="Charlotte Motor Speedway" label="Charlotte Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030184" start="41424" end="41447" title="Concord, North Carolina" label="Concord, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179250" start="41452" end="41482" title="Daytona International Speedway" label="Daytona International Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707177" start="41579" end="41596" title="NASCAR Cup Series" label="NASCAR Cup Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q254255" start="41732" end="41739" title="iRacing" label="iRacing"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376833" start="41740" end="41750" title="eNASCAR Coca-Cola iRacing Series" label="Pro Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="41852" end="41873" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="41879" end="41903" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="41909" end="41940" title="National Basketball Association" label="National Basketball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="41950" end="41972" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q191477" start="42085" end="42104" title="Pittsburgh Steelers" label="Pittsburgh Steelers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5749306" start="42136" end="42162" title="Hey Kid, Catch!" label="1979 television commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q505256" start="42173" end="42200" title="Joe Greene" label="&amp;quot;Mean Joe&amp;quot; Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067148" start="42257" end="42268" title="Heinz Field" label="Heinz Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127283" start="42295" end="42309" title="Coca-Cola Zero" label="Coca-Cola Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q715572" start="42331" end="42344" title="Troy Polamalu" label="Troy Polamalu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109032" start="42392" end="42411" title="College football" label="collegiate football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139943" start="42741" end="42763" title="1996 Cricket World Cup" label="1996 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="42776" end="42795" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q738648" start="42848" end="42862" title="Delhi Capitals" label="Delhi Capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q396412" start="42870" end="42891" title="Indian Premier League" label="Indian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q213347" start="42940" end="42959" title="The Football League" label="The Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="43042" end="43056" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="43060" end="43066" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128631" start="43459" end="43478" title="Leeds United A.F.C." label="Leeds United A.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q11152" start="44058" end="44077" title="Football League Cup" label="Football League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q60439913" start="44148" end="44162" title="2019–20 Premier League" label="2019–20 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="44229" end="44243" title="Premier League" label="Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="44303" end="44305" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="44310" end="44317" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="44319" end="44324" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="44326" end="44334" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="44336" end="44345" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="44347" end="44356" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="44358" end="44363" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="44375" end="44386" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q864672" start="44465" end="44484" title="Scottish League Cup" label="Scottish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q887620" start="44609" end="44625" title="Northern Ireland Football League Cup" label="Irish League Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="44629" end="44645" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619413" start="44736" end="44753" title="Tour Championship" label="Tour Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="44778" end="44786" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422450" start="44805" end="44824" title="East Lake Golf Club" label="East Lake Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="44828" end="44844" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9674" start="44901" end="44921" title="2010 Winter Olympics" label="2010 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="45036" end="45040" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283810" start="45206" end="45221" title="One, Two, Three" label="One, Two, Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663674" start="45235" end="45252" title="The Coca-Cola Kid" label="The Coca-Cola Kid"/>
<link wikidata="Q647665" start="45270" end="45292" title="The Gods Must Be Crazy" label="The Gods Must Be Crazy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="45340" end="45351" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210482" start="45370" end="45383" title="Come Together" label="Come Together"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="45439" end="45453" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q654066" start="45505" end="45520" title="All Summer Long (The Beach Boys song)" label="All Summer Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="45641" end="45654" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993106" start="45686" end="45703" title="Elvis in Concert" label="last tour of 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627030" start="45842" end="45868" title="A Little Less Conversation" label="A Little Less Conversation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="45959" end="45970" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="45972" end="45986" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="45988" end="45998" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q34389" start="46004" end="46019" title="Whitney Houston" label="Whitney Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706015" start="46150" end="46154" title="Lola (song)" label="Lola"/>
<link wikidata="Q188713" start="46164" end="46173" title="the Kinks" label="the Kinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="46277" end="46309" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="British Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q357455" start="46384" end="46394" title="Ray Davies" label="Ray Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836447" start="46515" end="46528" title="Michel Kichka" label="Michel Kichka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104955" start="47042" end="47058" title="Cocacolonization" label="Cocacolonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349904" start="47060" end="47078" title="Aftermath of World War II" label="After World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994590" start="47122" end="47132" title="White Coke" label="White Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q125168" start="47159" end="47173" title="Soviet Marshal" label="Soviet Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="47174" end="47187" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="47238" end="47258" title="American imperialism" label="American imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="47300" end="47310" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q374" start="47400" end="47405" title="vodka" label="vodka"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="47581" end="47598" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="47709" end="47724" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="47729" end="47739" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494823" start="47960" end="48007" title="Visit by Deng Xiaoping to the United States" label="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s visit to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q143487" start="48059" end="48073" title="Arab world" label="Arab countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911165" start="48131" end="48160" title="Arab League boycott of Israel" label="Arab League boycott of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136551" start="48206" end="48216" title="Mecca-Cola" label="Mecca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="48395" end="48408" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143978" start="48689" end="48695" title="STS-63" label="STS-63"/>
<link wikidata="Q717342" start="48761" end="48767" title="STS-77" label="STS-77"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="48925" end="48932" title="metonymy" label="metonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339440" start="49012" end="49058" title="Coca-Cola treatment of phytobezoars" label="used for the treatment of gastric phytobezoars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7189788" start="49144" end="49155" title="phytobezoar" label="phytobezoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574087" start="49448" end="49462" title="health effects" label="health effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144359" start="49464" end="49484" title="environmental issues" label="environmental issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q873451" start="49490" end="49507" title="business practice" label="business practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="49747" end="49769" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="49954" end="49971" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129609" start="50016" end="50021" title="Caucasian race" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q582965" start="50077" end="50088" title="anti-racism" label="anti-racism"/>
<link wikidata="Q880198" start="50236" end="50255" title="Governor of Georgia" label="Governor of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q356029" start="50256" end="50271" title="Herman Talmadge" label="Herman Talmadge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329436" start="50591" end="50605" title="consumer group" label="consumer group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="50608" end="50625" title="environmentalists" label="environmentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329436" start="50631" end="50640" title="Consumer organization" label="watchdogs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50687" end="50707" title="BreakFreeFromPlastic" label="BreakFreeFromPlastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q58734" start="50751" end="50759" title="polluter" label="polluter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202090" start="50826" end="50839" title="plastic waste" label="plastic waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171787" start="50958" end="50964" title="Dasani" label="Dasani"/>
<link wikidata="Q206978" start="50966" end="50972" title="Sprite (drink)" label="Sprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="50978" end="50983" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q170418" start="51044" end="51064" title="World Economic Forum" label="World Economic Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027534" start="51442" end="51449" title="sucrose" label="sucrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q133772" start="51464" end="51477" title="dental caries" label="dental caries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="51583" end="51590" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="52111" end="52127" title="Israel–Hamas war" label="Israel–Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916151" start="52243" end="52252" title="Im Tirtzu" label="Im Tirtzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q204481" start="52546" end="52555" title="far-right" label="far-right"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438715" start="52556" end="52568" title="death squads" label="death squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q786385" start="52574" end="52612" title="United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia" label="United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="52691" end="52702" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3961458" start="52801" end="52813" title="Sindicato Nacional de Trabajadores de la Industria de Alimentos" label="Sinaltrainal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="52929" end="52941" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q22657" start="53691" end="53699" title="concrete" label="concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295867" start="53785" end="53806" title="The Coca-Cola Company" label="The Coca-Cola Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104910" start="53809" end="53825" title="Coca-Cola HBC AG" label="Coca-Cola HBC AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339440" start="53828" end="53863" title="Coca-Cola treatment of phytobezoars" label="Coca-Cola treatment of phytobezoars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107552" start="53866" end="53874" title="Colalife" label="Colalife"/>
<link wikidata="Q9935" start="53877" end="53882" title="Fanta" label="Fanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6444391" start="53885" end="53909" title="List of Coca-Cola brands" label="List of Coca-Cola brands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099143" start="53912" end="53938" title="List of soft drink flavors" label="List of soft drink flavors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6825758" start="53941" end="53953" title="Mexican Coke" label="Mexican Coke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53956" end="53969" title="Neiman Marcus#History" label="Neiman Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q257260" start="53972" end="53988" title="OpenCola (drink)" label="OpenCola (drink)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603322" start="53991" end="54009" title="Premix and postmix" label="Premix and postmix"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="55602" end="55606" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6693" wikidata="Q1283623" url="?curid=6693" title="Cofinality">
<text>In mathematics, especially in order theory, the cofinality cf(&quot;A&quot;) of a partially ordered set &quot;A&quot; is the least of the cardinalities of the cofinal subsets of &quot;A&quot;. Formally,
:formula_1

This definition of cofinality relies on the axiom of choice, as it uses the fact that every non-empty set of cardinal numbers has a least member. The cofinality of a partially ordered set &quot;A&quot; can alternatively be defined as the least ordinal &quot;x&quot; such that there is a function from &quot;x&quot; to &quot;A&quot; with cofinal image. This second definition makes sense without the axiom of choice. If the axiom of choice is assumed, as will be the case in the rest of this article, then the two definitions are equivalent.

Cofinality can be similarly defined for a directed set and is used to generalize the notion of a subsequence in a net.

==Examples==

* The cofinality of a partially ordered set with greatest element is 1 as the set consisting only of the greatest element is cofinal (and must be contained in every other cofinal subset).
** In particular, the cofinality of any nonzero finite ordinal, or indeed any finite directed set, is 1, since such sets have a greatest element.
* Every cofinal subset of a partially ordered set must contain all maximal elements of that set. Thus the cofinality of a finite partially ordered set is equal to the number of its maximal elements.
** In particular, let formula_2 be a set of size formula_3 and consider the set of subsets of formula_2 containing no more than formula_5 elements. This is partially ordered under inclusion and the subsets with formula_5 elements are maximal. Thus the cofinality of this poset is formula_7 choose formula_8
* A subset of the natural numbers formula_9 is cofinal in formula_9 if and only if it is infinite, and therefore the cofinality of formula_11 is formula_12 Thus formula_11 is a regular cardinal.
* The cofinality of the real numbers with their usual ordering is formula_14 since formula_9 is cofinal in formula_16 The usual ordering of formula_17 is not order isomorphic to formula_18 the cardinality of the real numbers, which has cofinality strictly greater than formula_12 This demonstrates that the cofinality depends on the order; different orders on the same set may have different cofinality.

==Properties==

If formula_2 admits a totally ordered cofinal subset, then we can find a subset formula_21 that is well-ordered and cofinal in formula_22 Any subset of formula_21 is also well-ordered. Two cofinal subsets of formula_21 with minimal cardinality (that is, their cardinality is the cofinality of formula_21) need not be order isomorphic (for example if formula_26 then both formula_27 and formula_28 viewed as subsets of formula_21 have the countable cardinality of the cofinality of formula_21 but are not order isomorphic). But cofinal subsets of formula_21 with minimal order type will be order isomorphic.

==Cofinality of ordinals and other well-ordered sets==

The cofinality of an ordinal formula_32 is the smallest ordinal formula_33 that is the order type of a cofinal subset of formula_34 The cofinality of a set of ordinals or any other well-ordered set is the cofinality of the order type of that set.

Thus for a limit ordinal formula_35 there exists a formula_33-indexed strictly increasing sequence with limit formula_34 For example, the cofinality of formula_38 is formula_39 because the sequence formula_40 (where formula_5 ranges over the natural numbers) tends to formula_42 but, more generally, any countable limit ordinal has cofinality formula_43 An uncountable limit ordinal may have either cofinality formula_44 as does formula_45 or an uncountable cofinality.

The cofinality of 0 is 0. The cofinality of any successor ordinal is 1. The cofinality of any nonzero limit ordinal is an infinite regular cardinal.

==Regular and singular ordinals==
A regular ordinal is an ordinal that is equal to its cofinality. A singular ordinal is any ordinal that is not regular.

Every regular ordinal is the initial ordinal of a cardinal. Any limit of regular ordinals is a limit of initial ordinals and thus is also initial but need not be regular. Assuming the axiom of choice, formula_46 is regular for each formula_34 In this case, the ordinals formula_48 and formula_49 are regular, whereas formula_50 and formula_51 are initial ordinals that are not regular.

The cofinality of any ordinal formula_32 is a regular ordinal, that is, the cofinality of the cofinality of formula_32 is the same as the cofinality of formula_34 So the cofinality operation is idempotent.

==Cofinality of cardinals==

If formula_55 is an infinite cardinal number, then formula_56 is the least cardinal such that there is an unbounded function from formula_56 to formula_58 formula_56 is also the cardinality of the smallest set of strictly smaller cardinals whose sum is formula_58 more precisely
formula_61

That the set above is nonempty comes from the fact that
formula_62
that is, the disjoint union of formula_55 singleton sets. This implies immediately that formula_64 
The cofinality of any totally ordered set is regular, so formula_65

Using König&#x27;s theorem, one can prove formula_66 and formula_67 for any infinite cardinal formula_68

The last inequality implies that the cofinality of the cardinality of the continuum must be uncountable. On the other hand,
formula_69
the ordinal number ω being the first infinite ordinal, so that the cofinality of formula_70 is card(ω) = formula_12 (In particular, formula_70 is singular.) Therefore,
formula_73

(Compare to the continuum hypothesis, which states formula_74)

Generalizing this argument, one can prove that for a limit ordinal formula_33
formula_76

On the other hand, if the axiom of choice holds, then for a successor or zero ordinal formula_33
formula_78

==See also==
* 

==References==
* Jech, Thomas, 2003. &quot;Set Theory: The Third Millennium Edition, Revised and Expanded&quot;. Springer. .
* Kunen, Kenneth, 1980. &quot;Set Theory: An Introduction to Independence Proofs&quot;. Elsevier. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175351" start="30" end="42" title="order theory" label="order theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283623" start="48" end="58" title="Cofinality" label="cofinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q474715" start="82" end="103" title="partially ordered set" label="partially ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="138" end="151" title="cardinality" label="cardinalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141045" start="159" end="166" title="cofinal (mathematics)" label="cofinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="259" end="274" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="324" end="339" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="459" end="466" title="ordinal number" label="ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="560" end="565" title="Image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513048" start="799" end="811" title="directed set" label="directed set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332977" start="854" end="865" title="subsequence" label="subsequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191147" start="871" end="874" title="Net (mathematics)" label="net"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196892" start="940" end="956" title="greatest element" label="greatest element"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475294" start="1292" end="1307" title="maximal element" label="maximal element"/>
<link wikidata="Q209875" start="1714" end="1720" title="Binomial coefficient" label="choose"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1749" end="1763" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193137" start="1908" end="1924" title="regular cardinal" label="regular cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="1950" end="1961" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q997521" start="2084" end="2100" title="order isomorphic" label="order isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="2119" end="2150" title="Cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="2369" end="2384" title="total order" label="totally ordered"/>
<link wikidata="Q620006" start="3098" end="3108" title="order type" label="order type"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141045" start="3114" end="3128" title="cofinal subset" label="cofinal subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q659746" start="3192" end="3208" title="well-ordered set" label="well-ordered set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467845" start="3270" end="3283" title="limit ordinal" label="limit ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191286" start="3778" end="3795" title="successor ordinal" label="successor ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941494" start="4064" end="4079" title="initial ordinal" label="initial ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q368988" start="4616" end="4626" title="idempotent" label="idempotent"/>
<link wikidata="Q310647" start="4764" end="4773" title="bounded (set theory)" label="unbounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q842620" start="5029" end="5043" title="disjoint union" label="disjoint union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077462" start="5191" end="5211" title="König&amp;#x27;s theorem (set theory)" label="König&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="5622" end="5642" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="5786" end="5801" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q924992" start="5903" end="5915" title="Thomas Jech" label="Jech, Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q782431" start="6013" end="6027" title="Kenneth Kunen" label="Kunen, Kenneth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6695" wikidata="Q88291" url="?curid=6695" title="Citadel">
<text>A citadel is the most fortified area of a town or city. It may be a castle, fortress, or fortified center. The term is a diminutive of &quot;city&quot;, meaning &quot;little city&quot;, because it is a smaller part of the city of which it is the defensive core.

In a fortification with bastions, the citadel is the strongest part of the system, sometimes well inside the outer walls and bastions, but often forming part of the outer wall for the sake of economy. It is positioned to be the last line of defence, should the enemy breach the other components of the fortification system.

==History==
===3300–1300 BC===
Some of the oldest known structures which have served as citadels were built by the Indus Valley civilisation, where citadels represented a centralised authority. Citadels in Indus Valley were almost 12 meters tall. The purpose of these structures, however, remains debated. Though the structures found in the ruins of Mohenjo-daro were walled, it is far from clear that these structures were defensive against enemy attacks. Rather, they may have been built to divert flood waters.

Several settlements in Anatolia, including the Assyrian city of Kaneš in modern-day Kültepe, featured citadels. Kaneš&#x27; citadel contained the city&#x27;s palace, temples, and official buildings. The citadel of the Greek city of Mycenae was built atop a highly-defensible rectangular hill and was later surrounded by walls in order to increase its defensive capabilities.

===800 BC – 400 AD===

In Ancient Greece, the Acropolis, which literally means &quot;high city&quot;, placed on a commanding eminence, was important in the life of the people, serving as a lookout, a refuge, and a stronghold in peril, as well as containing military and food supplies, the shrine of the god and a royal palace. The most well known is the Acropolis of Athens, but nearly every Greek city-state had one – the Acrocorinth is famed as a particularly strong fortress. In a much later period, when Greece was ruled by the Latin Empire, the same strong points were used by the new feudal rulers for much the same purpose.

In the first millennium BC, the Castro culture emerged in northwestern Portugal and Spain in the region extending from the Douro river up to the Minho, but soon expanding north along the coast, and east following the river valleys. It was an autochthonous evolution of Atlantic Bronze Age communities. In 2008, the origins of the Celts were attributed to this period by John T. Koch and supported by Barry Cunliffe. The Ave River Valley in Portugal was the core region of this culture, with a large number of small settlements (the &quot;castros&quot;), but also settlements known as citadels or oppida by the Roman conquerors. These had several rings of walls and the Roman conquest of the citadels of Abobriga, Lambriaca and Cinania around 138 BC was possible only by prolonged siege. Ruins of notable citadels still exist, and are known by archaeologists as Citânia de Briteiros, Citânia de Sanfins, Cividade de Terroso and Cividade de Bagunte.

====167–160 BC====
Rebels who took power in a city, but with the citadel still held by the former rulers, could by no means regard their tenure of power as secure. One such incident played an important part in the history of the Maccabean Revolt against the Seleucid Empire. The Hellenistic garrison of Jerusalem and local supporters of the Seleucids held out for many years in the Acra citadel, making Maccabean rule in the rest of Jerusalem precarious. When finally gaining possession of the place, the Maccabeans pointedly destroyed and razed the Acra, though they constructed another citadel for their own use in a different part of Jerusalem.

===400–1600===

At various periods, and particularly during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, the citadel – having its own fortifications, independent of the city walls – was the last defence of a besieged army, often held after the town had been conquered. Locals and defending armies have often held out citadels long after the city had fallen. For example, in the 1543 Siege of Nice the Ottoman forces led by Barbarossa conquered and pillaged the town and took many captives, but the citadel held out.

In the Philippines, the Ivatan people of the northern islands of Batanes often built fortifications to protect themselves during times of war. They built their so-called &quot;idjangs&quot; on hills and elevated areas. These fortifications were likened to European castles because of their purpose. Usually, the only entrance to the castles would be via a rope ladder that would only be lowered for the villagers and could be kept away when invaders arrived.

===1600 to the present===
In times of war, the citadel in many cases afforded retreat to the people living in the areas around the town. However, citadels were often used also to protect a garrison or political power from the inhabitants of the town where it was located, being designed to ensure loyalty from the town that they defended. This was used, for example, during the Dutch Wars of 1664–1667, King Charles II of England constructed a Royal Citadel at Plymouth, an important channel port which needed to be defended from a possible naval attack. However, due to Plymouth&#x27;s support for the Parliamentarians, in the then-recent English Civil War, the Plymouth Citadel was so designed that its guns could fire on the town as well as on the sea approaches.

Barcelona had a great citadel built in 1714 to intimidate the Catalans against repeating their mid-17th- and early-18th-century rebellions against the Spanish central government. In the 19th century, when the political climate had liberalized enough to permit it, the people of Barcelona had the citadel torn down, and replaced it with the city&#x27;s main central park, the Parc de la Ciutadella. A similar example is the Citadella in Budapest, Hungary.

The attack on the Bastille in the French Revolution – though afterwards remembered mainly for the release of the handful of prisoners incarcerated there – was to considerable degree motivated by the structure&#x27;s being a Royal citadel in the midst of revolutionary Paris.

Similarly, after Garibaldi&#x27;s overthrow of Bourbon rule in Palermo, during the 1860 Unification of Italy, Palermo&#x27;s Castellamare Citadel – a symbol of the hated and oppressive former rule – was ceremoniously demolished.

Following Belgium gaining its independence in 1830, a Dutch garrison under General David Hendrik Chassé held out in Antwerp Citadel between 1830 and 1832, while the city had already become part of independent Belgium.

The Siege of the Alcázar in the Spanish Civil War, in which the Nationalists held out against a much larger Republican force for two months until relieved, shows that in some cases a citadel can be effective even in modern warfare; a similar case is the Battle of Huế during the Vietnam War, where a North Vietnamese Army division held the citadel of Huế for 26 days against roughly their own numbers of much better-equipped US and South Vietnamese troops.

===Modern usage===

The Citadelle of Québec (the construction was started in 1673 and completed in 1820) still survives as the largest citadel still in official military operation in North America. It is home to the Royal 22nd Regiment of the Canadian Army and forms part of the Ramparts of Quebec City dating back to 1620s.

Since the mid 20th century, citadels have commonly enclosed military command and control centres, rather than cities or strategic points of defence on the boundaries of a country. These modern citadels are built to protect the command centre from heavy attacks, such as aerial or nuclear bombardment. The military citadels under London in the UK, including the massive underground complex Pindar beneath the Ministry of Defence, are examples, as is the Cheyenne Mountain nuclear bunker in the US.

==Naval term==
On armoured warships, the heavily armoured section of the ship that protects the ammunition and machinery spaces is called the armoured citadel.

A modern naval interpretation refers to the heaviest protected part of the hull as &quot;the vitals&quot;, and the citadel is the semi-armoured freeboard above the vitals. Generally, Anglo-American and German languages follow this while Russian sources/language refer to &quot;the vitals&quot; as цитадель &quot;citadel&quot;. Likewise, Russian literature often refers to the turret of a tank as the &#x27;tower&#x27;.

The safe room on a ship is also called a citadel.

==See also== 
* List of citadels
* Acropolis
* Alcázar
* Arx (Roman)
* Fujian Tulou
* Kasbah, a synonym
* Kremlin (fortification)
* Presidio
* Rocca (fortification)
* List of cities with defensive walls
* List of forts

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q88291" start="2" end="9" title="Citadel" label="citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="50" end="54" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q23413" start="68" end="74" title="castle" label="castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="76" end="84" title="fortress" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q108709" start="121" end="131" title="diminutive" label="diminutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="268" end="281" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q81851" start="287" end="294" title="bastion" label="bastion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="703" end="728" title="Indus Valley civilisation" label="Indus Valley civilisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5725" start="938" end="950" title="Mohenjo-daro" label="Mohenjo-daro"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="1126" end="1134" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q538605" start="1187" end="1194" title="Kültepe" label="Kültepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="1335" end="1342" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1505" end="1519" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q131668" start="1525" end="1534" title="Acropolis" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="1768" end="1774" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16560" start="1798" end="1804" title="palace" label="palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131013" start="1833" end="1852" title="Acropolis of Athens" label="Acropolis of Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q420810" start="1902" end="1913" title="Acrocorinth" label="Acrocorinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="2011" end="2023" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049966" start="2143" end="2157" title="Castro culture" label="Castro culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q14299" start="2234" end="2239" title="Douro" label="Douro"/>
<link wikidata="Q14554" start="2256" end="2261" title="Minho River" label="Minho"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629081" start="2380" end="2399" title="Atlantic Bronze Age" label="Atlantic Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="2441" end="2446" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182558" start="2481" end="2493" title="John T. Koch" label="John T. Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q164566" start="2511" end="2525" title="Barry Cunliffe" label="Barry Cunliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q14591" start="2531" end="2540" title="Ave River" label="Ave River"/>
<link wikidata="Q192601" start="2707" end="2713" title="oppida" label="oppida"/>
<link wikidata="Q188055" start="2891" end="2896" title="siege" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094262" start="2972" end="2992" title="Citânia de Briteiros" label="Citânia de Briteiros"/>
<link wikidata="Q474928" start="2994" end="3012" title="Citânia de Sanfins" label="Citânia de Sanfins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306921" start="3014" end="3033" title="Cividade de Terroso" label="Cividade de Terroso"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3038" end="3057" title="Cividade de Bagunte" label="Cividade de Bagunte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930888" start="3289" end="3305" title="Maccabean Revolt" label="Maccabean Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q93180" start="3318" end="3333" title="Seleucid Empire" label="Seleucid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="3339" end="3350" title="Hellenistic" label="Hellenistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="3351" end="3359" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="3363" end="3372" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275701" start="3442" end="3446" title="Acra (fortress)" label="Acra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3773" end="3784" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="3793" end="3804" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q815184" start="4084" end="4097" title="Siege of Nice" label="Siege of Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q200582" start="4124" end="4134" title="Hayreddin Barbarossa" label="Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="4225" end="4236" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847372" start="4242" end="4255" title="Ivatan people" label="Ivatan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q13740" start="4283" end="4290" title="Batanes" label="Batanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231177" start="4394" end="4400" title="idjang" label="idjang"/>
<link wikidata="Q755170" start="5056" end="5066" title="Dutch Wars" label="Dutch Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="5086" end="5107" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373944" start="5139" end="5147" title="Royal Citadel, Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="5281" end="5297" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="5318" end="5335" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="5446" end="5455" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="5508" end="5516" title="Catalan people" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q301135" start="5821" end="5842" title="Parc de la Ciutadella" label="Parc de la Ciutadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q206170" start="5869" end="5878" title="Citadella" label="Citadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="5882" end="5890" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865480" start="5920" end="5928" title="Bastille" label="Bastille"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="5936" end="5953" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q539" start="6195" end="6204" title="Garibaldi" label="Garibaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="6225" end="6232" title="House of Bourbon" label="Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656" start="6241" end="6248" title="Palermo" label="Palermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="6266" end="6286" title="Unification of Italy" label="Unification of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174716" start="6491" end="6511" title="David Hendrik Chassé" label="David Hendrik Chassé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028868" start="6524" end="6539" title="Antwerp Citadel" label="Antwerp Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q815108" start="6631" end="6651" title="Siege of the Alcázar" label="Siege of the Alcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="6659" end="6676" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q697053" start="6881" end="6894" title="Battle of Huế" label="Battle of Huế"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="6906" end="6917" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="6927" end="6948" title="North Vietnamese Army" label="North Vietnamese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093313" start="7109" end="7128" title="Citadelle of Québec" label="Citadelle of Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617" start="7162" end="7166" title="1673" label="1673"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="7268" end="7281" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159553" start="7301" end="7320" title="Royal 22nd Regiment" label="Royal 22nd Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q25436" start="7328" end="7341" title="Canadian Army" label="Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27675579" start="7364" end="7387" title="Ramparts of Quebec City" label="Ramparts of Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409417" start="7716" end="7746" title="military citadels under London" label="military citadels under London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="7819" end="7838" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21767547" start="7864" end="7896" title="Cheyenne Mountain nuclear bunker" label="Cheyenne Mountain nuclear bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793719" start="8051" end="8067" title="armoured citadel" label="armoured citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129454" start="8494" end="8503" title="safe room" label="safe room"/>
<link wikidata="Q114363292" start="8557" end="8573" title="List of citadels" label="List of citadels"/>
<link wikidata="Q131668" start="8576" end="8585" title="Acropolis" label="Acropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q613611" start="8588" end="8595" title="Alcázar" label="Alcázar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802565" start="8598" end="8609" title="Arx (Roman)" label="Arx (Roman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q718001" start="8612" end="8624" title="Fujian Tulou" label="Fujian Tulou"/>
<link wikidata="Q89468" start="8627" end="8633" title="Kasbah" label="Kasbah"/>
<link wikidata="Q263274" start="8647" end="8670" title="Kremlin (fortification)" label="Kremlin (fortification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323096" start="8673" end="8681" title="Presidio" label="Presidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195705" start="8684" end="8705" title="Rocca (fortification)" label="Rocca (fortification)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864448" start="8708" end="8743" title="List of cities with defensive walls" label="List of cities with defensive walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q287859" start="8746" end="8759" title="List of forts" label="List of forts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6696" wikidata="Q659631" url="?curid=6696" title="Chain mail">
<text>Mail (sometimes spelled maille and often colloquially referred to as chainmail or chain-mail) is a type of armour consisting of small metal rings linked together in a pattern to form a mesh. It was in common military use between the 3rd century BC and the 16th century AD in Europe, while it continued to be used in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East as late as the 17th century. A coat of this armour is often called a hauberk or sometimes a byrnie.

==History==

The earliest examples of surviving mail were found in the Carpathian Basin at a burial in Horný Jatov, Slovakia dated in the 3rd century BC, and in a chieftain&#x27;s burial located in Ciumești, Romania. Its invention is commonly credited to the Celts, but there are examples of Etruscan pattern mail dating from at least the 4th century BC. Mail may have been inspired by the much earlier scale armour. Mail spread to North Africa, West Africa, the Middle East, Central Asia, India, Tibet, South East Asia, and Japan.

Herodotus wrote that the ancient Persians wore scale armour, but mail is also distinctly mentioned in the Avesta, the holy scripture of the Zoroastrian religion that written in the 6th century AD.

Mail continues to be used in the 21st century as a component of stab-resistant body armour, cut-resistant gloves for butchers and woodworkers, shark-resistant wet-suits for defense against shark bites, and a number of other applications.

==Etymology==
The origin of the word &quot;mail&quot; are not fully known. One theory is that it originally derives from the Latin word , meaning &#x27;spot&#x27; or &#x27;opacity&#x27; (as in macula of retina). Another theory relates the word to the old French , meaning &#x27;to hammer&#x27; (related to the modern English word &quot;malleable&quot;). In modern French, &quot;maille&quot; refers to a loop or stitch. The Arabic words &quot;burnus&quot; ( &#x27;burnoose, a hooded cloak&#x27;, also a chasuble worn by Coptic priests) and &quot;barnaza&quot; ( &#x27;to bronze&#x27;) suggest an Arabic influence for the Carolingian armour known as byrnie (see below).

The first attestations of the word &quot;mail&quot; are in Old French and Anglo-Norman: &quot;maille&quot;, &quot;maile&quot;, or &quot;male&quot; or other variants, which became &quot;mailye&quot;, &quot;maille&quot;, &quot;maile&quot;, &quot;male&quot;, or &quot;meile&quot; in Middle English.

Civilizations that used mail invented specific terms for each garment made from it. The standard terms for European mail armour derive from French: leggings are called chausses, a hood is a mail coif, and mittens, mitons. A mail collar hanging from a helmet is a camail or aventail. A shirt made from mail is a hauberk if knee-length and a haubergeon if mid-thigh length. A layer (or multiple layers) of mail sandwiched between layers of fabric is called a jazerant.

A waist-length coat in medieval Europe was called a byrnie, although the exact construction of a byrnie is unclear, including whether it was constructed of mail or other armour types. Noting that the byrnie was the &quot;most highly valued piece of armour&quot; to the Carolingian soldier, Bennet, Bradbury, DeVries, Dickie, and Jestice indicate that:

There is some dispute among historians as to what exactly constituted the Carolingian byrnie. Relying... only on artistic and some literary sources because of the lack of archaeological examples, some believe that it was a heavy leather jacket with metal scales sewn onto it with strong thread. It was also quite long, reaching below the hips and covering most of the arms. Other historians claim instead that the Carolingian byrnie was nothing more than a coat of mail, but longer and perhaps heavier than traditional early medieval mail. Without more certain evidence, this dispute will continue.
==In Europe==

The use of mail as battlefield armour was common during the Iron Age and the Middle Ages, becoming less common over the course of the 16th and 17th centuries when plate armour and more advanced firearms were developed. It is believed that the Roman Republic first came into contact with mail fighting the Gauls in Cisalpine Gaul, now Northern Italy. The Roman army adopted the technology for their troops in the form of the lorica hamata which was used as a primary form of armour through the Imperial period.
After the fall of the Western Empire, much of the infrastructure needed to create plate armour diminished. Eventually the word &quot;mail&quot; came to be synonymous with armour. It was typically an extremely prized commodity, as it was expensive and time-consuming to produce and could mean the difference between life and death in a battle. Historically mail makers were often men, but women also undertook the work: Alice la Haubergere was an armourer who worked in Cheapside in the early 1300s and in York in 1446 Agnes Hecche inherited her father&#x27;s mail making tools to continue her work after his death. Mail from dead combatants was frequently looted and was used by the new owner or sold for a lucrative price. As time went on and infrastructure improved, it came to be used by more soldiers. The oldest intact mail hauberk still in existence is thought to have been worn by Leopold III, Duke of Austria, who died in 1386 during the Battle of Sempach.

By the 14th century, articulated plate armour was commonly used to supplement mail. Eventually mail was supplanted by plate for the most part, as it provided greater protection against windlass crossbows, bludgeoning weapons, and lance charges while maintaining most of the mobility of mail. However, it was still widely used by many soldiers, along with brigandines and padded jacks. These three types of armour made up the bulk of the equipment used by soldiers, with mail being the most expensive. It was sometimes more expensive than plate armour. Mail typically persisted longer in less technologically advanced areas such as Eastern Europe but was in use throughout Europe into the 16th century.

During the late 19th and early 20th century, mail was used as a material for bulletproof vests, most notably by the Wilkinson Sword Company. Results were unsatisfactory; Wilkinson mail worn by the Khedive of Egypt&#x27;s regiment of &quot;Iron Men&quot; was manufactured from split rings which proved to be too brittle, and the rings would fragment when struck by bullets and aggravate the injury. The riveted mail armour worn by the opposing Sudanese Madhists did not have the same problem but also proved to be relatively useless against the firearms of British forces at the battle of Omdurman. During World War I, Wilkinson Sword transitioned from mail to a lamellar design which was the precursor to the flak jacket.
Mail was also used for face protection in World War I. Oculist Captain Cruise of the British Infantry designed a mail fringe to be attached to helmets to protect the upper face. This proved unpopular with soldiers, in spite of being proven to defend against a shrapnel round fired at a distance of . Another invention, a &quot;splatter mask&quot; or &quot;splinter mask&quot;, consisted of rigid upper face protection and a mail veil to protect the lower face, and was used by early tank crews as a measure against flying steel fragments (spalling) inside the vehicle.

==In Asia==

Mail armour was introduced to the Middle East and Asia through the Romans and was adopted by the Sassanid Persians starting in the 3rd century AD, where it was supplemental to the scale and lamellar armour already used. Mail was commonly also used as horse armour for cataphracts and heavy cavalry as well as armour for the soldiers themselves. Asian mail could be just as heavy as the European variety and sometimes had prayer symbols stamped on the rings as a sign of their craftsmanship as well as for divine protection.

Mail armour is mentioned in the Quran as being a gift revealed by Allah to David:

21:80 It was We Who taught him the making of coats of mail for your benefit, to guard you from each other&#x27;s violence: will ye then be grateful? (Yusuf Ali&#x27;s translation)
From the Abbasid Caliphate, mail was quickly adopted in Central Asia by Timur (Tamerlane) and the Sogdians and by India&#x27;s Delhi Sultanate. Mail armour was introduced by the Turks in late 12th century and commonly used by Turk and the Mughal and Suri armies where it eventually became the armour of choice in India. Indian mail was constructed with alternating rows of solid links and round riveted links and it was often integrated with plate protection (mail and plate armour).

=== China ===

Mail was introduced to China when its allies in Central Asia paid tribute to the Tang Emperor in 718 by giving him a coat of &quot;link armour&quot; assumed to be mail. Earliest assumed reference to mail can be found in early 3rd century record by Cao Zhi, being called &quot;chained ring armor&quot;. China first encountered the armour in 384 when its allies in the nation of Kuchi arrived wearing &quot;armour similar to chains&quot;. Once in China, mail was imported but was not produced widely. Due to its flexibility, comfort, and rarity, it was typically the armour of high-ranking guards and those who could afford the exotic import (to show off their social status) rather than the armour of the rank and file, who used more common brigandine, scale, and lamellar types. However, it was one of the few military products that China imported from foreigners. Mail spread to Korea slightly later where it was imported as the armour of imperial guards and generals.

===Japan===

In Japan, mail is called &quot;&quot; which means chain. When the word &quot;kusari&quot; is used in conjunction with an armoured item it usually means that mail makes up the majority of the armour composition. An example of this would be &quot;kusari gusoku&quot; which means chain armour. &quot;Kusari&quot; , , , , , shoulder guards, , and other armoured clothing were produced, even &quot;&quot; socks.

&quot;&quot; was used in samurai armour at least from the time of the Mongol invasion (1270s) but particularly from the Nambokucho Period (1336–1392). The Japanese used many different weave methods including a square 4-in-1 pattern (&quot;so gusari&quot;), a hexagonal 6-in-1 pattern (&quot;hana gusari&quot;) and a European 4-in-1 (&quot;nanban gusari&quot;). The rings of Japanese mail were much smaller than their European counterparts; they would be used in patches to link together plates and to drape over vulnerable areas such as the armpits.

&quot;Riveted kusari&quot; was known and used in Japan. On page 58 of the book &quot;Japanese Arms &amp; Armor: Introduction&quot; by H. Russell Robinson, there is a picture of Japanese riveted kusari, and
this quote from the translated reference of Sakakibara Kozan&#x27;s 1800 book, &quot;The Manufacture of Armour and Helmets in Sixteenth-Century Japan&quot;, shows that the Japanese not only knew of and used riveted kusari but that they manufactured it as well.

... karakuri-namban (riveted namban), with stout links each closed by a rivet. Its invention is credited to Fukushima Dembei Kunitaka, pupil, of Hojo Awa no Kami Ujifusa, but it is also said to be derived directly from foreign models. It is heavy because the links are tinned (biakuro-nagashi) and these are also sharp-edged because they are punched out of iron plate

Butted or split (twisted) links made up the majority of &quot;kusari&quot; links used by the Japanese. Links were either &quot;butted&quot; together meaning that the ends touched each other and were not riveted, or the &quot;kusari&quot; was constructed with links where the wire was turned or twisted two or more times; these split links are similar to the modern split ring commonly used on keychains. The rings were lacquered black to prevent rusting, and were always stitched onto a backing of cloth or leather. The kusari was sometimes concealed entirely between layers of cloth.

&quot;Kusari gusoku&quot; or chain armour was commonly used during the Edo period 1603 to 1868 as a stand-alone defense. According to George Cameron Stone

Entire suits of mail &quot;kusari gusoku&quot; were worn on occasions, sometimes under the ordinary clothing

In his book &quot;Arms and Armor of the Samurai: The History of Weaponry in Ancient Japan&quot;, Ian Bottomley shows a picture of a kusari armour and mentions &quot;&quot; (chain jackets) with detachable arms being worn by samurai police officials during the Edo period. The end of the samurai era in the 1860s, along with the 1876 ban on wearing swords in public, marked the end of any practical use for mail and other armour in Japan. Japan turned to a conscription army and uniforms replaced armour.

==Effectiveness==
Mail&#x27;s resistance to weapons is determined by four factors: linkage type (riveted, butted, or welded), material used (iron versus bronze or steel), weave density (a tighter weave needs a thinner weapon to surpass), and ring thickness (generally ranging from 1.0 to 1.6 mm diameter (18 to 14 gauge) wire in most examples). Mail, if a warrior could afford it, provided a significant advantage when combined with competent fighting techniques.

When the mail was not riveted, a thrust from most sharp weapons could penetrate it. However, when mail was riveted, only a strong well-placed thrust from certain spears, or thin or dedicated mail-piercing swords like the estoc, could penetrate, and a pollaxe or halberd blow could break through the armour. Strong projectile weapons such as stronger self bows, recurve bows, and crossbows could also penetrate riveted mail. Some evidence indicates that during armoured combat, the intention was to actually get around the armour rather than through it—according to a study of skeletons found at the battle of Visby, Gotland, a majority of the skeletons showed wounds on less well protected legs. Although mail was a formidable protection, due to technological advances as time progressed, mail worn under plate armour (and stand-alone mail as well) could be penetrated by the conventional weaponry of another knight.

The flexibility of mail meant that a blow would often injure the wearer, potentially causing serious bruising or fractures, and it was a poor defence against head trauma. Mail-clad warriors typically wore separate rigid helms over their mail coifs for head protection. Likewise, blunt weapons such as maces and warhammers could harm the wearer by their impact without penetrating the armour; usually a soft armour, such as gambeson, was worn under the hauberk. Medieval surgeons were very well capable of setting and caring for bone fractures resulting from blunt weapons. With the poor understanding of hygiene, however, cuts that could get infected were much more of a problem. Thus mail armour proved to be sufficient protection in most situations.

==Manufacture==

Several patterns of linking the rings together have been known since ancient times, with the most common being the 4-to-1 pattern (where each ring is linked with four others). In Europe, the 4-to-1 pattern was completely dominant. Mail was also common in East Asia, primarily Japan, with several more patterns being utilised and an entire nomenclature developing around them.

Historically, in Europe, from the pre-Roman period on, the rings composing a piece of mail would be riveted closed to reduce the chance of the rings splitting open when subjected to a thrusting attack or a hit by an arrow.

Up until the 14th century European mail was made of alternating rows of round riveted rings and solid rings. Sometime during the 14th century European mail makers started to transition from round rivets to wedge-shaped rivets, but continued using alternating rows of solid rings. Eventually European mail makers stopped using solid rings and almost all European mail was made from wedge riveted rings only with no solid rings.

Both were commonly made of wrought iron, but some later pieces were made of heat-treated steel. Wire for the riveted rings was formed by either of two methods. One was to hammer out wrought iron into plates and cut or slit the plates. These thin pieces were then pulled through a draw plate repeatedly until the desired diameter was achieved. Waterwheel-powered drawing mills are pictured in several period manuscripts. Another method was to simply forge down an iron billet into a rod and then proceed to draw it out into wire. The solid links would have been made by punching from a sheet. Guild marks were often stamped on the rings to show their origin and craftsmanship.

Forge welding was also used to create solid links, but there are few possible examples known; the only well-documented example from Europe is that of the camail (mail neck-defence) of the 7th-century Coppergate Helmet found in York. Outside of Europe this practice was more common such as &quot;theta&quot; links from India. Very few examples of historic butted mail have been found, and it is generally accepted that butted mail was never in wide use historically except in Japan, where mail (&quot;kusari&quot;) was commonly made from &quot;butted&quot; links. Butted link mail was also used by the Moros of the Philippines in their mail and plate armours.

==Modern uses==

===Practical uses===

Mail is used as protective clothing for butchers against meat-packing equipment. Workers may wear up to of mail under their white coats. Butchers also commonly wear a single mail glove to protect themselves from self-inflicted injury while cutting meat, as do many oyster shuckers.

Scuba divers sometimes use mail to protect them from sharkbite, as do animal control officers for protection against the animals they handle. In 1980, marine biologist Jeremiah Sullivan patented his design for Neptunic full coverage chain mail shark resistant suits which he had developed for close encounters with sharks.
Shark expert and underwater filmmaker Valerie Taylor was among the first to develop and test shark suits in 1979 while diving with sharks.

Mail is widely used in industrial settings as shrapnel guards and splash guards in metal working operations.

Electrical applications for mail include RF leakage testing and being worn as a Faraday cage suit by tesla coil enthusiasts and high voltage electrical workers.

====Stab-proof vests====
Conventional textile-based ballistic vests are designed to stop soft-nosed bullets but offer little defense from knife attacks. Knife-resistant armour is designed to defend against knife attacks; some of these use layers of metal plates, mail and metallic wires.

===Historical re-enactment===

Many historical reenactment groups, especially those whose focus is Antiquity or the Middle Ages, commonly use mail both as practical armour and for costuming. Mail is especially popular amongst those groups which use steel weapons. A modern hauberk made from 1.5 mm diameter wire with 10 mm inner diameter rings weighs roughly and contains 15,000–45,000 rings.

One of the drawbacks of mail is the uneven weight distribution; the stress falls mainly on shoulders. Weight can be better distributed by wearing a belt over the mail, which provides another point of support.

Mail worn today for re-enactment and recreational use can be made in a variety of styles and materials. Most recreational mail today is made of butted links which are galvanised or stainless steel. This is historically inaccurate but is much less expensive to procure and especially to maintain than historically accurate reproductions. Mail can also be made of titanium, aluminium, bronze, or copper. Riveted mail offers significantly better protection ability as well as historical accuracy than mail constructed with butted links. Japanese mail (&quot;kusari&quot;) is one of the few historically correct examples of mail being constructed with such &quot;butted links&quot;.

===Decorative uses===
Mail remained in use as a decorative and possibly high-status symbol with military overtones long after its practical usefulness had passed. It was frequently used for the epaulettes of military uniforms. It is still used in this form by some regiments of the British Army.

Mail has applications in sculpture and jewellery, especially when made out of precious metals or colourful anodized metals. Mail artwork includes headdresses, decorative wall hangings, ornaments, chess sets, macramé, and jewelry. For these non-traditional applications, hundreds of patterns (commonly referred to as &quot;weaves&quot;) have been invented.

Large-linked mail is occasionally used as BDSM clothing material, with the large links intended for fetishistic purposes.

==In popular culture==
===Video games===
Chainmail armor can be found in multiple games, such as &quot;Elden Ring&quot; and &quot;Minecraft&quot;. It is typically depicted as less expensive than plate mail, with the tradeoff being an inferior defense. Chainmail may also be purely cosmetic and hold no gameplay advantage.

===Film===

In some films, knitted string spray-painted with a metallic paint is used instead of actual mail in order to cut down on cost (an example being &quot;Monty Python and the Holy Grail&quot;, which was filmed on a very small budget). Films more dedicated to costume accuracy often use ABS plastic rings, for the lower cost and weight. Such ABS mail coats were made for &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; film trilogy, in addition to many metal coats. The metal coats are used rarely because of their weight, except in close-up filming where the appearance of ABS rings is distinguishable. A large scale example of the ABS mail used in the &quot;Lord of the Rings&quot; can be seen in the entrance to the Royal Armouries museum in Leeds in the form of a large curtain bearing the logo of the museum. It was acquired from the makers of the film&#x27;s armour, Weta Workshop, when the museum hosted an exhibition of WETA armour from their films. For the film &quot;Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome&quot;, Tina Turner is said to have worn actual mail and she complained how heavy this was. &quot;Game of Thrones&quot; makes use of mail, notably during the &quot;Red Wedding&quot; scene.
==Gallery==
==See also==

=== Mail-based armour ===
* Banded mail
* Hauberk
* Mail and plate armour
* Kusari (Japanese mail armour)
* Lorica hamata
* Lorica plumata with scales attached to a backing of mail
* Tatami (Japanese armour)
* Baju Rantai, type of mail from the Nusantara archipelago

===Armour supplementary to mail===
Typically worn under mail armour if thin or over mail armour if thick:
* Gambeson (also known as quilted armour or a padded jack)

Can be worn over mail armour:
* Brigandine
* Coat of plates
* Lamellar armour
* Mirror armour (supplementary plates worn over mail)
* Scale armour
* Splint armour
* Transitional armour

Others:
* Cataphract
* Proofing (armour)
* Ring armour

==References==
==External links==
* Erik D. Schmid/The Mail Research Society
* 
* The Maille Artisans International League (MAIL) – Hundreds of weaves/tutorials/articles, and gallery pictures
* &quot;Mail: Unchained&quot;, an article taking an in-depth look at the construction and usage of European chain mail
* Construction tips
** The Ringinator - Tool for making jump rings
** The Apprentice Armorer&#x27;s Illustrated Handbook For Making Mail
** The Ring Lord Chainmail Discussion Forum
** Ring Guide – Sizing Specialty Square Rings to Round Weaves
* Ancient Roman originals can be seen on the pages of the Roman Military Equipment Web museum, Romancoins.info
* http://artofchainmail.com/patterns/european/index.html
* http://www.iranicaonline.org/articles/armor-ii
* Chain Mail 101: Learn all about making Chain Mail</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="0" end="4" title="Chain mail" label="Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="24" end="30" title="Chain mail" label="maille"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="69" end="78" title="Chain mail" label="chainmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="82" end="92" title="Chain mail" label="chain-mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886611" start="107" end="113" title="armour" label="armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q643832" start="419" end="426" title="hauberk" label="hauberk"/>
<link wikidata="Q185032" start="522" end="538" title="Carpathian Basin" label="Carpathian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056550" start="649" end="657" title="Ciumești" label="Ciumești"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="659" end="666" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="710" end="715" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138021" start="743" end="751" title="Etruscan military history" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q574602" start="854" end="866" title="scale armour" label="scale armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="984" end="993" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83426" start="1090" end="1096" title="Avesta" label="Avesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9601" start="1124" end="1135" title="Zoroastrianism" label="Zoroastrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q485027" start="1261" end="1272" title="personal armor" label="body armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="1325" end="1330" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="1341" end="1349" title="wetsuit" label="wet-suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q747023" start="1614" end="1630" title="macula of retina" label="macula of retina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016888" start="1884" end="1892" title="Burnous" label="burnoose"/>
<link wikidata="Q215172" start="1923" end="1931" title="chasuble" label="chasuble"/>
<link wikidata="Q643832" start="2069" end="2075" title="Hauberk" label="byrnie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5088372" start="2555" end="2563" title="chausses" label="chausses"/>
<link wikidata="Q25038838" start="2577" end="2586" title="mail coif" label="mail coif"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2601" end="2607" title="mitons" label="mitons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603184" start="2650" end="2668" title="Aventail" label="camail or aventail"/>
<link wikidata="Q643832" start="2698" end="2705" title="hauberk" label="hauberk"/>
<link wikidata="Q643832" start="2727" end="2737" title="haubergeon" label="haubergeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168079" start="2844" end="2852" title="jazerant" label="jazerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="3124" end="3135" title="Charlemagne" label="Carolingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="3882" end="3890" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="3899" end="3910" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="3985" end="3997" title="plate armour" label="plate armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="4016" end="4023" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="4065" end="4079" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="4136" end="4150" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4345530" start="4156" end="4170" title="Northern Italy" label="Northern Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q584516" start="4246" end="4259" title="lorica hamata" label="lorica hamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="4414" end="4426" title="plate armour" label="plate armour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4751" end="4770" title="Alice la Haubergere" label="Alice la Haubergere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4850" end="4862" title="Agnes Hecche" label="Agnes Hecche"/>
<link wikidata="Q275651" start="5220" end="5248" title="Leopold III, Duke of Austria" label="Leopold III, Duke of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q661759" start="5278" end="5295" title="Battle of Sempach" label="Battle of Sempach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391846" start="5331" end="5343" title="plate armour" label="plate armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569863" start="5653" end="5663" title="brigandine" label="brigandine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492928" start="5669" end="5680" title="padded jack" label="padded jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q391752" start="6078" end="6095" title="Ballistic vest" label="bulletproof vests"/>
<link wikidata="Q653630" start="6117" end="6132" title="Wilkinson Sword" label="Wilkinson Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q159378" start="6198" end="6214" title="Isma&amp;#x27;il Pasha" label="Khedive of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137302" start="6579" end="6597" title="battle of Omdurman" label="battle of Omdurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592590" start="6710" end="6721" title="flak jacket" label="flak jacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="6778" end="6785" title="Oculist" label="Oculist"/>
<link wikidata="Q750604" start="6983" end="6991" title="Shrapnel shell" label="shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024411" start="7262" end="7270" title="spalling" label="spalling"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="7403" end="7411" title="Sassanid" label="Sassanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q574574" start="7496" end="7511" title="lamellar armour" label="lamellar armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q204766" start="7574" end="7585" title="cataphracts" label="cataphracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="7863" end="7868" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234801" start="7897" end="7902" title="Allah" label="Allah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41370" start="7906" end="7911" title="David" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q12536" start="8103" end="8120" title="Abbasid Caliphate" label="Abbasid Caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="8150" end="8162" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="8166" end="8171" title="Timur" label="Timur"/>
<link wikidata="Q229411" start="8221" end="8236" title="Delhi Sultanate" label="Delhi Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q84072" start="8272" end="8277" title="Turkish people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="8320" end="8324" title="Turkic peoples" label="Turk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33296" start="8333" end="8339" title="Mughal Empire" label="Mughal"/>
<link wikidata="Q373650" start="8344" end="8348" title="Suri Empire" label="Suri"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="8617" end="8622" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="8675" end="8687" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q698890" start="8842" end="8849" title="Cao Zhi" label="Cao Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244978" start="8971" end="8976" title="Kuchi" label="Kuchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q574574" start="9357" end="9365" title="Lamellar armour" label="lamellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="9581" end="9586" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3671179" start="10011" end="10025" title="Japanese armour" label="samurai armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q264012" start="10106" end="10123" title="Nambokucho Period" label="Nambokucho Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q23946927" start="10787" end="10810" title="Sakakibara Kozan" label="Sakakibara Kozan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="12031" end="12041" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="12827" end="12832" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q131172" start="12847" end="12853" title="welded" label="welded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454997" start="13416" end="13421" title="estoc" label="estoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573577" start="13446" end="13453" title="Pollaxe (polearm)" label="pollaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q185623" start="13457" end="13464" title="halberd" label="halberd"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146658" start="13545" end="13553" title="self bow" label="self bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739293" start="13556" end="13567" title="recurve bow" label="recurve bow"/>
<link wikidata="Q181947" start="13574" end="13582" title="crossbow" label="crossbow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13794" end="13809" title="Battle of Visby#Archaeological excavation" label="battle of Visby"/>
<link wikidata="Q173603" start="14333" end="14338" title="helmet" label="helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q272990" start="14414" end="14419" title="mace (bludgeon)" label="maces"/>
<link wikidata="Q824271" start="14424" end="14434" title="war hammer" label="warhammers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492928" start="14536" end="14544" title="gambeson" label="gambeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212500" start="15360" end="15365" title="rivet" label="rivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q860451" start="15939" end="15951" title="wrought iron" label="wrought iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q198918" start="16192" end="16202" title="draw plate" label="draw plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q146728" start="16255" end="16265" title="Waterwheel" label="Waterwheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231940" start="16380" end="16386" title="Billet (bar stock)" label="billet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703775" start="16589" end="16602" title="Forge welding" label="Forge welding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127298" start="16789" end="16806" title="Coppergate Helmet" label="Coppergate Helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="16816" end="16820" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q863709" start="17224" end="17245" title="mail and plate armour" label="mail and plate armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="17886" end="17892" title="sharks" label="sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15613451" start="17932" end="17946" title="Valerie Taylor (diver)" label="Valerie Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17987" end="17997" title="shark suit" label="shark suit"/>
<link wikidata="Q208138" start="18224" end="18236" title="Faraday cage" label="Faraday cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q657069" start="18631" end="18653" title="historical reenactment" label="historical reenactment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="18694" end="18703" title="Ancient history" label="Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="18711" end="18722" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q616200" start="20073" end="20082" title="epaulette" label="epaulette"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="20161" end="20173" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q567502" start="20283" end="20291" title="anodizing" label="anodized"/>
<link wikidata="Q64826862" start="20759" end="20769" title="Elden Ring" label="Elden Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q49740" start="20786" end="20795" title="Minecraft" label="Minecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q25043" start="21141" end="21172" title="Monty Python and the Holy Grail" label="Monty Python and the Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q143496" start="21273" end="21284" title="Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene" label="ABS plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="21357" end="21403" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="&amp;quot;The Lord of the Rings&amp;quot; film trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283541" start="21691" end="21706" title="Royal Armouries" label="Royal Armouries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236009" start="21845" end="21858" title="Weta Workshop" label="Weta Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q426663" start="21949" end="21975" title="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome" label="Mad Max Beyond Thunderdome"/>
<link wikidata="Q23572" start="22073" end="22088" title="Game of Thrones" label="Game of Thrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854489" start="22218" end="22229" title="Banded mail" label="Banded mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q643832" start="22232" end="22239" title="Hauberk" label="Hauberk"/>
<link wikidata="Q863709" start="22242" end="22263" title="Mail and plate armour" label="Mail and plate armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4538428" start="22266" end="22295" title="Kusari (Japanese mail armour)" label="Kusari (Japanese mail armour)"/>
<link wikidata="Q584516" start="22298" end="22311" title="Lorica hamata" label="Lorica hamata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870322" start="22314" end="22328" title="Lorica plumata" label="Lorica plumata"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934046" start="22373" end="22397" title="Tatami (Japanese armour)" label="Tatami (Japanese armour)"/>
<link wikidata="Q804200" start="22400" end="22411" title="Baju Rantai" label="Baju Rantai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492928" start="22566" end="22574" title="Gambeson" label="Gambeson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569863" start="22656" end="22666" title="Brigandine" label="Brigandine"/>
<link wikidata="Q350324" start="22669" end="22683" title="Coat of plates" label="Coat of plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q574574" start="22686" end="22701" title="Lamellar armour" label="Lamellar armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586550" start="22704" end="22717" title="Mirror armour" label="Mirror armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q574602" start="22758" end="22770" title="Scale armour" label="Scale armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4524079" start="22773" end="22786" title="Splint armour" label="Splint armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q163295" start="22789" end="22808" title="Transitional armour" label="Transitional armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q204766" start="22820" end="22830" title="Cataphract" label="Cataphract"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250020" start="22833" end="22850" title="Proofing (armour)" label="Proofing (armour)"/>
<link wikidata="Q736868" start="22853" end="22864" title="Ring armour" label="Ring armour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6697" wikidata="Q83496" url="?curid=6697" title="Cerberus">
<text>In Greek mythology, Cerberus ( or ; &quot;Kérberos&quot; ), often referred to as the hound of [[Hades]], is a multi-headed dog that guards the gates of the underworld to prevent the dead from leaving. He was the offspring of the monsters Echidna and Typhon, and was usually described as having three heads, a serpent for a tail, and snakes protruding from his body. Cerberus is primarily known for his capture by Heracles, the last of Heracles&#x27; twelve labours.

== Etymology ==
The etymology of Cerberus&#x27; name is uncertain. Ogden refers to attempts to establish an Indo-European etymology as &quot;not yet successful&quot;. It has been claimed to be related to the Sanskrit word सर्वरा &quot;sarvarā&quot;, used as an epithet of one of the dogs of Yama, from a Proto-Indo-European word *&quot;k̑érberos&quot;, meaning &quot;spotted&quot;. Lincoln (1991), among others, critiques this etymology. This etymology was also rejected by Manfred Mayrhofer, who proposed an Austro-Asiatic origin for the word, and Beekes. Lincoln notes a similarity between Cerberus and the Norse mythological dog Garmr, relating both names to a Proto-Indo-European root &quot;*ger-&quot; &quot;to growl&quot; (perhaps with the suffixes &quot;-*m/*b&quot; and &quot;-*r&quot;). However, as Ogden observes, this analysis actually requires &quot;Kerberos&quot; and &quot;Garmr&quot; to be derived from two &quot;different&quot; Indo-European roots (*&quot;ker-&quot; and *&quot;gher-&quot; respectively), and so does not actually establish a relationship between the two names.

Though probably not Greek, Greek etymologies for Cerberus have been offered. An etymology given by Servius (the late-fourth-century commentator on Virgil)—but rejected by Ogden—derives Cerberus from the Greek word &quot;creoboros&quot; meaning &quot;flesh-devouring&quot;. Another suggested etymology derives Cerberus from &quot;Ker berethrou&quot;, meaning &quot;evil of the pit&quot;.

== Descriptions ==
Descriptions of Cerberus vary, including the number of his heads. Cerberus was usually three-headed, though not always. Cerberus had several multi-headed relatives. His father was the multi snake-footed Typhon, and Cerberus was the brother of three other multi-headed monsters, the multi-snake-headed Lernaean Hydra; Orthrus, the two-headed dog that guarded the Cattle of Geryon; and the Chimera, who had three heads: that of a lion, a goat, and a snake. And, like these close relatives, Cerberus was, with only the rare iconographic exception, multi-headed.

In the earliest description of Cerberus, Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Theogony&quot; (c. 8th – 7th century BC), Cerberus has fifty heads, while Pindar (c. 522 – c. 443 BC) gave him one hundred heads. However, later writers almost universally give Cerberus three heads. An exception is the Latin poet Horace&#x27;s Cerberus which has a single dog head, and one hundred snake heads. Perhaps trying to reconcile these competing traditions, Apollodorus&#x27;s Cerberus has three dog heads and the heads of &quot;all sorts of snakes&quot; along his back, while the Byzantine poet John Tzetzes (who probably based his account on Apollodorus) gives Cerberus fifty heads, three of which were dog heads, the rest being the &quot;heads of other beasts of all sorts&quot;.

In art Cerberus is most commonly depicted with two dog heads (visible), never more than three, but occasionally with only one. On one of the two earliest depictions (c. 590–580 BC), a Corinthian cup from Argos (see below), now lost, Cerberus was shown as a normal single-headed dog. The first appearance of a three-headed Cerberus occurs on a mid-sixth-century BC Laconian cup (see below).

Horace&#x27;s many snake-headed Cerberus followed a long tradition of Cerberus being part snake. This is perhaps already implied as early as in Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Theogony&quot;, where Cerberus&#x27; mother is the half-snake Echidna, and his father the snake-headed Typhon. In art, Cerberus is often shown as being part snake, for example the lost Corinthian cup showed snakes protruding from Cerberus&#x27; body, while the mid sixth-century BC Laconian cup gives Cerberus a snake for a tail. In the literary record, the first certain indication of Cerberus&#x27; serpentine nature comes from the rationalized account of Hecataeus of Miletus (fl. 500–494 BC), who makes Cerberus a large poisonous snake. Plato refers to Cerberus&#x27; composite nature, and Euphorion of Chalcis (3rd century BC) describes Cerberus as having multiple snake tails, and presumably in connection to his serpentine nature, associates Cerberus with the creation of the poisonous aconite plant. Virgil has snakes writhe around Cerberus&#x27; neck, Ovid&#x27;s Cerberus has a venomous mouth, necks &quot;vile with snakes&quot;, and &quot;hair inwoven with the threatening snake&quot;, while Seneca gives Cerberus a mane consisting of snakes, and a single snake tail.

Cerberus was given various other traits. According to Euripides, Cerberus not only had three heads but three bodies, and according to Virgil he had multiple backs. Cerberus ate raw flesh (according to Hesiod), had eyes which flashed fire (according to Euphorion), a three-tongued mouth (according to Horace), and acute hearing (according to Seneca).

== The Twelfth Labour of Heracles ==
Cerberus&#x27; only mythology concerns his capture by Heracles. As early as Homer we learn that Heracles was sent by Eurystheus, the king of Tiryns, to bring back Cerberus from Hades the king of the underworld. According to Apollodorus, this was the twelfth and final labour imposed on Heracles. In a fragment from a lost play &quot;Pirithous&quot;, (attributed to either Euripides or Critias) Heracles says that, although Eurystheus commanded him to bring back Cerberus, it was not from any desire to see Cerberus, but only because Eurystheus thought that the task was impossible.

Heracles was aided in his mission by his being an initiate of the Eleusinian Mysteries. Euripides has his initiation being &quot;lucky&quot; for Heracles in capturing Cerberus. And both Diodorus Siculus and Apollodorus say that Heracles was initiated into the Mysteries, in preparation for his descent into the underworld. According to Diodorus, Heracles went to Athens, where Musaeus, the son of Orpheus, was in charge of the initiation rites, while according to Apollodorus, he went to Eumolpus at Eleusis.

Heracles also had the help of Hermes, the usual guide of the underworld, as well as Athena. In the &quot;Odyssey&quot;, Homer has Hermes and Athena as his guides. And Hermes and Athena are often shown with Heracles on vase paintings depicting Cerberus&#x27; capture. By most accounts, Heracles made his descent into the underworld through an entrance at Tainaron, the most famous of the various Greek entrances to the underworld. The place is first mentioned in connection with the Cerberus story in the rationalized account of Hecataeus of Miletus (fl. 500–494 BC), and Euripides, Seneca, and Apolodorus, all have Heracles descend into the underworld there. However Xenophon reports that Heracles was said to have descended at the Acherusian Chersonese near Heraclea Pontica, on the Black Sea, a place more usually associated with Heracles&#x27; exit from the underworld (see below). Heraclea, founded c. 560 BC, perhaps took its name from the association of its site with Heracles&#x27; Cerberian exploit.

=== Theseus and Pirithous ===
While in the underworld, Heracles met the heroes Theseus and Pirithous, where the two companions were being held prisoner by Hades for attempting to carry off Hades&#x27;s wife Persephone. Along with bringing back Cerberus, Heracles also managed (usually) to rescue Theseus, and in some versions Pirithous as well. According to Apollodorus, Heracles found Theseus and Pirithous near the gates of Hades, bound to the &quot;Chair of Forgetfulness, to which they grew and were held fast by coils of serpents&quot;, and when they saw Heracles, &quot;they stretched out their hands as if they should be raised from the dead by his might&quot;, and Heracles was able to free Theseus, but when he tried to raise up Pirithous, &quot;the earth quaked and he let go.&quot;

The earliest evidence for the involvement of Theseus and Pirithous in the Cerberus story, is found on a shield-band relief (c. 560 BC) from Olympia, where Theseus and Pirithous (named) are seated together on a chair, arms held out in supplication, while Heracles approaches, about to draw his sword. The earliest literary mention of the rescue occurs in Euripides, where Heracles saves Theseus (with no mention of Pirithous). In the lost play &quot;Pirithous&quot;, both heroes are rescued, while in the rationalized account of Philochorus, Heracles was able to rescue Theseus, but not Pirithous. In one place Diodorus says Heracles brought back both Theseus and Pirithous, by the favor of Persephone, while in another he says that Pirithous remained in Hades, or according to &quot;some writers of myth&quot; that neither Theseus, nor Pirithous returned. Both are rescued in the &quot;Fabulae&quot; of Hyginus.

=== Capture===

There are various versions of how Heracles accomplished Cerberus&#x27; capture. According to Apollodorus, Heracles asked Hades for Cerberus, and Hades told Heracles he would allow him to take Cerberus only if he &quot;mastered him without the use of the weapons which he carried&quot;, and so, using his lion-skin as a shield, Heracles squeezed Cerberus around the head until he submitted.

In some early sources Cerberus&#x27; capture seems to involve Heracles fighting Hades. Homer (&quot;Iliad&quot; 5.395–397) has Hades injured by an arrow shot by Heracles. A scholium to the &quot;Iliad&quot; passage, explains that Hades had commanded that Heracles &quot;master Cerberus without shield or Iron&quot;. Heracles did this, by (as in Apollodorus) using his lion-skin instead of his shield, and making stone points for his arrows, but when Hades still opposed him, Heracles shot Hades in anger. Consistent with the no iron requirement, on an early-sixth-century BC lost Corinthian cup, Heracles is shown attacking Hades with a stone, while the iconographic tradition, from c. 560 BC, often shows Heracles using his wooden club against Cerberus.

Euripides has Amphitryon ask Heracles: &quot;Did you conquer him in fight, or receive him from the goddess [i.e. Persephone]? To which Heracles answers: &quot;In fight&quot;, and the &quot;Pirithous&quot; fragment says that Heracles &quot;overcame the beast by force&quot;. However, according to Diodorus, Persephone welcomed Heracles &quot;like a brother&quot; and gave Cerberus &quot;in chains&quot; to Heracles. Aristophanes has Heracles seize Cerberus in a stranglehold and run off, while Seneca has Heracles again use his lion-skin as shield, and his wooden club, to subdue Cerberus, after which a quailing Hades and Persephone allow Heracles to lead a chained and submissive Cerberus away. Cerberus is often shown being chained, and Ovid tells that Heracles dragged the three headed Cerberus with chains of adamant.

=== Exit from the underworld ===

There were several locations which were said to be the place where Heracles brought up Cerberus from the underworld. The geographer Strabo (63/64 BC – c. AD 24) reports that &quot;according to the myth writers&quot; Cerberus was brought up at Tainaron, the same place where Euripides has Heracles enter the underworld. Seneca has Heracles enter and exit at Tainaron. Apollodorus, although he has Heracles enter at Tainaron, has him exit at Troezen. The geographer Pausanias tells us that there was a temple at Troezen with &quot;altars to the gods said to rule under the earth&quot;, where it was said that, in addition to Cerberus being &quot;dragged&quot; up by Heracles, Semele was supposed to have been brought up out of the underworld by Dionysus.

Another tradition had Cerberus brought up at Heraclea Pontica (the same place which Xenophon had earlier associated with Heracles&#x27; descent) and the cause of the poisonous plant aconite which grew there in abundance. Herodorus of Heraclea and Euphorion said that when Heracles brought Cerberus up from the underworld at Heraclea, Cerberus &quot;vomited bile&quot; from which the aconite plant grew up. Ovid, also makes Cerberus the cause of the poisonous aconite, saying that on the &quot;shores of Scythia&quot;, upon leaving the underworld, as Cerberus was being dragged by Heracles from a cave, dazzled by the unaccustomed daylight, Cerberus spewed out a &quot;poison-foam&quot;, which made the aconite plants growing there poisonous. Seneca&#x27;s Cerberus too, like Ovid&#x27;s, reacts violently to his first sight of daylight. Enraged, the previously submissive Cerberus struggles furiously, and Heracles and Theseus must together drag Cerberus into the light.

Pausanias reports that according to local legend Cerberus was brought up through a chasm in the earth dedicated to Clymenus (Hades) next to the sanctuary of Chthonia at Hermione, and in Euripides&#x27; &quot;Heracles&quot;, though Euripides does not say that Cerberus was brought out there, he has Cerberus kept for a while in the &quot;grove of Chthonia&quot; at Hermione. Pausanias also mentions that at Mount Laphystion in Boeotia, that there was a statue of Heracles Charops (&quot;with bright eyes&quot;), where the Boeotians said Heracles brought up Cerberus. Other locations which perhaps were also associated with Cerberus being brought out of the underworld include, Hierapolis, Thesprotia, and Emeia near Mycenae.

=== Presented to Eurystheus, returned to Hades ===
In some accounts, after bringing Cerberus up from the underworld, Heracles paraded the captured Cerberus through Greece. Euphorion has Heracles lead Cerberus through Midea in Argolis, as women and children watch in fear, and Diodorus Siculus says of Cerberus, that Heracles &quot;carried him away to the amazement of all and exhibited him to men.&quot; Seneca has Juno complain of Heracles &quot;highhandedly parading the black hound through Argive cities&quot; and Heracles greeted by laurel-wreathed crowds, &quot;singing&quot; his praises.

Then, according to Apollodorus, Heracles showed Cerberus to Eurystheus, as commanded, after which he returned Cerberus to the underworld. However, according to Hesychius of Alexandria, Cerberus escaped, presumably returning to the underworld on his own.

== Principal sources ==

The earliest mentions of Cerberus (c. 8th – 7th century BC) occur in Homer&#x27;s &quot;Iliad&quot; and &quot;Odyssey&quot;, and Hesiod&#x27;s &quot;Theogony&quot;. Homer does not name or describe Cerberus, but simply refers to Heracles being sent by Eurystheus to fetch the &quot;hound of Hades&quot;, with Hermes and Athena as his guides, and, in a possible reference to Cerberus&#x27; capture, that Heracles shot Hades with an arrow. According to Hesiod, Cerberus was the offspring of the monsters Echidna and Typhon, was fifty-headed, ate raw flesh, and was the &quot;brazen-voiced hound of Hades&quot;, who fawns on those that enter the house of Hades, but eats those who try to leave.

Stesichorus (c. 630 – 555 BC) apparently wrote a poem called &quot;Cerberus&quot;, of which virtually nothing remains. However the early-sixth-century BC-lost Corinthian cup from Argos, which showed a single head, and snakes growing out from many places on his body, was possibly influenced by Stesichorus&#x27; poem. The mid-sixth-century BC cup from Laconia gives Cerberus three heads and a snake tail, which eventually becomes the standard representation.

Pindar (c. 522 – c. 443 BC) apparently gave Cerberus one hundred heads. Bacchylides (5th century BC) also mentions Heracles bringing Cerberus up from the underworld, with no further details. Sophocles (c. 495 – c. 405 BC), in his &quot;Women of Trachis&quot;, makes Cerberus three-headed, and in his &quot;Oedipus at Colonus&quot;, the Chorus asks that Oedipus be allowed to pass the gates of the underworld undisturbed by Cerberus, called here the &quot;untamable Watcher of Hades&quot;. Euripides (c. 480 – 406 BC) describes Cerberus as three-headed, and three-bodied, says that Heracles entered the underworld at Tainaron, has Heracles say that Cerberus was not given to him by Persephone, but rather he fought and conquered Cerberus, &quot;for I had been lucky enough to witness the rites of the initiated&quot;, an apparent reference to his initiation into the Eleusinian Mysteries, and says that the capture of Cerberus was the last of Heracles&#x27; labors. The lost play &quot;Pirthous&quot; (attributed to either Euripides or his late contemporary Critias) has Heracles say that he came to the underworld at the command of Eurystheus, who had ordered him to bring back Cerberus alive, not because he wanted to see Cerberus, but only because Eurystheus thought Heracles would not be able to accomplish the task, and that Heracles &quot;overcame the beast&quot; and &quot;received favour from the gods&quot;.
Plato (c. 425 – 348 BC) refers to Cerberus&#x27; composite nature, citing Cerberus, along with Scylla and the Chimera, as an example from &quot;ancient fables&quot; of a creature composed of many animal forms &quot;grown together in one&quot;. Euphorion of Chalcis (3rd century BC) describes Cerberus as having multiple snake tails, and eyes that flashed, like sparks from a blacksmith&#x27;s forge, or the volcanic Mount Etna. From Euphorion, also comes the first mention of a story which told that at Heraclea Pontica, where Cerberus was brought out of the underworld, by Heracles, Cerberus &quot;vomited bile&quot; from which the poisonous aconite plant grew up.

According to Diodorus Siculus (1st century BC), the capture of Cerberus was the eleventh of Heracles&#x27; labors, the twelfth and last being stealing the Apples of the Hesperides. Diodorus says that Heracles thought it best to first go to Athens to take part in the Eleusinian Mysteries, &quot;Musaeus, the son of Orpheus, being at that time in charge of the initiatory rites&quot;, after which, he entered into the underworld &quot;welcomed like a brother by Persephone&quot;, and &quot;receiving the dog Cerberus in chains he carried him away to the amazement of all and exhibited him to men.&quot;

In Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot; (1st century BC), Aeneas and the Sibyl encounter Cerberus in a cave, where he &quot;lay at vast length&quot;, filling the cave &quot;from end to end&quot;, blocking the entrance to the underworld. Cerberus is described as &quot;triple-throated&quot;, with &quot;three fierce mouths&quot;, multiple &quot;large backs&quot;, and serpents writhing around his neck. The Sibyl throws Cerberus a loaf laced with honey and herbs to induce sleep, enabling Aeneas to enter the underworld, and so apparently for Virgil—contradicting Hesiod—Cerberus guarded the underworld against entrance. Later Virgil describes Cerberus, in his bloody cave, crouching over half-gnawed bones. In his &quot;Georgics&quot;, Virgil refers to Cerberus, his &quot;triple jaws agape&quot; being tamed by Orpheus&#x27; playing his lyre.

Horace (65 – 8 BC) also refers to Cerberus yielding to Orpheus&#x27; lyre, here Cerberus has a single dog head, which &quot;like a Fury&#x27;s is fortified by a hundred snakes&quot;, with a &quot;triple-tongued mouth&quot; oozing &quot;fetid breath and gore&quot;.

Ovid (43 BC – AD 17/18) has Cerberus&#x27; mouth produce venom, and like Euphorion, makes Cerberus the cause of the poisonous plant aconite. According to Ovid, Heracles dragged Cerberus from the underworld, emerging from a cave &quot;where &#x27;tis fabled, the plant grew / on soil infected by Cerberian teeth&quot;, and dazzled by the daylight, Cerberus spewed out a &quot;poison-foam&quot;, which made the aconite plants growing there poisonous.
Seneca, in his tragedy &quot;Hercules Furens&quot; gives a detailed description of Cerberus and his capture.
Seneca&#x27;s Cerberus has three heads, a mane of snakes, and a snake tail, with his three heads being covered in gore, and licked by the many snakes which surround them, and with hearing so acute that he can hear &quot;even ghosts&quot;. Seneca has Heracles use his lion-skin as shield, and his wooden club, to beat Cerberus into submission, after which Hades and Persephone, quailing on their thrones, let Heracles lead a chained and submissive Cerberus away. But upon leaving the underworld, at his first sight of daylight, a frightened Cerberus struggles furiously, and Heracles, with the help of Theseus (who had been held captive by Hades, but released, at Heracles&#x27; request) drag Cerberus into the light. Seneca, like Diodorus, has Heracles parade the captured Cerberus through Greece.

Apollodorus&#x27; Cerberus has three dog-heads, a serpent for a tail, and the heads of many snakes on his back. According to Apollodorus, Heracles&#x27; twelfth and final labor was to bring back Cerberus from Hades. Heracles first went to Eumolpus to be initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries. Upon his entering the underworld, all the dead flee Heracles except for Meleager and the Gorgon Medusa. Heracles drew his sword against Medusa, but Hermes told Heracles that the dead are mere &quot;empty phantoms&quot;. Heracles asked Hades (here called Pluto) for Cerberus, and Hades said that Heracles could take Cerberus provided he was able to subdue him without using weapons. Heracles found Cerberus at the gates of Acheron, and with his arms around Cerberus, though being bitten by Cerberus&#x27; serpent tail, Heracles squeezed until Cerberus submitted. Heracles carried Cerberus away, showed him to Eurystheus, then returned Cerberus to the underworld.

In an apparently unique version of the story, related by the sixth-century AD Pseudo-Nonnus, Heracles descended into Hades to abduct Persephone, and killed Cerberus on his way back up.

== Iconography ==
The capture of Cerberus was a popular theme in ancient Greek and Roman art. The earliest depictions date from the beginning of the sixth century BC. One of the two earliest depictions, a Corinthian cup (c. 590–580 BC) from Argos (now lost), shows a naked Heracles, with quiver on his back and bow in his right hand, striding left, accompanied by Hermes. Heracles threatens Hades with a stone, who flees left, while a goddess, perhaps Persephone or possibly Athena, standing in front of Hades&#x27; throne, prevents the attack. Cerberus, with a single canine head and snakes rising from his head and body, flees right. On the far right a column indicates the entrance to Hades&#x27; palace. Many of the elements of this scene—Hermes, Athena, Hades, Persephone, and a column or portico—are common occurrences in later works. The other earliest depiction, a relief &quot;pithos&quot; fragment from Crete (c. 590–570 BC), is thought to show a single lion-headed Cerberus with a snake (open-mouthed) over his back being led to the right.

A mid-sixth-century BC Laconian cup by the Hunt Painter adds several new features to the scene which also become common in later works: three heads, a snake tail, Cerberus&#x27; chain and Heracles&#x27; club. Here Cerberus has three canine heads, is covered by a shaggy coat of snakes, and has a tail which ends in a snake head. He is being held on a chain leash by Heracles who holds his club raised over head.

In Greek art, the vast majority of depictions of Heracles and Cerberus occur on Attic vases. Although the lost Corinthian cup shows Cerberus with a single dog head, and the relief &quot;pithos&quot; fragment (c. 590–570 BC) apparently shows a single lion-headed Cerberus, in Attic vase painting Cerberus usually has two dog heads. In other art, as in the Laconian cup, Cerberus is usually three-headed. Occasionally in Roman art Cerberus is shown with a large central lion head and two smaller dog heads on either side.

As in the Corinthian and Laconian cups (and possibly the relief &quot;pithos&quot; fragment), Cerberus is often depicted as part snake. In Attic vase painting, Cerberus is usually shown with a snake for a tail or a tail which ends in the head of a snake. Snakes are also often shown rising from various parts of his body including snout, head, neck, back, ankles, and paws.

Two Attic amphoras from Vulci, one (c. 530–515 BC) by the Bucci Painter (Munich 1493), the other (c. 525–510 BC) by the Andokides painter (Louvre F204), in addition to the usual two heads and snake tail, show Cerberus with a mane down his necks and back, another typical Cerberian feature of Attic vase painting. Andokides&#x27; amphora also has a small snake curling up from each of Cerberus&#x27; two heads.

Besides this lion-like mane and the occasional lion-head mentioned above, Cerberus was sometimes shown with other leonine features. A pitcher (c. 530–500) shows Cerberus with mane and claws, while a first-century BC sardonyx cameo shows Cerberus with leonine body and paws. In addition, a limestone relief fragment from Taranto (c. 320–300 BC) shows Cerberus with three lion-like heads.

During the second quarter of the 5th century BC the capture of Cerberus disappears from Attic vase painting. After the early third century BC, the subject becomes rare everywhere until the Roman period. In Roman art the capture of Cerberus is usually shown together with other labors. Heracles and Cerberus are usually alone, with Heracles leading Cerberus.

==Cerberus rationalized==
At least as early as the 6th century BC, some ancient writers attempted to explain away various fantastical features of Greek mythology; included in these are various rationalized accounts of the Cerberus story. The earliest such account (late 6th century BC) is that of Hecataeus of Miletus. In his account Cerberus was not a dog at all, but rather simply a large venomous snake, which lived on Tainaron. The serpent was called the &quot;hound of Hades&quot; only because anyone bitten by it died immediately, and it was this snake that Heracles brought to Eurystheus. The geographer Pausanias (who preserves for us Hecataeus&#x27; version of the story) points out that, since Homer does not describe Cerberus, Hecataeus&#x27; account does not necessarily conflict with Homer, since Homer&#x27;s &quot;Hound of Hades&quot; may not in fact refer to an actual dog.

Other rationalized accounts make Cerberus out to be a normal dog. According to Palaephatus (4th century BC) Cerberus was one of the two dogs who guarded the cattle of Geryon, the other being Orthrus. Geryon lived in a city named Tricranium (in Greek &quot;Tricarenia&quot;, &quot;Three-Heads&quot;), from which name both Cerberus and Geryon came to be called &quot;three-headed&quot;. Heracles killed Orthus, and drove away Geryon&#x27;s cattle, with Cerberus following along behind. Molossus, a Mycenaen, offered to buy Cerberus from Eurystheus (presumably having received the dog, along with the cattle, from Heracles). But when Eurystheus refused, Molossus stole the dog and penned him up in a cave in Tainaron. Eurystheus commanded Heracles to find Cerberus and bring him back. After searching the entire Peloponnesus, Heracles found where it was said Cerberus was being held, went down into the cave, and brought up Cerberus, after which it was said: &quot;Heracles descended through the cave into Hades and brought up Cerberus.&quot;

In the rationalized account of Philochorus, in which Heracles rescues Theseus, Perithous is eaten by Cerberus. In this version of the story, Aidoneus (i.e., &quot;Hades&quot;) is the mortal king of the Molossians, with a wife named Persephone, a daughter named Kore (another name for the goddess Persephone) and a large mortal dog named Cerberus, with whom all suitors of his daughter were required to fight. After having stolen Helen, to be Theseus&#x27; wife, Theseus and Perithous, attempt to abduct Kore, for Perithous, but Aidoneus catches the two heroes, imprisons Theseus, and feeds Perithous to Cerberus. Later, while a guest of Aidoneus, Heracles asks Aidoneus to release Theseus, as a favor, which Aidoneus grants.

A 2nd-century AD Greek known as Heraclitus the paradoxographer (not to be confused with the 5th-century BC Greek philosopher Heraclitus)—claimed that Cerberus had two pups that were never away from their father, which made Cerberus appear to be three-headed.

==Cerberus allegorized==
Servius, a medieval commentator on Virgil&#x27;s &quot;Aeneid&quot;, derived Cerberus&#x27; name from the Greek word &quot;creoboros&quot; meaning &quot;flesh-devouring&quot; (see above), and held that Cerberus symbolized the corpse-consuming earth, with Heracles&#x27; triumph over Cerberus representing his victory over earthly desires. Later, the mythographer Fulgentius, allegorizes Cerberus&#x27; three heads as representing the three origins of human strife: &quot;nature, cause, and accident&quot;, and (drawing on the same flesh-devouring etymology as Servius) as symbolizing &quot;the three ages—infancy, youth, old age, at which death enters the world.&quot; The Byzantine historian and bishop Eusebius wrote that Cerberus was represented with three heads, because the positions of the sun above the earth are three—rising, midday, and setting.

The later Vatican Mythographers repeat and expand upon the traditions of Servius and Fulgentius. All three Vatican Mythographers repeat Servius&#x27; derivation of Cerberus&#x27; name from &quot;creoboros&quot;. The Second Vatican Mythographer repeats (nearly word for word) what Fulgentius had to say about Cerberus, while the Third Vatican Mythographer, in another very similar passage to Fugentius&#x27;, says (more specifically than Fugentius), that for &quot;the philosophers&quot; Cerberus represented hatred, his three heads symbolizing the three kinds of human hatred: natural, causal, and casual (i.e. accidental).

The Second and Third Vatican Mythographers, note that the three brothers Zeus, Poseidon and Hades each have tripartite insignia, associating Hades&#x27; three-headed Cerberus, with Zeus&#x27; three-forked thunderbolt, and Poseidon&#x27;s three-pronged trident, while the Third Vatican Mythographer adds that &quot;some philosophers think of Cerberus as the tripartite earth: Asia, Africa, and Europe. This earth, swallowing up bodies, sends souls to Tartarus.&quot;

Virgil described Cerberus as &quot;ravenous&quot; (&quot;fame rabida&quot;), and a rapacious Cerberus became proverbial. Thus Cerberus came to symbolize avarice, and so, for example, in Dante&#x27;s &quot;Inferno,&quot; Cerberus is placed in the Third Circle of Hell, guarding over the gluttons, where he &quot;rends the spirits, flays and quarters them,&quot; and Dante (perhaps echoing Servius&#x27; association of Cerberus with earth) has his guide Virgil take up handfuls of earth and throw them into Cerberus&#x27; &quot;rapacious gullets.&quot;

== Namesakes ==
In the constellation Cerberus introduced by Johannes Hevelius in 1687, Cerberus is drawn as a three-headed snake, held in Hercules&#x27; hand (previously these stars had been depicted as a branch of the tree on which grew the Apples of the Hesperides).

In 1829, French naturalist Georges Cuvier gave the name &quot;Cerberus&quot; to a genus of Asian snakes, which are commonly called &quot;dog-faced water snakes&quot; in English.

The Serbian hard rock band Kerber, formed in 1981 by members Goran Šepa, Tomislav Nikolić and Branislav Božinović, is named after Cerberus.

In 1988 the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) developed Kerberos, a computer-network authentication protocol, named after Cerberus.

In 2023 European heatwaves, the most significant of which was named &quot;Cerberus Heatwave&quot;, which brought the hottest temperatures ever recorded in Europe.

== See also ==
* List of Greek mythological creatures
* Sharvara and Shyama of Hindu mythology
* Dormarch – part of the Cŵn Annwn
* Hellhound
* Ammit, a chthonic creature in Egyptian mythology
* Cadejo

== Notes ==
== References ==

* Apollodorus, &quot;Apollodorus, The Library, with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Apuleius, &quot;Metamorphoses (The Golden Ass)&quot;, Volume I: Books 1–6. Edited and translated by J. Arthur Hanson. Loeb Classical Library No. 44. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1996. Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Aristophanes, &quot;Frogs&quot;, Matthew Dillon, Ed., Perseus Digital Library, Tufts University, 1995. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Bacchylides, &quot;Odes&quot;, translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1991. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Bloomfield, Maurice, &quot;Cerberus, the Dog of Hades: The History of an Idea&quot;, Open Court publishing Company, 1905. Online version at Internet Archive
* Bowra, C. M., &quot;Greek Lyric Poetry: From Alcman to Simonides&quot;, Clarendon Press, 2001. .
* Diodorus Siculus, &quot;Diodorus Siculus: The Library of History&quot;. Translated by C. H. Oldfather. Twelve volumes. Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989.
* Euripides. &quot;Fragments: Oedipus-Chrysippus. Other Fragments&quot;. Edited and translated by Christopher Collard, Martin Cropp. Loeb Classical Library No. 506. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2009.
* Euripides, &quot;Heracles&quot;, translated by E. P. Coleridge in &quot;The Complete Greek Drama&quot;, edited by Whitney J. Oates and Eugene O&#x27;Neill Jr. Volume 1. New York. Random House. 1938. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Fowler, R. L. (2000), &quot;Early Greek Mythography: Volume 1: Text and Introduction&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2000. .
* Fowler, R. L. (2013), &quot;Early Greek Mythography: Volume 2: Commentary&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2013. .
* Freeman, Kathleen, &quot;Ancilla to the Pre-Socratic Philosophers: A Complete Translation of the Fragments in Diels, Fragmente Der Vorsokratiker&quot;, Harvard University Press, 1983. .
* Gantz, Timothy, &quot;Early Greek Myth: A Guide to Literary and Artistic Sources&quot;, Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996, Two volumes: (Vol. 1), (Vol. 2).
* Hard, Robin, &quot;The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of Greek Mythology&quot;&quot;, Psychology Press, 2004, . Google Books.
* Harding, Phillip, &quot;The Story of Athens: The Fragments of the Local Chronicles of Attika&quot;, Routledge, 2007. .
* Hawes, Greta, &quot;Rationalizing Myth in Antiquity&quot;, OUP Oxford, 2014. .
* Hesiod, &quot;Theogony&quot;, in &quot;The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White&quot;, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer, &quot;The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Homer; &quot;The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hopman, Marianne Govers, &quot;Scylla: Myth, Metaphor, Paradox&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2013. .
* Horace, &quot;The Odes and Carmen Saeculare of Horace&quot;. John Conington. trans. London. George Bell and Sons. 1882. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Hyginus, &quot;The Myths of Hyginus&quot;. Edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.
* Kirk, G. S. 1990 &quot;The Iliad: A Commentary: Volume 2, Books 5–8&quot;, .
* Lansing, Richard (editor), &quot;The Dante Encyclopedia&quot;, Routledge, 2010. .
* Lightfoot, J. L. &quot;Hellenistic Collection: Philitas. Alexander of Aetolia. Hermesianax. Euphorion. Parthenius&quot;. Edited and translated by J. L. Lightfoot. Loeb Classical Library No. 508. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2010. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Lucan, &quot;Pharsalia&quot;, Sir Edward Ridley. London. Longmans, Green, and Co. 1905. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Markantonatos, Andreas, &quot;Tragic Narrative: A Narratological Study of Sophocles&#x27; Oedipus at Colonus&quot;, Walter de Gruyter, 2002. .
* Nimmo Smith, Jennifer, &quot;A Christian&#x27;s Guide to Greek Culture: The Pseudo-nonnus Commentaries on Sermons 4, 5, 39 and 43&quot;. Liverpool University Press, 2001. .
* Ogden, Daniel (2013a), &quot;Drakōn: Dragon Myth and Serpent Cult in the Greek and Roman Worlds&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2013. .
* Ogden, Daniel (2013b), &quot;Dragons, Serpents, and Slayers in the Classical and early Christian Worlds: A sourcebook&quot;, Oxford University Press. .
* Ovid. &quot;Heroides. Amores&quot;. Translated by Grant Showerman. Revised by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library 41. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1977. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Ovid, &quot;Metamorphoses&quot;, Brookes More. Boston. Cornhill Publishing Co. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Papadopoulou, Thalia, &quot;Heracles and Euripidean Tragedy&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2005. .
* Pausanias, &quot;Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes&quot;. Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pepin, Ronald E., &quot;The Vatican Mythographers&quot;, Fordham University Press, 2008. 
* Pindar, &quot;Odes&quot;, Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Pipili, Maria, &quot;Laconian Iconography of the Sixth Century B.C.&quot;, Oxford University, 1987.
* Plato, &quot;Republic Books 6–10&quot;, Translated by Paul Shorey, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1969. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Plutarch. &quot;Lives, Volume I: Theseus and Romulus. Lycurgus and Numa. Solon and Publicola&quot;. Translated by Bernadotte Perrin. Loeb Classical Library No. 46. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1914. . &quot;Theseus&quot; at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Propertius &quot;Elegies&quot; Edited and translated by G. P. Goold. Loeb Classical Library 18. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1990. Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Quintus Smyrnaeus, &quot;Quintus Smyrnaeus: The Fall of Troy&quot;, Translator: A.S. Way; Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA, 1913. Internet Archive
* Room, Adrian, &quot;Who&#x27;s Who in Classical Mythology&quot;, Gramercy Books, 2003. .
* Schefold, Karl (1966), &quot;Myth and Legend in Early Greek Art&quot;, London, Thames and Hudson.
* Schefold, Karl (1992), &quot;Gods and Heroes in Late Archaic Greek Art&quot;, assisted by Luca Giuliani, Cambridge University Press, 1992. .
* Seneca, &quot;Tragedies, Volume I: Hercules. Trojan Women. Phoenician Women. Medea. Phaedra&quot;. Edited and translated by John G. Fitch. Loeb Classical Library No. 62. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2002. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Seneca, &quot;Tragedies, Volume II: Oedipus. Agamemnon. Thyestes. Hercules on Oeta. Octavia&quot;. Edited and translated by John G. Fitch. Loeb Classical Library No. 78. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2004. . Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Smallwood, Valerie, &quot;M. Herakles and Kerberos (Labour XI)&quot; in &quot;Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC)&quot; V.1 Artemis Verlag, Zürich and Munich, 1990. . pp. 85–100.
* Sophocles, &quot;Women of Trachis&quot;, Translated by Robert Torrance. Houghton Mifflin. 1966. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
* Statius, &quot;Statius with an English Translation by J. H. Mozley&quot;, Volume I, &quot;Silvae&quot;, &quot;Thebaid&quot;, Books I–IV, Loeb Classical Library No. 206, London: William Heinemann, Ltd., New York: G. P. Putnamm&#x27;s Sons, 1928. . Internet Archive
* Statius, &quot;Statius with an English Translation by J. H. Mozley&quot;, Volume II, &quot;Thebaid&quot;, Books V–XII, &quot;Achilleid&quot;, Loeb Classical Library No. 207, London: William Heinemann, Ltd., New York: G. P. Putnamm&#x27;s Sons, 1928. . Internet Archive
* Stern, Jacob, &quot;Palaephatus Πεπὶ Ὰπίστων, On Unbelievable Tales&quot;, Bolchazy-Carducci Publishers, 1996. .
* Trypanis, C. A., Gelzer, Thomas; Whitman, Cedric, &quot;CALLIMACHUS, MUSAEUS, Aetia, Iambi, Hecale and Other Fragments. Hero and Leander&quot;, Harvard University Press, 1975. .
* Tzetzes, &quot;Chiliades&quot;, editor Gottlieb Kiessling, F.C.G. Vogel, 1826. (English translation, Books II–IV, by Gary Berkowitz. Internet Archive).
* Virgil, &quot;Aeneid&quot;, Theodore C. Williams. trans. Boston. Houghton Mifflin Co. 1910. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* Virgil, &quot;Bucolics, Aeneid, and Georgics of Vergil&quot;. J. B. Greenough. Boston. Ginn &amp; Co. 1900. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library
* West, David, &quot;Horace, Odes 3&quot;, Oxford University Press, 2002. .
* West, M. L. (2003), &quot;Greek Epic Fragments: From the Seventh to the Fifth Centuries BC&quot;. Edited and translated by Martin L. West. Loeb Classical Library No. 497. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2003. Online version at Harvard University Press.
* Whitbread, Leslie George, &quot;Fulgentius the Mythographer&quot;. Columbus: Ohio State University Press, 1971.
* Woodford, Susan, Spier, Jeffrey, &quot;Kerberos&quot;, in &quot;Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC)&quot; VI.1 Artemis Verlag, Zürich and Munich, 1992. . pp. 24–32.
* Xenophon, &quot;Anabasis&quot; in &quot;Xenophon in Seven Volumes&quot;, 3. Carleton L. Brownson. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts; William Heinemann, Ltd., London. 1922. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.
== External links ==
*
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3" end="18" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q83496" start="20" end="28" title="Cerberus" label="Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83496" start="85" end="103" title="Cerberus" label="hound of [[Hades]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q175231" start="110" end="122" title="polycephaly" label="multi-headed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521549" start="156" end="166" title="Greek underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="238" end="245" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="250" end="256" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="413" end="421" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233460" start="450" end="464" title="Labours of Heracles" label="twelve labours"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="675" end="683" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490503" start="750" end="762" title="Sharvara and Shyama" label="dogs of Yama"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="771" end="790" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q84591" start="941" end="958" title="Manfred Mayrhofer" label="Manfred Mayrhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508757" start="1016" end="1022" title="Robert S. P. Beekes" label="Beekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="1076" end="1094" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythological"/>
<link wikidata="Q213932" start="1099" end="1104" title="Garmr" label="Garmr"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="1661" end="1668" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="1709" end="1715" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="2172" end="2178" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170379" start="2270" end="2284" title="Lernaean Hydra" label="Lernaean Hydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q336230" start="2286" end="2293" title="Orthrus" label="Orthrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q86805" start="2341" end="2347" title="Geryon" label="Geryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182790" start="2357" end="2364" title="Chimera (mythology)" label="Chimera"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="2570" end="2576" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="2590" end="2598" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="2664" end="2670" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="2820" end="2826" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="2957" end="2968" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="3080" end="3089" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="3095" end="3107" title="John Tzetzes" label="John Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="3467" end="3474" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="3487" end="3492" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="3647" end="3654" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="3900" end="3907" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="4296" end="4316" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="4379" end="4384" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q921175" start="4432" end="4452" title="Euphorion of Chalcis" label="Euphorion of Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q155904" start="4631" end="4638" title="Aconitum" label="aconite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="4646" end="4652" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="4699" end="4703" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="4841" end="4847" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="4972" end="4981" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="5382" end="5387" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="5423" end="5433" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217379" start="5447" end="5453" title="Tiryns" label="Tiryns"/>
<link wikidata="Q41410" start="5483" end="5488" title="Hades" label="Hades"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="5530" end="5541" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="5678" end="5687" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q294092" start="5691" end="5698" title="Critias" label="Critias"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="5955" end="5975" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="6075" end="6091" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223779" start="6183" end="6210" title="katabasis" label="descent into the underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q728059" start="6266" end="6273" title="Musaeus of Athens" label="Musaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="6286" end="6293" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="6316" end="6332" title="initiation rites" label="initiation rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125049" start="6377" end="6385" title="Eumolpus" label="Eumolpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q204905" start="6389" end="6396" title="Eleusis" label="Eleusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="6429" end="6435" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="6483" end="6489" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="6504" end="6511" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q849911" start="6753" end="6761" title="Tainaron" label="Tainaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="6927" end="6947" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="6981" end="6987" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="7066" end="7074" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q302511" start="7158" end="7174" title="Heraclea Pontica" label="Heraclea Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="7183" end="7192" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="7487" end="7494" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q502156" start="7499" end="7508" title="Pirithous" label="Pirithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="7615" end="7625" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38888" start="8342" end="8349" title="Olympia, Greece" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q266299" start="8730" end="8741" title="Philochorus" label="Philochorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="8853" end="8860" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q502156" start="8865" end="8874" title="Pirithous" label="Pirithous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738147" start="9088" end="9095" title="Fabulae" label="Fabulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q206214" start="10292" end="10302" title="Amphitryon" label="Amphitryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195566" start="11091" end="11098" title="adamant" label="adamant"/>
<link wikidata="Q581494" start="11575" end="11582" title="Troezen" label="Troezen"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="11599" end="11608" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q776139" start="11809" end="11815" title="Semele" label="Semele"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="11878" end="11886" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302511" start="11934" end="11950" title="Heraclea Pontica" label="Heraclea Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q155904" start="12071" end="12078" title="Aconitum" label="aconite"/>
<link wikidata="Q720494" start="12110" end="12131" title="Herodorus" label="Herodorus of Heraclea"/>
<link wikidata="Q845909" start="12392" end="12399" title="Scythia" label="Scythia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699013" start="13018" end="13026" title="Chthonia" label="Chthonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q994564" start="13030" end="13038" title="Ermioni" label="Hermione"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699013" start="13207" end="13215" title="Chthonia" label="Chthonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067673" start="13332" end="13339" title="Charops (mythology)" label="Charops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428276" start="13537" end="13547" title="Hierapolis" label="Hierapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12760042" start="13549" end="13559" title="Thesprotia" label="Thesprotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q132564" start="13576" end="13583" title="Mycenae" label="Mycenae"/>
<link wikidata="Q191897" start="13812" end="13819" title="Argolis" label="Argolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="13862" end="13878" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q443510" start="14341" end="14364" title="Hesychius of Alexandria" label="Hesychius of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="14530" end="14535" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8275" start="14549" end="14554" title="Iliad" label="Iliad"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="14571" end="14578" title="Odyssey" label="Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="14590" end="14596" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="14610" end="14618" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q212087" start="14712" end="14722" title="Eurystheus" label="Eurystheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="14769" end="14775" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="14780" end="14786" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="14911" end="14917" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="14962" end="14969" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="14974" end="14980" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332797" start="15153" end="15164" title="Stesichorus" label="Stesichorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="15312" end="15319" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q189901" start="15332" end="15337" title="Argos, Peloponnese" label="Argos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="15505" end="15512" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="15613" end="15619" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q310681" start="15685" end="15696" title="Bacchylides" label="Bacchylides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="15804" end="15813" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="15849" end="15865" title="Women of Trachis" label="Women of Trachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q294001" start="15919" end="15937" title="Oedipus at Colonus" label="Oedipus at Colonus"/>
<link wikidata="Q130890" start="15966" end="15973" title="Oedipus" label="Oedipus"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="16102" end="16111" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="16479" end="16499" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q294092" start="16670" end="16677" title="Critias" label="Critias"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="17029" end="17034" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q193115" start="17124" end="17130" title="Scylla" label="Scylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q921175" start="17273" end="17293" title="Euphorion of Chalcis" label="Euphorion of Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="17445" end="17455" title="Mount Etna" label="Mount Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q302511" start="17532" end="17548" title="Heraclea Pontica" label="Heraclea Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q155904" start="17672" end="17679" title="Aconitum" label="aconite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="17709" end="17725" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165938" start="17851" end="17875" title="Apples of the Hesperides" label="Apples of the Hesperides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="17936" end="17942" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="17963" end="17983" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q728059" start="17991" end="17998" title="Musaeus of Athens" label="Musaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q174353" start="18011" end="18018" title="Orpheus" label="Orpheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q45967" start="18157" end="18167" title="Persephone" label="Persephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="18302" end="18308" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="18322" end="18328" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="18353" end="18359" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q762835" start="18368" end="18373" title="Cumaean Sibyl" label="Sibyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="18783" end="18789" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q674439" start="19015" end="19023" title="Georgics" label="Georgics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="19140" end="19146" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="19406" end="19410" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="19855" end="19861" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3785162" start="19884" end="19899" title="Hercules (Seneca)" label="Hercules Furens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125049" start="21002" end="21010" title="Eumolpus" label="Eumolpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="21036" end="21056" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q321541" start="21130" end="21138" title="Meleager" label="Meleager"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="21147" end="21153" title="Gorgon" label="Gorgon"/>
<link wikidata="Q160730" start="21154" end="21160" title="Medusa" label="Medusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q191087" start="21480" end="21487" title="Acheron" label="Acheron"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962922" start="21799" end="21812" title="Pseudo-Nonnus" label="Pseudo-Nonnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="22112" end="22119" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160695" start="22793" end="22799" title="pithos" label="pithos"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="22820" end="22825" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="22982" end="22989" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23002" end="23014" title="Hunt Painter" label="Hunt Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="23452" end="23457" title="Attica" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="23647" end="23652" title="Attica" label="Attic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24326" end="24339" title="Bucci Painter" label="Bucci Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q492239" start="24388" end="24405" title="Andokides painter" label="Andokides painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q180884" start="24895" end="24903" title="sardonyx" label="sardonyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="24999" end="25006" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q242270" start="25723" end="25743" title="Hecataeus of Miletus" label="Hecataeus of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849911" start="25848" end="25856" title="Tainaron" label="Tainaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q580565" start="26396" end="26407" title="Palaephatus" label="Palaephatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q86805" start="26484" end="26490" title="Geryon" label="Geryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q336230" start="26508" end="26515" title="Orthrus" label="Orthrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q266299" start="27389" end="27400" title="Philochorus" label="Philochorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q827399" start="27560" end="27570" title="Molossians" label="Molossians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5732548" start="28116" end="28146" title="Heraclitus the paradoxographer" label="Heraclitus the paradoxographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q41155" start="28209" end="28219" title="Heraclitus" label="Heraclitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="28369" end="28376" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Servius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="28404" end="28410" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="28424" end="28430" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q932714" start="28732" end="28742" title="Fabius Planciades Fulgentius" label="Fulgentius"/>
<link wikidata="Q142999" start="29073" end="29081" title="Eusebius" label="Eusebius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401638" start="29235" end="29256" title="Vatican Mythographers" label="Vatican Mythographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="30031" end="30035" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="30072" end="30080" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="30503" end="30508" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante"/>
<link wikidata="Q4509219" start="30522" end="30529" title="Inferno (Dante)" label="Inferno"/>
<link wikidata="Q110127776" start="30563" end="30583" title="Third Circle of Hell" label="Third Circle of Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321626" start="30892" end="30914" title="Cerberus (constellation)" label="constellation Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57963" start="30929" end="30946" title="Johannes Hevelius" label="Johannes Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q165938" start="31111" end="31135" title="Hesperides" label="Apples of the Hesperides"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="31166" end="31180" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703143" start="31201" end="31209" title="Cerberus (snake)" label="Cerberus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="31330" end="31339" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q432708" start="31345" end="31351" title="Kerber (band)" label="Kerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250121" start="31379" end="31389" title="Goran Šepa" label="Goran Šepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="31471" end="31514" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="31525" end="31533" title="Kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q119557850" start="31605" end="31628" title="2023 European heatwaves" label="2023 European heatwaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717453" start="31783" end="31819" title="List of Greek mythological creatures" label="List of Greek mythological creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490503" start="31822" end="31841" title="Sharvara and Shyama" label="Sharvara and Shyama"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872698" start="31863" end="31871" title="Dormarch" label="Dormarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280977" start="31898" end="31907" title="Hellhound" label="Hellhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q131483" start="31910" end="31915" title="Ammit" label="Ammit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016347" start="31961" end="31967" title="Cadejo" label="Cadejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q817383" start="32001" end="32012" title="Bibliotheca (Pseudo-Apollodorus)" label="Apollodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170512" start="32275" end="32283" title="Apuleius" label="Apuleius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044767" start="32291" end="32321" title="The Golden Ass" label="Metamorphoses (The Golden Ass)"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="32393" end="32415" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q43353" start="32528" end="32540" title="Aristophanes" label="Aristophanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q815376" start="32542" end="32559" title="The Frogs" label="&amp;quot;Frogs&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q310681" start="32680" end="32691" title="Bacchylides" label="Bacchylides"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="33061" end="33077" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="33180" end="33202" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="33296" end="33305" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="33427" end="33449" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="33519" end="33528" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233835" start="33536" end="33544" title="Herakles (Euripides)" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q44233" start="34738" end="34744" title="Hesiod" label="Hesiod"/>
<link wikidata="Q156498" start="34752" end="34760" title="Theogony" label="Theogony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="35005" end="35010" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="35237" end="35242" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="35581" end="35587" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q298376" start="35750" end="35757" title="Gaius Julius Hyginus" label="Hyginus"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="36205" end="36227" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q188646" start="36343" end="36348" title="Lucan" label="Lucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="37092" end="37096" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="37183" end="37205" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="37316" end="37320" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184742" start="37328" end="37341" title="Metamorphoses" label="Metamorphoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q192931" start="37555" end="37564" title="Pausanias (geographer)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q134929" start="37932" end="37938" title="Pindar" label="Pindar"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="38138" end="38143" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="38342" end="38350" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="38475" end="38497" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q8827" start="38620" end="38630" title="Propertius" label="Propertius"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="38689" end="38711" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q352702" start="38820" end="38837" title="Quintus Smyrnaeus" label="Quintus Smyrnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q122511" start="39066" end="39080" title="Karl Schefold" label="Schefold, Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q122511" start="39166" end="39180" title="Karl Schefold" label="Schefold, Karl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="39309" end="39315" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="39448" end="39470" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="39585" end="39591" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="39724" end="39746" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q682373" start="39939" end="39983" title="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae" label="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235" start="40058" end="40067" title="Sophocles" label="Sophocles"/>
<link wikidata="Q945342" start="40075" end="40091" title="Women of Trachis" label="Women of Trachis"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="40203" end="40210" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="40340" end="40362" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q243203" start="40469" end="40476" title="Statius" label="Statius"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="40611" end="40633" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="41035" end="41042" title="John Tzetzes" label="Tzetzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q530515" start="41050" end="41059" title="Chiliades" label="Chiliades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="41189" end="41195" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="41203" end="41209" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398" start="41329" end="41335" title="Virgil" label="Virgil"/>
<link wikidata="Q669908" start="41561" end="41572" title="Martin Litchfield West" label="West, M. L."/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="41700" end="41722" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q682373" start="42014" end="42058" title="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae" label="Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="42133" end="42141" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q73112" start="42149" end="42157" title="Anabasis (Xenophon)" label="Anabasis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6698" wikidata="Q18710" url="?curid=6698" title="Camel case">
<text>Camel case (sometimes stylized autologically as camelCase or CamelCase, also known as camel caps or more formally as medial capitals) is the practice of writing phrases without spaces or punctuation and with capitalized words. The format indicates the first word starting with either case, then the following words having an initial uppercase letter. Common examples include &quot;YouTube&quot;, &quot;PowerPoint&quot;, &quot;HarperCollins&quot;, &quot;FedEx&quot;, &quot;iPhone&quot;, &quot;eBay&quot;, and &quot;LaGuardia&quot;. Camel case is often used as a naming convention in computer programming. It is also sometimes used in online usernames such as &quot;JohnSmith&quot;, and to make multi-word domain names more legible, for example in promoting &quot;EasyWidgetCompany.com&quot;.

The more specific terms Pascal case and upper camel case refer to a joined phrase where the first letter of each word is capitalized, including the initial letter of the first word. Similarly, lower camel case (also known as [[dromedary]] case) requires an initial lowercase letter. Some people and organizations, notably Microsoft, use the term &quot;camel case&quot; only for lower camel case, designating Pascal case for the upper camel case. Some programming styles prefer camel case with the first letter capitalized, others not. For clarity, this article leaves the definition of camel case ambiguous with respect to capitalization, and uses the more specific terms when necessary.

Camel case is distinct from several other styles: &quot;title case&quot;, which capitalizes all words but retains the spaces between them; &quot;Tall Man lettering&quot;, which uses capitals to emphasize the differences between similar-looking product names such as &quot;predniSONE&quot; and &quot;predniSOLONE&quot;; and &quot;snake case&quot;, which uses underscores interspersed with lowercase letters (sometimes with the first letter capitalized). A combination of snake and camel case (identifiers &quot;Written_Like_This&quot;) is recommended in the Ada 95 style guide.

== Variations and synonyms ==
The practice has various names, including:

* camelBack (or camel-back) notation or CamelCaps
* camel case or CamelCase
* CapitalizedWords or CapWords for upper camel case in Python
* compoundNames
* Embedded caps (or embedded capitals)
* HumpBack (or hump-back) notation
* InterCaps or intercapping (abbreviation of &quot;Internal Capitalization&quot;)
* medial capitals, recommended by the Oxford English Dictionary
* mixedCase for lower camel case in Python
* PascalCase for upper camel case (after the Pascal programming language)
* Smalltalk case
* WikiWord or WikiCase (especially in older wikis)
== History ==

The earliest known occurrence of the term &quot;InterCaps&quot; on Usenet is in an April 1990 post to the group alt.folklore.computers by Avi Rappoport. The earliest use of the name &quot;Camel Case&quot; occurs in 1995, in a post by Newton Love. Love has since said, &quot;With the advent of programming languages having these sorts of constructs, the humpiness of the style made me call it HumpyCase at first, before I settled on CamelCase. I had been calling it CamelCase for years. ... The citation above was just the first time I had used the name on USENET.&quot; The term &quot;Pascal Case&quot; was coined in design discussions for the .NET Framework, first released in 2002.

== Traditional use in natural language ==

===In word combinations===
The use of medial capitals as a convention in the regular spelling of everyday texts is rare, but is used in some languages as a solution to particular problems which arise when two words or segments are combined.

In Italian, pronouns can be suffixed to verbs, and because the honorific form of second-person pronouns is capitalized, this can produce a sentence like &quot;non ho trovato il tempo di risponderLe&quot; (&quot;I have not found time to answer you&quot; – where &quot;Le&quot; means &quot;to you&quot;).

In German, the medial capital letter I, called &quot;Binnen-I&quot;, is sometimes used in a word like &quot;StudentInnen&quot; (&quot;students&quot;) to indicate that both &quot;Studenten&quot; (&quot;male students&quot;) and &quot;Studentinnen&quot; (&quot;female students&quot;) are intended simultaneously. However, mid-word capitalization does not conform to German orthography apart from proper names like &quot;McDonald&quot;; the previous example could be correctly written using parentheses as &quot;Student(inn)en&quot;, analogous to &quot;congress(wo)men&quot; in English.

In Irish, camel case is used when an inflectional prefix is attached to a proper noun, for example (&quot;in Galway&quot;), from (&quot;Galway&quot;); (&quot;the Scottish person&quot;), from (&quot;Scottish person&quot;); and (&quot;to Ireland&quot;), from (&quot;Ireland&quot;). In recent Scottish Gaelic orthography, a hyphen has been inserted: . 

This convention of inflectional prefix is also used by several written Bantu languages (e.g. &quot;isiZulu&quot;, &quot;Zulu language&quot;) and several indigenous languages of Mexico (e.g. Nahuatl, Totonacan, Mixe–Zoque, and some Oto-Manguean languages).

In Dutch, when capitalizing the digraph &quot;ij&quot;, both the letter &quot;I&quot; and the letter &quot;J&quot; are capitalized, for example in the country name &quot;IJsland&quot; (&quot;Iceland&quot;).

In Chinese pinyin, camel case is sometimes used for place names so that readers can more easily pick out the different parts of the name. For example, places like Beijing (北京), Qinhuangdao (秦皇岛), and Daxing&#x27;anling (大兴安岭) can be written as &quot;BeiJing&quot;, &quot;QinHuangDao,&quot; and &quot;DaXingAnLing&quot; respectively&quot;,&quot; with the number of capital letters equaling the number of Chinese characters. Writing word compounds only by the initial letter of each character is also acceptable in some cases, so Beijing can be written as &quot;BJ&quot;, Qinghuangdao as &quot;QHD,&quot; and Daxing&#x27;anling as DXAL.

In English, medial capitals are usually only found in Scottish or Irish &quot;Mac-&quot; or &quot;Mc-&quot; patronymic names, where for example &quot;MacDonald, McDonald,&quot; and &quot;Macdonald&quot; are common spelling variants of MacDonald (son of Dòmhnall), and in Anglo-Norman &quot;Fitz-&quot; names, where for example both &quot;FitzGerald&quot; and &quot;Fitzgerald&quot; (son of Gerald) are found.

In their English style guide &quot;The King&#x27;s English&quot;, first published in 1906, H. W. and F. G. Fowler suggested that medial capitals could be used in triple compound words where hyphens would cause ambiguity—the examples they give are &quot;KingMark-like&quot; (as against &quot;King Mark-like&quot;) and &quot;Anglo-SouthAmerican&quot; (as against &quot;Anglo-South American&quot;). However, they described the system as &quot;too hopelessly contrary to use at present&quot;.

Some French names also uses CamelCase names, such as LeBeau (surname), LaRue, DeMordaunt, and Italian names DeRose/DeRosa.

===In transliterations===

In the scholarly transliteration of languages written in other scripts, medial capitals are used in similar situations. For example, in transliterated Hebrew, &quot;haIvri&quot; means &quot;the Hebrew person&quot; or &quot;the Jew&quot; and &quot;b&#x27;Yerushalayim&quot; means &quot;in Jerusalem&quot;. In Tibetan proper names like &quot;rLobsang&quot;, the &quot;r&quot; stands for a prefix glyph in the original script that functions as tone marker rather than a normal letter. Another example is &quot;tsIurku&quot;, a Latin transcription of the Chechen term for the capping stone of the characteristic Medieval defensive towers of Chechnya and Ingushetia; the letter &quot;I&quot; (palochka) is not actually capital, denoting a phoneme distinct from the one transcribed as &quot;i&quot;.

=== In abbreviations ===
Medial capitals are traditionally used in abbreviations to reflect the capitalization that the words would have when written out in full, for example in the academic titles PhD or BSc. A more recent example is NaNoWriMo, a contraction of National Novel Writing Month and the designation for both the annual event and the nonprofit organization that runs it. In German, the names of statutes are abbreviated using embedded capitals, e.g. StGB for (Criminal Code), PatG for (Patent Act), BVerfG for (Federal Constitutional Court), or the very common GmbH, for (private limited company). In this context, there can even be three or more camel case capitals, e.g. in TzBfG for (Act on Part-Time and Limited Term Occupations). In French, camel case acronyms such as OuLiPo (1960) were favored for a time as alternatives to initialisms.

Camel case is often used to transliterate initialisms into alphabets where two letters may be required to represent a single character of the original alphabet, e.g., DShK from Cyrillic ДШК. 

== History of modern technical use ==

=== Chemical formulas ===
The first systematic and widespread use of medial capitals for technical purposes was the notation for chemical formulas invented by the Swedish chemist Jacob Berzelius in 1813. To replace the multitude of naming and symbol conventions used by chemists until that time, he proposed to indicate each chemical element by a symbol of one or two letters, the first one being capitalized. The capitalization allowed formulas like &quot;NaCl&quot; to be written without spaces and still be parsed without ambiguity.

Berzelius&#x27; system continues to be used, augmented with three-letter symbols such as &quot;Uue&quot; for unconfirmed or unknown elements and abbreviations for some common substituents (especially in the field of organic chemistry, for instance &quot;Et&quot; for &quot;ethyl-&quot;). This has been further extended to describe the amino acid sequences of proteins and other similar domains.

=== Early use in trademarks ===
Since the early 20th century, medial capitals have occasionally been used for corporate names and product trademarks, such as
* DryIce Corporation (1925) marketed the solid form of carbon dioxide (CO2) as &quot;Dry Ice&quot;, thus leading to its common name.
* CinemaScope and VistaVision, rival widescreen movie formats (1953)
* ShopKo (1962), retail stores, later renamed Shopko
* &quot;MisteRogers Neighborhood&quot;, the TV series also called &quot;Mister Rogers&#x27; Neighborhood&quot; (1968)
* ChemGrass (1965), later renamed AstroTurf (1967)
* ConAgra (1971), formerly Consolidated Mills
* MasterCraft (1968), a sports boat manufacturer
* AeroVironment (1971)
* PolyGram (1972), formerly Grammophon-Philips Group
* United HealthCare (1977)
* MasterCard (1979), formerly Master Charge
* SportsCenter (1979)

=== Computer programming ===

In the 1970s and 1980s, medial capitals were adopted as a standard or alternative naming convention for multi-word identifiers in several programming languages. The precise origin of the convention in computer programming has not yet been settled. A 1954 conference proceedings occasionally informally referred to IBM&#x27;s Speedcoding system as &quot;SpeedCo&quot;. Christopher Strachey&#x27;s paper on GPM (1965), shows a program that includes some medial capital identifiers, including &quot;codice_1&quot; and &quot;codice_2&quot; (This was most likely the influence of the CPL language, of which Strachey was one of the designers)

Multiple-word descriptive identifiers with embedded spaces such as codice_3 or codice_4 cannot be used in most programming languages because the spaces between the words would be parsed as delimiters between tokens. The alternative of running the words together as in codice_5 or codice_6 is difficult to understand and possibly misleading; for example, codice_6 is an English word (able to be charted), whereas codice_8 means a table of codice_9 .

Some early programming languages, notably Lisp (1958) and COBOL (1959), addressed this problem by allowing a hyphen (&quot;-&quot;) to be used between words of compound identifiers, as in &quot;END-OF-FILE&quot;: Lisp because it worked well with prefix notation (a Lisp parser would not treat a hyphen in the middle of a symbol as a subtraction operator) and COBOL because its operators were individual English words. This convention remains in use in these languages, and is also common in program names entered on a command line, as in Unix.

However, this solution was not adequate for mathematically oriented languages such as FORTRAN (1955) and ALGOL (1958), which used the hyphen as an infix subtraction operator. FORTRAN ignored blanks altogether, so programmers could use embedded spaces in variable names. However, this feature was not very useful since the early versions of the language restricted identifiers to no more than six characters.

Exacerbating the problem, common punched card character sets of the time were uppercase only and lacked other special characters. It was only in the late 1960s that the widespread adoption of the ASCII character set made both lowercase and the underscore character codice_10 universally available. Some languages, notably C, promptly adopted underscores as word separators, and identifiers such as codice_11 are still prevalent in C programs and libraries (as well as in later languages influenced by C, such as Perl and Python). However, some languages and programmers chose to avoid underscores and adopted camel case instead.

Charles Simonyi, who worked at Xerox PARC in the 1970s and later oversaw the creation of Microsoft&#x27;s Office suite of applications, invented and taught the use of Hungarian Notation, one version of which uses the lowercase letter(s) at the start of a (capitalized) variable name to denote its type. One account claims that the camel case style first became popular at Xerox PARC around 1978, with the Mesa programming language developed for the Xerox Alto computer. This machine lacked an underscore key (whose place was taken by a left arrow &quot;←&quot;), and the hyphen and space characters were not permitted in identifiers, leaving camel case as the only viable scheme for readable multiword names. The PARC Mesa Language Manual (1979) included a coding standard with specific rules for upper and lower camel case that was strictly followed by the Mesa libraries and the Alto operating system. Niklaus Wirth, the inventor of Pascal, came to appreciate camel case during a sabbatical at PARC and used it in Modula, his next programming language.

The Smalltalk language, which was developed originally on the Alto, also uses camel case instead of underscores. This language became quite popular in the early 1980s, and thus may also have been instrumental in spreading the style outside PARC.

Upper camel case (or &quot;Pascal case&quot;) is used in Wolfram Language in computer algebraic system Mathematica for predefined identifiers. User defined identifiers should start with a lower case letter. This avoids the conflict between predefined and user defined identifiers both today and in all future versions.

C# variable names are recommended to follow the lower camel case convention.

===Computer companies and products===
Whatever its origins in the computing field, the convention was used in the names of computer companies and their commercial brands, since the late 1970s — a trend that continues to this day:

* (1977) CompuServe
* (1978) WordStar
* (1979) VisiCalc
* (1982) MicroProse, WordPerfect
* (1983) NetWare
* (1984) LaserJet, MacWorks, PostScript
* (1985) PageMaker
* (1987) ClarisWorks, HyperCard, PowerPoint
* (1990) WorldWideWeb (the first web browser), later renamed Nexus

=== Spread to mainstream usage ===
In the 1980s and 1990s, after the advent of the personal computer exposed hacker culture to the world, camel case then became fashionable for corporate trade names in non-computer fields as well. Mainstream usage was well established by 1990:

* (1980) EchoStar
* (1984) BellSouth
* (1985) &quot;EastEnders&quot;
* (1986) &quot;SpaceCamp&quot;
* (1990) HarperCollins, SeaTac
* (1998) PricewaterhouseCoopers, merger of Price Waterhouse and Coopers

During the dot-com bubble of the late 1990s, the lowercase prefixes &quot;e&quot; (for &quot;electronic&quot;) and &quot;i&quot; (for &quot;Internet&quot;, &quot;information&quot;, &quot;intelligent&quot;, etc.) became quite common, giving rise to names like Apple&#x27;s iMac and the eBox software platform.

In 1998, Dave Yost suggested that chemists use medial capitals to aid readability of long chemical names, e.g. write AmidoPhosphoRibosylTransferase instead of amidophosphoribosyltransferase. This usage was not widely adopted.

Camel case is sometimes used for abbreviated names of certain neighborhoods, e.g. New York City neighborhoods &quot;SoHo&quot; (&quot;So&quot;uth of &quot;Ho&quot;uston Street) and &quot;TriBeCa&quot; (&quot;Tri&quot;angle &quot;Be&quot;low &quot;Ca&quot;nal Street) and San Francisco&#x27;s &quot;SoMa&quot; (&quot;So&quot;uth of &quot;Ma&quot;rket). Such usages erode quickly, so the neighborhoods are now typically rendered as &quot;Soho&quot;, &quot;Tribeca&quot;, and &quot;Soma&quot;.

Internal capitalization has also been used for other technical codes like HeLa (1983).

== Current usage in computing ==

=== Programming and coding ===

The use of medial caps for compound identifiers is recommended by the coding style guidelines of many organizations or software projects. For some languages (such as Mesa, Pascal, Modula, Java and Microsoft&#x27;s .NET) this practice is recommended by the language developers or by authoritative manuals and has therefore become part of the language&#x27;s &quot;culture&quot;.

Style guidelines often distinguish between upper and lower camel case, typically specifying which variety should be used for specific kinds of entities: variables, record fields, methods, procedures, functions, subroutines, types, etc. These rules are sometimes supported by static analysis tools that check source code for adherence.

The original Hungarian notation for programming, for example, specifies that a lowercase abbreviation for the &quot;usage type&quot; (not data type) should prefix all variable names, with the remainder of the name in upper camel case; as such it is a form of lower camel case.

Programming identifiers often need to contain acronyms and initialisms that are already in uppercase, such as &quot;old HTML file&quot;. By analogy with the title case rules, the natural camel case rendering would have the abbreviation all in uppercase, namely &quot;oldHTMLFile&quot;. However, this approach is problematic when two acronyms occur together (e.g., &quot;parse DBM XML&quot; would become &quot;parseDBMXML&quot;) or when the standard mandates lower camel case but the name begins with an abbreviation (e.g. &quot;SQL server&quot; would become &quot;sQLServer&quot;). For this reason, some programmers prefer to treat abbreviations as if they were words and write &quot;oldHtmlFile&quot;, &quot;parseDbmXml&quot; or &quot;sqlServer&quot;. However, this can make it harder to recognize that a given word is intended as an acronym.

Difficulties arise when identifiers have different meaning depending only on the case, as can occur with mathematical functions or trademarks. In this situation changing the case of an identifier might not be an option and an alternative name need be chosen.

=== Wiki link markup ===
Camel case is used in some wiki markup languages for terms that should be automatically linked to other wiki pages. This convention was originally used in Ward Cunningham&#x27;s original wiki software, WikiWikiWeb, and can be activated in most other wikis. Some wiki engines such as TiddlyWiki, Trac and PmWiki make use of it in the default settings, but usually also provide a configuration mechanism or plugin to disable it. Wikipedia formerly used camel case linking as well, but switched to explicit link markup using square brackets and many other wiki sites have done the same. MediaWiki, for example, camel case for linking. Some wikis that do not use camel case linking may still use the camel case as a naming convention, such as AboutUs.

=== Other uses ===
The NIEM registry requires that XML data elements use upper camel case and XML attributes use lower camel case.

Most popular command-line interfaces and scripting languages cannot easily handle file names that contain embedded spaces (usually requiring the name to be put in quotes). Therefore, users of those systems often resort to camel case (or underscores, hyphens and other &quot;safe&quot; characters) for compound file names like MyJobResume.pdf.

Microblogging and social networking services that limit the number of characters in a message are potential outlets for medial capitals. Using camel case between words reduces the number of spaces, and thus the number of characters, in a given message, allowing more content to fit into the limited space. Hashtags, especially long ones, often use camel case to maintain readability (e.g. #CollegeStudentProblems is easier to read than #collegestudentproblems); this practice improves accessibility as screen readers recognize CamelCase in parsing composite hashtags.

In website URLs, spaces are percent-encoded as &quot;%20&quot;, making the address longer and less human readable. By omitting spaces, camel case does not have this problem.

== Readability studies ==
Camel case has been criticized as negatively impacting readability due to the removal of spaces and uppercasing of every word.

A 2009 study of 135 subjects comparing snake case (underscored identifiers) to camel case found that camel case identifiers were recognized with higher accuracy among all subjects. Subjects recognized snake case identifiers more quickly than camel case identifiers. Training in camel case sped up camel case recognition and slowed snake case recognition, although this effect involved coefficients with high p-values. The study also conducted a subjective survey and found that non-programmers either preferred underscores or had no preference, and 38% of programmers trained in camel case stated a preference for underscores. However, these preferences had no statistical correlation to accuracy or speed when controlling for other variables.

A 2010 follow-up study used a similar study design with 15 subjects consisting of expert programmers trained primarily in snake case. It used a static rather than animated stimulus and found perfect accuracy in both styles except for one incorrect camel case response. Subjects recognized identifiers in snake case more quickly than camel case. The study used eye-tracking equipment and found that the difference in speed for its subjects was primarily due to the fact that average duration of fixations for camel-case was significantly higher than that of snake case for 3-part identifiers. The survey recorded a mixture of preferred identifier styles but again there was no correlation of preferred style to accuracy or speed.

== See also ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* Camel Case Guide &amp; Converter, further reading on usage with examples
* Examples and history of CamelCase, also WordsSmashedTogetherLikeSo
* .NET Framework General Reference Capitalization Styles
* What&#x27;s in a nAME(cq)?, by Bill Walsh, at The Slot
* The Science of Word Recognition, by Kevin Larson, Advanced Reading Technology, Microsoft Corporation
* Convert text to CamelCase
* OASIS Cover Pages: CamelCase for Naming XML-Related Components
* Convert text to CamelCase, Title Case, Uppercase and lowercase
* Demystifying Common Casings in Programming: What They Are and When to Use Them</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="0" end="10" title="Camel case" label="Camel case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872602" start="31" end="44" title="autological" label="autologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="48" end="57" title="Camel case" label="camelCase"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="61" end="70" title="Camel case" label="CamelCase"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="86" end="96" title="Camel case" label="camel caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="117" end="132" title="Camel case" label="medial capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q425951" start="208" end="219" title="capitalization" label="capitalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="333" end="342" title="uppercase" label="uppercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q461984" start="561" end="578" title="Naming convention (programming)" label="naming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q32635" start="704" end="716" title="domain names" label="domain names"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="816" end="827" title="Camel case" label="Pascal case"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="832" end="848" title="Camel case" label="upper camel case"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="985" end="1001" title="Camel case" label="lower camel case"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710" start="1017" end="1035" title="Camel case" label="[[dromedary]] case"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1114" end="1123" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q99572267" start="1537" end="1547" title="title case" label="title case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679947" start="1626" end="1644" title="Tall Man lettering" label="Tall Man lettering"/>
<link wikidata="Q424972" start="1753" end="1763" title="prednisone" label="predniSONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426176" start="1780" end="1792" title="prednisolone" label="predniSOLONE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289587" start="1810" end="1820" title="snake case" label="snake case"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199" start="1839" end="1849" title="underscore" label="underscore"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="2038" end="2044" title="Ada 95" label="Ada 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="2264" end="2270" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2445" end="2460" title=":wikt:medial capital" label="medial capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2481" end="2506" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="2595" end="2622" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="2626" end="2635" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="2685" end="2689" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289" start="3351" end="3365" title=".NET Framework" label=".NET Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q9893" start="4018" end="4019" title="I" label="I"/>
<link wikidata="Q863893" start="4034" end="4042" title="Binnen-I" label="Binnen-I"/>
<link wikidata="Q350044" start="4344" end="4362" title="German orthography" label="German orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="4468" end="4479" title="parentheses" label="parentheses"/>
<link wikidata="Q106011348" start="4568" end="4573" title="Irish orthography" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="4674" end="4680" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437753" start="4855" end="4882" title="Scottish Gaelic orthography" label="Scottish Gaelic orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="4987" end="5002" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="5036" end="5049" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661395" start="5080" end="5099" title="languages of Mexico" label="languages of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965602" start="5106" end="5113" title="Nahuatl languages" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q34039" start="5115" end="5124" title="Totonacan languages" label="Totonacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q954016" start="5126" end="5136" title="Mixe–Zoque languages" label="Mixe–Zoque"/>
<link wikidata="Q33669" start="5147" end="5169" title="Oto-Manguean languages" label="Oto-Manguean languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="5176" end="5181" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q748469" start="5219" end="5221" title="IJ (digraph)" label="ij"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5343" end="5350" title="Iceland" label="IJsland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="5384" end="5391" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="5392" end="5398" title="pinyin" label="pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="5784" end="5802" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778569" start="6252" end="6261" title="MacDonald (surname)" label="MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q16466739" start="6355" end="6365" title="FitzGerald (surname)" label="FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744447" start="6462" end="6485" title="The King&amp;#x27;s English" label="The King&amp;#x27;s English"/>
<link wikidata="Q640096" start="6518" end="6523" title="Henry Watson Fowler" label="H. W."/>
<link wikidata="Q5481054" start="6528" end="6540" title="Francis George Fowler" label="F. G. Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="6596" end="6609" title="compound word" label="compound word"/>
<link wikidata="Q180309" start="6617" end="6623" title="hyphen" label="hyphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16871988" start="6970" end="6986" title="LeBeau (surname)" label="LeBeau (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28008481" start="6988" end="6993" title="LaRue" label="LaRue"/>
<link wikidata="Q107426891" start="6995" end="7005" title="DeMordaunt" label="DeMordaunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869526" start="7025" end="7031" title="DeRose" label="DeRose"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7032" end="7038" title="Rosa_(surname)#DeRosa" label="DeRosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="7219" end="7225" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q34271" start="7376" end="7383" title="Standard Tibetan" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="7509" end="7513" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="7619" end="7626" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6960545" start="7676" end="7701" title="Vainakh medieval towers" label="Medieval defensive towers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="7705" end="7713" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219" start="7718" end="7728" title="Ingushetia" label="Ingushetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q425140" start="7756" end="7764" title="palochka" label="palochka"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="7802" end="7809" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="8068" end="8071" title="Bachelor of Science" label="BSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961898" start="8098" end="8107" title="NaNoWriMo" label="NaNoWriMo"/>
<link wikidata="Q56025" start="8386" end="8414" title="Federal Constitutional Court" label="Federal Constitutional Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17376040" start="8447" end="8470" title="private limited company" label="private limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q744609" start="8649" end="8655" title="Oulipo" label="OuLiPo"/>
<link wikidata="Q477863" start="8887" end="8891" title="DShK" label="DShK"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="8897" end="8905" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="9131" end="9146" title="Jöns Jakob Berzelius" label="Jacob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314" start="9409" end="9413" title="sodium chloride" label="NaCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139" start="9584" end="9587" title="ununennium" label="Uue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371525" start="9743" end="9745" title="Ethyl group" label="Et"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="9824" end="9834" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="9848" end="9855" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="9995" end="10004" title="corporation" label="corporate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="10098" end="10112" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q485544" start="10178" end="10189" title="CinemaScope" label="CinemaScope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788758" start="10194" end="10205" title="VistaVision" label="VistaVision"/>
<link wikidata="Q752245" start="10213" end="10223" title="widescreen" label="widescreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501155" start="10247" end="10253" title="ShopKo Stores Inc." label="ShopKo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234484" start="10370" end="10402" title="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood" label="Mister Rogers&amp;#x27; Neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593385" start="10450" end="10459" title="AstroTurf" label="AstroTurf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123399" start="10469" end="10476" title="ConAgra Foods Inc." label="ConAgra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907883" start="10515" end="10526" title="MasterCraft" label="MasterCraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q919300" start="10564" end="10577" title="AeroVironment" label="AeroVironment"/>
<link wikidata="Q700359" start="10587" end="10595" title="PolyGram" label="PolyGram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103926" start="10640" end="10657" title="UnitedHealth Group" label="United HealthCare"/>
<link wikidata="Q489921" start="10667" end="10677" title="MasterCard" label="MasterCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131232" start="10711" end="10723" title="SportsCenter" label="SportsCenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q461984" start="10844" end="10861" title="naming convention (programming)" label="naming convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773882" start="10877" end="10887" title="Identifier (computer programming)" label="identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="10900" end="10920" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="11076" end="11079" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7475416" start="11087" end="11098" title="Speedcoding" label="Speedcoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q93122" start="11130" end="11150" title="Christopher Strachey" label="Christopher Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11167" end="11170" title="General purpose macro processor#Examples of general purpose macro processors" label="GPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347334" start="11341" end="11344" title="CPL_(programming_language)" label="CPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q194152" start="11579" end="11585" title="Parser" label="parsed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641420" start="11589" end="11598" title="delimiter" label="delimiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11608" end="11614" title="Lexical analysis#Token" label="tokens"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="11892" end="11896" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="11908" end="11913" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q180309" start="11959" end="11965" title="hyphen" label="hyphen"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="12368" end="12380" title="command line" label="command line"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="12481" end="12488" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094499" start="12500" end="12505" title="ALGOL 58" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="12837" end="12849" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q8815" start="13000" end="13005" title="ASCII" label="ASCII"/>
<link wikidata="Q11199" start="13048" end="13058" title="underscore" label="underscore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="13126" end="13127" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="13316" end="13320" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="13325" end="13331" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q49819" start="13434" end="13449" title="Charles Simonyi" label="Charles Simonyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="13465" end="13475" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q903244" start="13601" end="13619" title="Hungarian Notation" label="Hungarian Notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042397" start="13839" end="13864" title="Mesa (programming language)" label="Mesa programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140061" start="13883" end="13893" title="Xerox Alto" label="Xerox Alto"/>
<link wikidata="Q92604" start="14338" end="14351" title="Niklaus Wirth" label="Niklaus Wirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="14369" end="14375" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428476" start="14450" end="14456" title="Modula" label="Modula"/>
<link wikidata="Q235086" start="14494" end="14503" title="Smalltalk" label="Smalltalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15241057" start="14794" end="14810" title="Wolfram Language" label="Wolfram Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q81294" start="14840" end="14851" title="Mathematica" label="Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122074" start="15375" end="15385" title="CompuServe" label="CompuServe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="15395" end="15403" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q725401" start="15413" end="15421" title="VisiCalc" label="VisiCalc"/>
<link wikidata="Q652421" start="15431" end="15441" title="MicroProse" label="MicroProse"/>
<link wikidata="Q174757" start="15443" end="15454" title="WordPerfect" label="WordPerfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="15464" end="15471" title="Novell NetWare" label="NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040290" start="15481" end="15489" title="LaserJet" label="LaserJet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722157" start="15491" end="15499" title="MacWorks" label="MacWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q218170" start="15501" end="15511" title="PostScript" label="PostScript"/>
<link wikidata="Q360355" start="15521" end="15530" title="Adobe PageMaker" label="PageMaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q621196" start="15540" end="15551" title="ClarisWorks" label="ClarisWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053749" start="15553" end="15562" title="HyperCard" label="HyperCard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11266" start="15564" end="15574" title="PowerPoint" label="PowerPoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q590890" start="15584" end="15596" title="WorldWideWeb" label="WorldWideWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417728" start="15830" end="15840" title="trade name" label="trade name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280748" start="15931" end="15939" title="EchoStar Communications Corporation" label="EchoStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q815668" start="15949" end="15958" title="BellSouth" label="BellSouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="15974" end="15984" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631607" start="16006" end="16015" title="SpaceCamp" label="SpaceCamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q95149" start="16031" end="16044" title="HarperCollins Publishers" label="HarperCollins"/>
<link wikidata="Q985072" start="16046" end="16052" title="SeaTac, Washington" label="SeaTac"/>
<link wikidata="Q488048" start="16062" end="16084" title="PricewaterhouseCoopers" label="PricewaterhouseCoopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79721" start="16137" end="16151" title="dot-com bubble" label="dot-com bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="16219" end="16229" title="electronics" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="16313" end="16324" title="intelligent" label="intelligent"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="16385" end="16390" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q14091" start="16398" end="16402" title="iMac" label="iMac"/>
<link wikidata="Q191297" start="16411" end="16415" title="Zentyal" label="eBox"/>
<link wikidata="Q408291" start="16595" end="16625" title="amidophosphoribosyltransferase" label="amidophosphoribosyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q847482" start="17229" end="17233" title="HeLa" label="HeLa"/>
<link wikidata="Q962139" start="17379" end="17391" title="coding style" label="coding style"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042397" start="17475" end="17479" title="Mesa (programming language)" label="Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="17481" end="17487" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428476" start="17489" end="17495" title="Modula" label="Modula"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="17497" end="17501" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="17506" end="17515" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q21622213" start="17523" end="17527" title=".NET" label=".NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="17841" end="17849" title="variable (computer science)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172412" start="17852" end="17865" title="field (computer science)" label="record fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="17867" end="17873" title="method (computer science)" label="method"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="17876" end="17886" title="procedure (computer science)" label="procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="17888" end="17897" title="Function (computer science)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="17899" end="17909" title="subroutine" label="subroutine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="17912" end="17917" title="type (computer science)" label="types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329550" start="17963" end="17978" title="static code analysis" label="static analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="17996" end="18007" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q903244" start="18037" end="18055" title="Hungarian notation" label="Hungarian notation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101244" start="18348" end="18372" title="acronyms and initialisms" label="acronyms and initialisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="19459" end="19480" title="wikitext" label="wiki markup languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q171" start="19536" end="19540" title="wiki" label="wiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637" start="19587" end="19602" title="Ward Cunningham" label="Ward Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686945" start="19619" end="19632" title="wiki software" label="wiki software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197736" start="19634" end="19645" title="WikiWikiWeb" label="WikiWikiWeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144644" start="19715" end="19725" title="TiddlyWiki" label="TiddlyWiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q765385" start="19727" end="19731" title="Trac" label="Trac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891726" start="19736" end="19742" title="PmWiki" label="PmWiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q184148" start="19837" end="19843" title="Plug-in (computing)" label="plugin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="19954" end="19969" title="square brackets" label="square brackets"/>
<link wikidata="Q83" start="20016" end="20025" title="MediaWiki" label="MediaWiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q323099" start="20171" end="20178" title="AboutUs" label="AboutUs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4044950" start="20204" end="20208" title="National Information Exchange Model" label="NIEM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="20232" end="20235" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="20326" end="20348" title="command-line interface" label="command-line interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q959549" start="20354" end="20363" title="shell script" label="scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q92438" start="20657" end="20670" title="Microblogging" label="Microblogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="20675" end="20700" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q278485" start="20963" end="20970" title="Hashtag" label="Hashtag"/>
<link wikidata="Q555097" start="21142" end="21155" title="accessibility" label="accessibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328864" start="21159" end="21172" title="screen reader" label="screen reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046948" start="21254" end="21269" title="Percent-encoding" label="percent-encoded"/>
<link wikidata="Q372222" start="21325" end="21339" title="human readable" label="human readable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289587" start="21594" end="21604" title="snake case" label="snake case"/>
<link wikidata="Q253255" start="21963" end="21970" title="p-value" label="p-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q201936" start="22794" end="22803" title="Fixation (visual)" label="fixations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6700" wikidata="Q12117" url="?curid=6700" title="Cereal">
<text>A cereal is a grass cultivated for its edible grain. Cereals are the world&#x27;s largest crops, and are therefore staple foods. They include rice, wheat, rye, oats, barley, millet, and maize. Edible grains from other plant families, such as buckwheat and quinoa, are pseudocereals. Most cereals are annuals, producing one crop from each planting, though rice is sometimes grown as a perennial. Winter varieties are hardy enough to be planted in the autumn, becoming dormant in the winter, and harvested in spring or early summer; spring varieties are planted in spring and harvested in late summer. The term cereal is derived from the name of the Roman goddess of grain crops and fertility, Ceres.

Cereals were domesticated in the Neolithic, some 8,000 years ago. Wheat and barley were domesticated in the Fertile Crescent; rice was domesticated in East Asia, and sorghum and millet were domesticated in West Africa. Maize was domesticated by Indigenous peoples of the Americas in southern Mexico about 9,000 years ago. In the 20th century, cereal productivity was greatly increased by the Green Revolution. This increase in production has accompanied a growing international trade, with some countries producing large portions of the cereal supply for other countries.

Cereals provide food eaten directly as whole grains, usually cooked, or they are ground to flour and made into bread, porridge, and other products. Cereals have a high starch content, enabling them to be fermented into alcoholic drinks such as beer. Cereal farming has a substantial environmental impact, and is often produced in high-intensity monocultures. The environmental harms can be mitigated by sustainable practices which reduce the impact on soil and improve biodiversity, such as no-till farming and intercropping.

== History ==

=== Origins ===

Wheat, barley, rye, and oats were gathered and eaten in the Fertile Crescent during the early Neolithic. Cereal grains 19,000 years old have been found at the Ohalo II site in Israel, with charred remnants of wild wheat and barley.

During the same period, farmers in China began to farm rice and millet, using human-made floods and fires as part of their cultivation regimen. The use of soil conditioners, including manure, fish, compost and ashes, appears to have begun early, and developed independently in areas of the world including Mesopotamia, the Nile Valley, and Eastern Asia.

Cereals that became modern barley and wheat were domesticated some 8,000 years ago in the Fertile Crescent. Millets and rice were domesticated in East Asia, while sorghum and other millets were domesticated in sub-Saharan West Africa, primarily as feed for livestock. Maize arose from a single domestication in Mesoamerica about 9,000 years ago.

In these agricultural regions, religion was often shaped by the divinity associated with the grain and harvests. In the Mesopotamian creation myth, an era of civilization is inaugurated by the grain goddess Ashnan. The Roman goddess Ceres presided over agriculture, grain crops, fertility, and motherhood; the term cereal is derived from Latin &quot;cerealis&quot;, &quot;of grain&quot;, originally meaning &quot;of [the goddess] Ceres&quot;. Several gods of antiquity combined agriculture and war: the Hittite Sun goddess of Arinna, the Canaanite Lahmu and the Roman Janus.

Complex civilizations arose where cereal agriculture created a surplus, allowing for part of the harvest to be appropriated from farmers, allowing power to be concentrated in cities.

=== Modern ===

During the second half of the 20th century, there was a significant increase in the production of high-yield cereal crops worldwide, especially wheat and rice, due to the Green Revolution, a technological change funded by development organizations. The strategies developed by the Green Revolution included mechanized tilling, monoculture, nitrogen fertilizers, and breeding of new strains of seeds. These innovations focused on fending off starvation and increasing yield-per-plant, and were very successful in raising overall yields of cereal grains, but paid less attention to nutritional quality. These modern high-yield cereal crops tend to have low-quality proteins, with essential amino acid deficiencies, are high in carbohydrates, and lack balanced essential fatty acids, vitamins, minerals and other quality factors. So-called ancient grains and heirloom varieties have seen an increase in popularity with the &quot;organic&quot; movements of the early 21st century, but there is a tradeoff in yield-per-plant, putting pressure on resource-poor areas as food crops are replaced with cash crops.

== Biology ==

Cereals are grasses, in the Poaceae family, that produce edible grains. A cereal grain is botanically a caryopsis, a fruit where the seed coat is fused with the pericarp. Grasses have stems that are hollow except at the nodes and narrow alternate leaves borne in two ranks. The lower part of each leaf encloses the stem, forming a leaf-sheath. The leaf grows from the base of the blade, an adaptation that protects the growing meristem from grazing animals. The flowers are usually hermaphroditic, with the exception of maize, and mainly anemophilous or wind-pollinated, although insects occasionally play a role.

Among the best-known cereals are maize, rice, wheat, barley, sorghum, millet, oat, rye and triticale. Some other grains are colloquially called cereals, even though they are not grasses; these pseudocereals include buckwheat, quinoa, and amaranth.

== Cultivation ==

All cereal crops are cultivated in a similar way. Most are annual, so after sowing they are harvested just once. An exception is rice, which although usually treated as an annual can survive as a perennial, producing a ratoon crop. Cereals adapted to a temperate climate, such as barley, oats, rye, spelt, triticale, and wheat, are called cool-season cereals. Those preferring a tropical climate, such as millet and sorghum, are called warm-season cereals. Cool-season cereals, especially rye, followed by barley, are hardy; they grow best in fairly cool weather, and stop growing, depending on variety, when the temperature goes above around . Warm-season cereals, in contrast, require hot weather and cannot tolerate frost. Cool-season cereals can be grown in highlands in the tropics, where they sometimes deliver several crops in a single year.

=== Planting ===

In the tropics, warm-season cereals can be grown at any time of the year. In temperate zones, these cereals can only be grown when there is no frost. Most cereals are planted in tilled soils, which reduces weeds and breaks up the surface of a field. Most cereals need regular water in the early part of their life cycle. Rice is commonly grown in flooded fields, though some strains are grown on dry land. Other warm climate cereals, such as sorghum, are adapted to arid conditions.

Cool-season cereals are grown mainly in temperate zones. These cereals often have both winter varieties for autumn sowing, winter dormancy, and early summer harvesting, and spring varieties planted in spring and harvested in late summer. Winter varieties have the advantage of using water when it is plentiful, and permitting a second crop after the early harvest. They flower only in spring as they require vernalization, exposure to cold for a specific period, fixed genetically. Spring crops grow when it is warmer but less rainy, so they may need irrigation.

=== Growth ===

Cereal strains are bred for consistency and resilience to the local environmental conditions. The greatest constraints on yield are plant diseases, especially rusts (mostly the &quot;Puccinia&quot; spp.) and powdery mildews. Fusarium head blight, caused by &quot;Fusarium graminearum&quot;, is a significant limitation on a wide variety of cereals. Other pressures include pest insects and wildlife like rodents and deer. In conventional agriculture, some farmers will apply fungicides or pesticides

=== Harvesting ===

Annual cereals die when they have come to seed, and dry up. Harvesting begins once the plants and seeds are dry enough. Harvesting in mechanized agricultural systems is by combine harvester, a machine which drives across the field in a single pass in which it cuts the stalks and then threshes and winnows the grain. In traditional agricultural systems, mostly in the Global South, harvesting may be by hand, using tools such as scythes and grain cradles. Leftover parts of the plant can be allowed to decompose, or collected as straw; this can be used for animal bedding, mulch, and a growing medium for mushrooms. It is used in crafts such as building with cob or straw-bale construction.

=== Preprocessing and storage ===

If cereals are not completely dry when harvested, such as when the weather is rainy, the stored grain will be spoilt by mould fungi such as &quot;Aspergillus&quot; and &quot;Penicillium&quot;. This can be prevented by drying it artificially. It may then be stored in a grain elevator or silo, to be sold later. Grain stores need to be constructed to protect the grain from damage by pests such as seed-eating birds and rodents.

=== Processing ===

When the cereal is ready to be distributed, it is sold to a manufacturing facility that first removes the outer layers of the grain for subsequent milling for flour or other processing steps, to produce foods such as flour, oatmeal, or pearl barley. In developing countries, processing may be traditional, in artisanal workshops, as with tortilla production in Central America.

Most cereals can be processed in a variety of ways. Rice processing, for instance, can create whole-grain or polished rice, or rice flour. Removal of the germ increases the longevity of grain in storage. Some grains can be malted, a process of activating enzymes in the seed to cause sprouting that turns the complex starches into sugars before drying. These sugars can be extracted for industrial uses and further processing, such as for making industrial alcohol, beer, whisky, or rice wine, or sold directly as a sugar. In the 20th century, industrial processes developed around chemically altering the grain, to be used for other processes. In particular, maize can be altered to produce food additives, such as corn starch and high-fructose corn syrup.

== Effects on the environment ==

=== Impacts ===

Cereal production has a substantial impact on the environment. Tillage can lead to soil erosion and increased runoff. Irrigation consumes large quantities of water; its extraction from lakes, rivers, or aquifers may have multiple environmental effects, such as lowering the water table and cause salination of aquifers. Fertilizer production contributes to global warming, and its use can lead to pollution and eutrophication of waterways. Arable farming uses large amounts of fossil fuel, releasing greenhouse gases which contribute to global warming. Pesticide usage can cause harm to wildlife, such as to bees.

=== Mitigations ===

Some of the impacts of growing cereals can be mitigated by changing production practices. Tillage can be reduced by no-till farming, such as by direct drilling of cereal seeds, or by developing and planting perennial crop varieties so that annual tilling is not required. Rice can be grown as a ratoon crop; and other researchers are exploring perennial cool-season cereals, such as kernza, being developed in the US.

Fertilizer and pesticide usage may be reduced in some polycultures, growing several crops in a single field at the same time. Fossil fuel-based nitrogen fertilizer usage can be reduced by intercropping cereals with legumes which fix nitrogen. Greenhouse gas emissions may be cut further by more efficient irrigation or by water harvesting methods like contour trenching that reduce the need for irrigation, and by breeding new crop varieties.

== Uses ==

=== Direct consumption ===

Some cereals such as rice require little preparation before human consumption. For example, to make plain cooked rice, raw milled rice is washed and boiled. Foods such as porridge and muesli may be made largely of whole cereals, especially oats, whereas commercial breakfast cereals such as granola may be highly processed and combined with sugars, oils, and other products.

=== Flour-based foods ===

Cereals can be ground to make flour. Wheat flour is the main ingredient of bread and pasta. Maize flour has been important in Mesoamerica since ancient times, with foods such as Mexican tortillas and tamales. Rye flour is a constituent of bread in central and northern Europe, while rice flour is common in Asia.

A cereal grain consists of starchy endosperm, germ, and bran. Wholemeal flour contains all of these; white flour is without some or all of the germ or bran.

=== Alcohol ===

Because cereals have a high starch content, they are often used to make industrial alcohol and alcoholic drinks by fermentation. For instance, beer is produced by brewing and fermenting starch, mainly from cereal grains—most commonly malted barley. Rice wines such as Japanese sake are brewed in Asia; a fermented rice and honey wine was made in China some 9,000 years ago.

=== Animal feed ===

Cereals and their related byproducts such as hay are routinely fed to farm animals. Common cereals as animal food include maize, barley, wheat, and oats. Moist grains may be treated chemically or made into silage; mechanically flattened or crimped, and kept in airtight storage until used; or stored dry with a moisture content of less than 14%. Commercially, grains are often combined with other materials and formed into feed pellets.

== Nutrition ==

=== Whole-grain and processed ===

As whole grains, cereals provide carbohydrates, polyunsaturated fats, protein, vitamins, and minerals. When processed by the removal of the bran and germ, all that remains is the starchy endosperm. In some developing countries, cereals constitute a majority of daily sustenance. In developed countries, cereal consumption is moderate and varied but still substantial, primarily in the form of refined and processed grains.

=== Amino acid balance ===

Some cereals are deficient in the essential amino acid lysine, obliging vegetarian cultures to combine their diet of cereal grains with legumes to obtain a balanced diet. Many legumes, however, are deficient in the essential amino acid methionine, which grains contain. Thus, a combination of legumes with grains forms a well-balanced diet for vegetarians. Such combinations include dal (lentils) with rice by South Indians and Bengalis, beans with maize tortillas, tofu with rice, and peanut butter with wholegrain wheat bread (as sandwiches) in several other cultures, including the Americas. For feeding animals, the amount of crude protein measured in grains is expressed as grain crude protein concentration.

=== Comparison of major cereals ===

== Production and trade commodities ==

Cereals constitute the world&#x27;s largest commodities by tonnage, whether measured by production or by international trade. Several major producers of cereals dominate the market. Because of the scale of the trade, some countries have become reliant on imports, thus cereals pricing or availability can have outsized impacts on countries with a food trade imbalance and thus food security. Speculation, as well as other compounding production and supply factors leading up to the 2007–2008 financial crises, created rapid inflation of grain prices during the 2007–2008 world food price crisis. Other disruptions, such as climate change or war related changes to supply or transportation can create further food insecurity; for example the Russian invasion of Ukraine in 2022 disrupted Ukrainian and Russian wheat supplies causing a global food price crisis in 2022 that affected countries heavily dependent on wheat flour.

=== Production ===

Cereals are the world&#x27;s largest crops by tonnage of grain produced. Three cereals, maize, wheat, and rice, together accounted for 89% of all cereal production worldwide in 2012, and 43% of the global supply of food energy in 2009, while the production of oats and rye has drastically fallen from their 1960s levels.

Other cereals not included in the U.N.&#x27;s Food and Agriculture Organization statistics include wild rice, which is grown in small amounts in North America, and teff, an ancient grain that is a staple in Ethiopia. Teff is grown in sub-Saharan Africa as a grass primarily for feeding horses. It is high in fiber and protein. Its flour is often used to make injera. It can be eaten as a warm breakfast cereal like farina with a chocolate or nutty flavor.

The table shows the annual production of cereals in 1961, 1980, 2000, 2010, and 2019/2020.

=== Trade ===

Cereals are the most traded commodities by quantity in 2021, with wheat, maize, and rice the main cereals involved. The Americas and Europe are the largest exporters, and Asia is the largest importer. The largest exporter of maize is the US, while India is the largest exporter of rice. China is the largest importer of maize and of rice. Many other countries trade cereals, both as exporters and as importers. Cereals are traded as futures on world commodity markets, helping to mitigate the risks of changes in price for example, if harvests fail.

== See also ==

* Food price crisis
* Food quality
* Food safety
* Lists of foods
* Post-harvest losses
* Pulse
== Notes ==

== References ==

== Sources ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12117" start="2" end="8" title="Cereal" label="cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="14" end="19" title="Poaceae" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="46" end="51" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="115" end="126" title="staple food" label="staple food"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="142" end="146" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="148" end="153" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="155" end="158" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="160" end="163" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="166" end="172" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="174" end="180" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="186" end="191" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="242" end="251" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q139925" start="256" end="262" title="quinoa" label="quinoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q749997" start="268" end="280" title="pseudocereal" label="pseudocereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="300" end="307" title="annual plant" label="annuals"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="384" end="393" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="648" end="661" title="Roman goddess" label="Roman goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="692" end="697" title="Ceres (mythology)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="713" end="725" title="domesticated" label="domesticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="733" end="742" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="766" end="771" title="Wheat" label="Wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="776" end="782" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="808" end="824" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="826" end="830" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="866" end="873" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="878" end="884" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="945" end="979" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Indigenous peoples of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="1092" end="1108" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593509" start="1156" end="1183" title="Grain trade" label="growing international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938952" start="1312" end="1323" title="whole grain" label="whole grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q36465" start="1364" end="1369" title="flour" label="flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="1384" end="1389" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q186817" start="1391" end="1399" title="porridge" label="porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="1441" end="1447" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="1492" end="1508" title="alcoholic drinks" label="alcoholic drinks"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="1517" end="1521" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381236" start="1556" end="1576" title="Environmental impact of agriculture" label="environmental impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="1618" end="1629" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751054" start="1676" end="1697" title="Sustainable agriculture" label="sustainable practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227672" start="1764" end="1779" title="no-till farming" label="no-till farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q853859" start="1784" end="1797" title="intercropping" label="intercropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="1847" end="1850" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="1856" end="1860" title="oats" label="oats"/>
<link wikidata="Q170526" start="1892" end="1908" title="Fertile Crescent" label="Fertile Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="1926" end="1935" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517652" start="1991" end="1999" title="Ohalo II" label="Ohalo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="2008" end="2014" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2100" end="2105" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q106611631" start="2115" end="2124" title="History of rice cultivation" label="farm rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q622543" start="2165" end="2170" title="Slash-and-burn" label="fires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842710" start="2220" end="2236" title="soil conditioner" label="soil conditioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q185716" start="2249" end="2255" title="manure" label="manure"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="2263" end="2270" title="compost" label="compost"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480332" start="2275" end="2280" title="wood ash" label="ashes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2371" end="2382" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="2388" end="2399" title="Nile Valley" label="Nile Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115587" start="2420" end="2439" title="Neolithic founder crops" label="Cereals that became"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="2469" end="2481" title="domesticated" label="domesticated"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="2583" end="2590" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="2688" end="2693" title="Maize" label="Maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="2731" end="2742" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088330" start="2974" end="2980" title="Ashnan" label="Ashnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32102" start="3000" end="3005" title="Ceres (mythology)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q18176350" start="3278" end="3299" title="Sun goddess of Arinna" label="Sun goddess of Arinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q932672" start="3315" end="3320" title="Lahmu" label="Lahmu"/>
<link wikidata="Q167685" start="3335" end="3340" title="Janus" label="Janus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8432" start="3351" end="3363" title="civilization" label="civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q186050" start="3714" end="3730" title="Green Revolution" label="Green Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q220212" start="3870" end="3881" title="monoculture" label="monoculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25105257" start="4194" end="4214" title="Protein quality" label="low-quality proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q245282" start="4221" end="4241" title="essential amino acid" label="essential amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="4268" end="4280" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q378154" start="4301" end="4321" title="essential fatty acid" label="essential fatty acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="4324" end="4331" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="4334" end="4342" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q24652614" start="4380" end="4394" title="ancient grains" label="ancient grains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700975" start="4399" end="4417" title="Heirloom plant" label="heirloom varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073374" start="4463" end="4492" title="Organic movement" label="&amp;quot;organic&amp;quot; movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q235352" start="4607" end="4617" title="Crop" label="food crops"/>
<link wikidata="Q932139" start="4636" end="4645" title="cash crop" label="cash crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="4692" end="4699" title="Poaceae" label="Poaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="4728" end="4733" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q506139" start="4768" end="4777" title="caryopsis" label="caryopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314483" start="4781" end="4786" title="fruit" label="fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="4797" end="4806" title="seed coat" label="seed coat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364" start="4825" end="4833" title="pericarp" label="pericarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="4848" end="4853" title="Plant stem" label="stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="4884" end="4889" title="Nodes (botany)" label="nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q303479" start="5146" end="5160" title="hermaphroditic" label="hermaphroditic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="5184" end="5189" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047706" start="5202" end="5214" title="Anemophily" label="anemophilous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="5319" end="5323" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="5340" end="5347" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="5349" end="5355" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q380329" start="5370" end="5379" title="triticale" label="triticale"/>
<link wikidata="Q749997" start="5472" end="5484" title="pseudocereal" label="pseudocereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734" start="5494" end="5503" title="buckwheat" label="buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q139925" start="5505" end="5511" title="quinoa" label="quinoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q156344" start="5517" end="5525" title="amaranth" label="amaranth"/>
<link wikidata="Q192691" start="5606" end="5612" title="annual plant" label="annual"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="5743" end="5752" title="perennial" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541883" start="5766" end="5772" title="ratoon" label="ratoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="5800" end="5817" title="temperate climate" label="temperate climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="5827" end="5833" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q12104" start="5835" end="5838" title="oat" label="oat"/>
<link wikidata="Q12099" start="5841" end="5844" title="rye" label="rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q158767" start="5846" end="5851" title="spelt" label="spelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q380329" start="5853" end="5862" title="triticale" label="triticale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="5868" end="5873" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q135712" start="5926" end="5942" title="tropical climate" label="tropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="5952" end="5958" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="5963" end="5970" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q878333" start="6593" end="6605" title="Tillage" label="tilled soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q654799" start="7307" end="7320" title="vernalization" label="vernalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="7601" end="7606" title="crop yield" label="yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q111911704" start="7611" end="7625" title="Lists of cereal pests and diseases" label="plant diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130524" start="7638" end="7643" title="Rust (fungus)" label="rusts"/>
<link wikidata="Q305162" start="7662" end="7670" title="Puccinia" label="Puccinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045958" start="7687" end="7701" title="powdery mildew" label="powdery mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q288349" start="7742" end="7762" title="Fusarium graminearum" label="Fusarium graminearum"/>
<link wikidata="Q111911704" start="7852" end="7864" title="Lists of cereal pests and diseases" label="pest insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q193237" start="7954" end="7963" title="fungicide" label="fungicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="8172" end="8189" title="combine harvester" label="combine harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369140" start="8285" end="8293" title="Threshing" label="threshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q961751" start="8298" end="8305" title="Winnowing" label="winnows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="8368" end="8380" title="Global North and Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q130912" start="8429" end="8435" title="scythe" label="scythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180468" start="8441" end="8453" title="grain cradle" label="grain cradle"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="8529" end="8534" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q54802" start="8659" end="8662" title="cob (material)" label="cob"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255891" start="8666" end="8689" title="straw-bale construction" label="straw-bale construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q159341" start="8847" end="8852" title="mould" label="mould"/>
<link wikidata="Q335130" start="8873" end="8884" title="Aspergillus" label="Aspergillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q843136" start="8901" end="8912" title="Penicillium" label="Penicillium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520009" start="8996" end="9010" title="grain elevator" label="grain elevator"/>
<link wikidata="Q213643" start="9014" end="9018" title="silo" label="silo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="9146" end="9152" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q623605" start="9323" end="9340" title="Gristmill" label="milling for flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089240" start="9400" end="9407" title="oatmeal" label="oatmeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743860" start="9412" end="9424" title="pearl barley" label="pearl barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="9514" end="9533" title="Tortilla" label="tortilla production"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9607" end="9622" title="Rice#Processing" label="Rice processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395224" start="9778" end="9784" title="Malting" label="malted"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="10001" end="10019" title="Ethanol" label="industrial alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="10021" end="10025" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="10027" end="10033" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142986" start="10038" end="10047" title="rice wine" label="rice wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485291" start="10057" end="10076" title="barley malt syrup" label="directly as a sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q627371" start="10099" end="10119" title="Food processing" label="industrial processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="10215" end="10220" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393961" start="10271" end="10282" title="corn starch" label="corn starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q11422173" start="10287" end="10311" title="high-fructose corn syrup" label="high-fructose corn syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q878333" start="10428" end="10435" title="Tillage" label="Tillage"/>
<link wikidata="Q889503" start="10448" end="10460" title="soil erosion" label="soil erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="10568" end="10575" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381246" start="10586" end="10616" title="Environmental effects of irrigation" label="multiple environmental effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="10639" end="10650" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="10685" end="10695" title="Fertilizer" label="Fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="10722" end="10736" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q156698" start="10776" end="10790" title="eutrophication" label="eutrophication"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="10842" end="10853" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q111461869" start="10855" end="10881" title="Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture" label="releasing greenhouse gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171498" start="10970" end="10977" title="Pesticide toxicity to bees" label="to bees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227672" start="11117" end="11132" title="no-till farming" label="no-till farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167856" start="11208" end="11222" title="perennial crop" label="perennial crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541883" start="11296" end="11302" title="Ratooning" label="ratoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745353" start="11384" end="11390" title="kernza" label="kernza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739133" start="11474" end="11485" title="polyculture" label="polyculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q83323" start="11564" end="11583" title="nitrogen fertilizer" label="nitrogen fertilizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q853859" start="11608" end="11621" title="intercropping" label="intercropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="11635" end="11641" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q272467" start="11649" end="11661" title="nitrogen fixation" label="fix nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165587" start="11772" end="11789" title="contour trenching" label="contour trenching"/>
<link wikidata="Q523224" start="12010" end="12021" title="cooked rice" label="cooked rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674257" start="12027" end="12038" title="white rice" label="milled rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q186817" start="12075" end="12083" title="porridge" label="porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q52406" start="12088" end="12094" title="muesli" label="muesli"/>
<link wikidata="Q768267" start="12169" end="12185" title="breakfast cereal" label="breakfast cereal"/>
<link wikidata="Q119203" start="12195" end="12202" title="granola" label="granola"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739805" start="12253" end="12257" title="Vegetable oil" label="oils"/>
<link wikidata="Q44494" start="12322" end="12328" title="Mill (grinding)" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249305" start="12344" end="12355" title="Wheat flour" label="Wheat flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7802" start="12382" end="12387" title="bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q178" start="12392" end="12397" title="pasta" label="pasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="12433" end="12444" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q55642411" start="12493" end="12501" title="tortilla" label="tortilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147853" start="12507" end="12513" title="tamale" label="tamale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269205" start="12590" end="12600" title="rice flour" label="rice flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="12656" end="12665" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641345" start="12667" end="12671" title="Cereal germ" label="germ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188672" start="12677" end="12681" title="bran" label="bran"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="12868" end="12886" title="industrial alcohol" label="industrial alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q154" start="12891" end="12906" title="alcoholic drink" label="alcoholic drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6950796" start="12911" end="12923" title="Fermentation in food processing" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="12939" end="12943" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q869095" start="12959" end="12966" title="brewing" label="brewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41534" start="12982" end="12988" title="starch" label="starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152024" start="13030" end="13034" title="malt" label="malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142986" start="13045" end="13054" title="Rice wine" label="Rice wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170219" start="13073" end="13077" title="sake" label="sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q336989" start="13237" end="13240" title="hay" label="hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q80962" start="13255" end="13274" title="animal husbandry" label="fed to farm animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q660071" start="13398" end="13404" title="silage" label="silage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938952" start="13685" end="13696" title="whole grain" label="whole grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11358" start="13715" end="13727" title="carbohydrate" label="carbohydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3604509" start="13730" end="13749" title="polyunsaturated fat" label="polyunsaturated fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296145" start="13752" end="13759" title="Protein (nutrient)" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q34956" start="13761" end="13768" title="vitamin" label="vitamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189598" start="13775" end="13783" title="Mineral (nutrient)" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="13888" end="13908" title="Developing country" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="13964" end="13983" title="Developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q178430" start="14189" end="14195" title="lysine" label="lysine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="14270" end="14276" title="legume" label="legume"/>
<link wikidata="Q180341" start="14370" end="14380" title="methionine" label="methionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685145" start="14410" end="14423" title="protein combining" label="a combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139389" start="14517" end="14520" title="dal" label="dal"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="14544" end="14555" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q402913" start="14562" end="14570" title="Bengali people" label="Bengalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="14572" end="14577" title="beans" label="beans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15660894" start="14583" end="14598" title="Corn tortilla" label="maize tortillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="14600" end="14604" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q147651" start="14620" end="14633" title="peanut butter" label="peanut butter"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="14733" end="14748" title="fodder" label="feeding animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q21296145" start="14764" end="14777" title="crude protein" label="crude protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886253" start="15203" end="15210" title="Food prices" label="pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229911" start="15303" end="15316" title="food security" label="food security"/>
<link wikidata="Q107885" start="15318" end="15329" title="Speculation" label="Speculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="15408" end="15434" title="Financial crisis of 2007–2008" label="2007–2008 financial crises"/>
<link wikidata="Q685550" start="15487" end="15520" title="2007–2008 world food price crisis" label="2007–2008 world food price crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="15667" end="15694" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q111525590" start="15760" end="15792" title="World food crises (2022–present)" label="global food price crisis in 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q186205" start="16087" end="16098" title="food energy" label="food energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q82151" start="16240" end="16273" title="Food and Agriculture Organization" label="Food and Agriculture Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q831681" start="16293" end="16302" title="wild rice" label="wild rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q843942" start="16358" end="16362" title="teff" label="teff"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="16401" end="16409" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q935807" start="16553" end="16559" title="injera" label="injera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505415" start="16609" end="16615" title="Farina (food)" label="farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q317088" start="16786" end="16797" title="commodities" label="commodities"/>
<link wikidata="Q183984" start="17181" end="17198" title="futures trading" label="traded as futures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922469" start="17208" end="17224" title="commodity market" label="commodity market"/>
<link wikidata="Q124488251" start="17327" end="17344" title="Food price crisis" label="Food price crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498665" start="17347" end="17359" title="Food quality" label="Food quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q909821" start="17362" end="17373" title="Food safety" label="Food safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q5944294" start="17376" end="17390" title="Lists of foods" label="Lists of foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q7233547" start="17393" end="17412" title="Post-harvest losses (grains)" label="Post-harvest losses"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="17415" end="17420" title="Pulse (legume)" label="Pulse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6704" wikidata="Q641707" url="?curid=6704" title="Christendom">
<text>The terms Christendom or Christian world commonly refer to the global Christian community, Christian states, Christian-majority countries or countries in which Christianity is dominant or prevails.

Following the spread of Christianity from the Levant to Europe and North Africa during the early Roman Empire, Christendom has been divided in the pre-existing Greek East and Latin West. After the Great schism of 1054, two main branches within Christianity emerged, centred around the cities of Rome (Western Christianity, whose community was called Western or Latin Christendom) and Constantinople (Eastern Christianity, whose community was called Eastern Christendom). After the fall of Constantinople in 1453, Latin Christendom rose to a central role in the Western world. Following the reformation, protestantism emerged as the third main branch of Christianity in the 16th century. The history of the Christian world spans about 2,000 years and includes a variety of socio-political developments, as well as advancements in the arts, architecture, literature, science, philosophy, politics and technology.

==Terminology==
The Anglo-Saxon term &quot;crīstendōm&quot; appears to have been coined in the 9th century by a scribe somewhere in southern England, possibly at the court of king Alfred the Great of Wessex. The scribe was translating Paulus Orosius&#x27; book &quot;History Against the Pagans&quot; () and in need for a term to express the concept of the universal culture focused on Jesus Christ. It had the sense now taken by &quot;Christianity&quot; (as is still the case with the cognate Dutch &quot;christendom&quot;, where it denotes mostly the religion itself, just like the German &quot;Christentum&quot;).

The current sense of the word of &quot;lands where Christianity is the dominant religion&quot; emerged in Late Middle English (by ).

Canadian theology professor Douglas John Hall stated (1997) that &quot;Christendom&quot; [...] means literally the dominion or sovereignty of the Christian religion.&quot; Thomas John Curry, Roman Catholic auxiliary bishop of Los Angeles, defined (2001) Christendom as &quot;the system dating from the fourth century by which governments upheld and promoted Christianity.&quot; Curry states that the end of Christendom came about because modern governments refused to &quot;uphold the teachings, customs, ethos, and practice of Christianity.&quot; British church historian Diarmaid MacCulloch described (2010) Christendom as &quot;the union between Christianity and secular power.&quot;

There is a common and nonliteral sense of the word that is much like the terms &quot;Western world&quot;, &quot;known world&quot; or &quot;Free World&quot;. The notion of &quot;Europe&quot; and the &quot;Western World&quot; has been intimately connected with the concept of &quot;Christianity and Christendom&quot;; many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity.

==History==
===Rise of Christendom===

Early Christianity spread in the Greek/Roman world and beyond as a 1st-century Jewish sect, which historians refer to as Jewish Christianity. It may be divided into two distinct phases: the apostolic period, when the first apostles were alive and organizing the Church, and the post-apostolic period, when an early episcopal structure developed, whereby bishoprics were governed by bishops (overseers).

The post-apostolic period concerns the time roughly after the death of the apostles when bishops emerged as overseers of urban Christian populations. The earliest recorded use of the terms &quot;Christianity&quot; (Greek ) and &quot;catholic&quot; (Greek ), dates to this period, the 2nd century, attributed to Ignatius of Antioch &quot;c.&quot; 107. Early Christendom would close at the end of imperial persecution of Christians after the ascension of Constantine the Great and the Edict of Milan in AD 313 and the First Council of Nicaea in 325.

According to Malcolm Muggeridge (1980), Christ founded Christianity, but Constantine founded Christendom. Canadian theology professor Douglas John Hall dates the &#x27;inauguration of Christendom&#x27; to the 4th century, with Constantine playing the primary role (so much so that he equates Christendom with &quot;Constantinianism&quot;) and Theodosius I (Edict of Thessalonica, 380) and Justinian I secondary roles.

===Late Antiquity and Early Middle Ages===


&quot;Christendom&quot; has referred to the medieval and renaissance notion of the &quot;Christian world&quot; as a polity. In essence, the earliest vision of Christendom was a vision of a Christian theocracy, a government founded upon and upholding Christian values, whose institutions are spread through and over with Christian doctrine. In this period, members of the Christian clergy wield political authority. The specific relationship between the political leaders and the clergy varied but, in theory, the national and political divisions were at times subsumed under the leadership of the church as an institution. This model of church-state relations was accepted by various Church leaders and political leaders in European history.

The Church gradually became a defining institution of the Roman Empire. Emperor Constantine issued the Edict of Milan in 313 proclaiming toleration for the Christian religion, and convoked the First Council of Nicaea in 325 whose Nicene Creed included belief in &quot;one holy catholic and apostolic Church&quot;. Emperor Theodosius I made Nicene Christianity the state church of the Roman Empire with the Edict of Thessalonica of 380. In terms of prosperity and cultural life, the Byzantine Empire was one of the peaks in Christian history and Christian civilization, and Constantinople remained the leading city of the Christian world in size, wealth, and culture. There was a renewed interest in classical Greek philosophy, as well as an increase in literary output in vernacular Greek.

As the Western Roman Empire disintegrated into feudal kingdoms and principalities, the concept of Christendom changed as the western church became one of five patriarchates of the Pentarchy and the Christians of the Eastern Roman Empire developed. The Byzantine Empire was the last bastion of Christendom. Christendom would take a turn with the rise of the Franks, a Germanic tribe who converted to the Christian faith and entered into communion with Rome.

On Christmas Day 800 AD, Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne, resulting in the creation of another Christian king beside the Christian emperor in the Byzantine state. The Carolingian Empire created a definition of &quot;Christendom&quot; in juxtaposition with the Byzantine Empire, that of a distributed versus centralized culture respectively.

The classical heritage flourished throughout the Middle Ages in both the Byzantine Greek East and the Latin West. In the Greek philosopher Plato&#x27;s ideal state there are three major classes, which was representative of the idea of the &quot;tripartite soul&quot;, which is expressive of three functions or capacities of the human soul: &quot;reason&quot;, &quot;the spirited element&quot;, and &quot;appetites&quot; (or &quot;passions&quot;). Will Durant made a convincing case that certain prominent features of Plato&#x27;s ideal community where discernible in the organization, dogma and effectiveness of &quot;the&quot; Medieval Church in Europe:

... For a thousand years Europe was ruled by an order of guardians considerably like that which was visioned by our philosopher. During the Middle Ages it was customary to classify the population of Christendom into &quot;laboratores&quot; (workers), &quot;bellatores&quot; (soldiers), and &quot;oratores&quot; (clergy). The last group, though small in number, monopolized the instruments and opportunities of culture, and ruled with almost unlimited sway half of the most powerful continent on the globe. The clergy, like Plato&#x27;s guardians, were placed in authority... by their talent as shown in ecclesiastical studies and administration, by their disposition to a life of meditation and simplicity, and ... by the influence of their relatives with the powers of state and church. In the latter half of the period in which they ruled [800 AD onwards], the clergy were as free from family cares as even Plato could desire [for such guardians]... [Clerical] Celibacy was part of the psychological structure of the power of the clergy; for on the one hand they were unimpeded by the narrowing egoism of the family, and on the other their apparent superiority to the call of the flesh added to the awe in which lay sinners held them...&quot;&quot;

===Later Middle Ages and Renaissance===


After the collapse of Charlemagne&#x27;s empire, the southern remnants of the Holy Roman Empire became a collection of states loosely connected to the Holy See of Rome. Tensions between Pope Innocent III and secular rulers ran high, as the pontiff exerted control over their temporal counterparts in the west and vice versa. The pontificate of Innocent III is considered the height of temporal power of the papacy. The &quot;Corpus Christianum&quot; described the then-current notion of the community of all Christians united under the Roman Catholic Church. The community was to be guided by Christian values in its politics, economics and social life. Its legal basis was the &quot;corpus iuris canonica&quot; (body of canon law).

In the East, Christendom became more defined as the Byzantine Empire&#x27;s gradual loss of territory to an expanding Islam and the Muslim conquest of Persia. This caused Christianity to become important to the Byzantine identity. Before the East–West Schism which divided the Church religiously, there had been the notion of a &quot;universal Christendom&quot; that included the East and the West. After the East–West Schism, hopes of regaining religious unity with the West were ended by the Fourth Crusade, when Crusaders conquered the Byzantine capital of Constantinople and hastened the decline of the Byzantine Empire on the path to its destruction. With the breakup of the Byzantine Empire into individual nations with nationalist Orthodox Churches, the term Christendom described Western Europe, Catholicism, Orthodox Byzantines, and other Eastern rites of the Church.

The Catholic Church&#x27;s peak of authority over all European Christians and their common endeavours of the Christian community—for example, the Crusades, the fight against the Moors in the Iberian Peninsula and against the Ottomans in the Balkans—helped to develop a sense of communal identity against the obstacle of Europe&#x27;s deep political divisions. The popes, formally just the bishops of Rome, claimed to be the focus of all Christendom, which was largely recognised in Western Christendom from the 11th century until the Reformation, but not in Eastern Christendom. Moreover, this authority was also sometimes abused, and fostered the Inquisition and anti-Jewish pogroms, to root out divergent elements and create a religiously uniform community. Ultimately, the Inquisition was done away with by order of Pope Innocent III.

Christendom ultimately was led into specific crisis in the late Middle Ages, when the kings of France managed to establish a French national church during the 14th century and the papacy became ever more aligned with the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation. Known as the Western Schism, western Christendom was a split between three men, who were driven by politics rather than any real theological disagreement for simultaneously claiming to be the true pope. The Avignon Papacy developed a reputation for corruption that estranged major parts of Western Christendom. The Avignon schism was ended by the Council of Constance.

Before the modern period, Christendom was in a general crisis at the time of the Renaissance Popes because of the moral laxity of these pontiffs and their willingness to seek and rely on temporal power as secular rulers did. Many in the Catholic Church&#x27;s hierarchy in the Renaissance became increasingly entangled with insatiable greed for material wealth and temporal power, which led to many reform movements, some merely wanting a moral reformation of the Church&#x27;s clergy, while others repudiated the Church and separated from it in order to form new sects. The Italian Renaissance produced ideas or institutions by which men living in society could be held together in harmony. In the early 16th century, Baldassare Castiglione (&quot;The Book of the Courtier&quot;) laid out his vision of the ideal gentleman and lady, while Machiavelli cast a jaundiced eye on &quot;la verità effetuale delle cose&quot;—the actual truth of things—in &quot;The Prince&quot;, composed, humanist style, chiefly of parallel ancient and modern examples of Virtù. Some Protestant movements grew up along lines of mysticism or renaissance humanism (cf. Erasmus). The Catholic Church fell partly into general neglect under the Renaissance Popes, whose inability to govern the Church by showing personal example of high moral standards set the climate for what would ultimately become the Protestant Reformation. During the Renaissance, the papacy was mainly run by the wealthy families and also had strong secular interests. To safeguard Rome and the connected Papal States the popes became necessarily involved in temporal matters, even leading armies, as the great patron of arts Pope Julius II did. During these intermediate times, popes strove to make Rome the capital of Christendom while projecting it through art, architecture, and literature as the center of a Golden Age of unity, order, and peace.

Professor Frederick J. McGinness described Rome as essential in understanding the legacy the Church and its representatives encapsulated best by The Eternal City: No other city in Europe matches Rome in its traditions, history, legacies, and influence in the Western world. Rome in the Renaissance under the papacy not only acted as guardian and transmitter of these elements stemming from the Roman Empire but also assumed the role as artificer and interpreter of its myths and meanings for the peoples of Europe from the Middle Ages to modern times... Under the patronage of the popes, whose wealth and income were exceeded only by their ambitions, the city became a cultural center for master architects, sculptors, musicians, painters, and artisans of every kind...In its myth and message, Rome had become the sacred city of the popes, the prime symbol of a triumphant Catholicism, the center of orthodox Christianity, a new Jerusalem.

It is clearly noticeable that the popes of the Italian Renaissance have been subjected by many writers with an overly harsh tone. Pope Julius II, for example, was not only an effective secular leader in military affairs, a deviously effective politician but foremost one of the greatest patron of the Renaissance period and person who also encouraged open criticism from noted humanists.

The blossoming of renaissance humanism was made very much possible due to the universality of the institutions of Catholic Church and represented by personalities such as Pope Pius II, Nicolaus Copernicus, Leon Battista Alberti, Desiderius Erasmus, sir Thomas More, Bartolomé de Las Casas, Leonardo da Vinci and Teresa of Ávila. George Santayana in his work &quot;The Life of Reason&quot; postulated the tenets of the all encompassing order the Church had brought and as the repository of the legacy of classical antiquity:

The enterprise of individuals or of small aristocratic bodies has meantime sown the world which we call civilised with some seeds and nuclei of order. There are scattered about a variety of churches, industries, academies, and governments. But the universal order once dreamt of and nominally almost established, the empire of universal peace, all-permeating rational art, and philosophical worship, is mentioned no more. An unformulated conception, the prerational ethics of private privilege and national unity, fills the background of men&#x27;s minds. It represents feudal traditions rather than the tendency really involved in contemporary industry, science, or philanthropy. Those dark ages, from which our political practice is derived, had a political theory which we should do well to study; for their theory about a universal empire and a Catholic church was in turn the echo of a former age of reason, when a few men conscious of ruling the world had for a moment sought to survey it as a whole and to rule it justly.

===Reformation and Early Modern era===


Developments in western philosophy and European events brought change to the notion of the &quot;Corpus Christianum&quot;. The Hundred Years&#x27; War accelerated the process of transforming France from a feudal monarchy to a centralized state. The rise of strong, centralized monarchies denoted the European transition from feudalism to capitalism. By the end of the Hundred Years&#x27; War, both France and England were able to raise enough money through taxation to create independent standing armies. In the Wars of the Roses, Henry Tudor took the crown of England. His heir, the absolute king Henry VIII establishing the English church.

In modern history, the Reformation and rise of modernity in the early 16th century entailed a change in the &quot;Corpus Christianum&quot;. In the Holy Roman Empire, the Peace of Augsburg of 1555 officially ended the idea among secular leaders that all Christians must be united under one church. The principle of &quot;cuius regio, eius religio&quot; (&quot;whose the region is, his religion&quot;) established the religious, political and geographic divisions of Christianity, and this was established with the Treaty of Westphalia in 1648, which legally ended the concept of a single Christian hegemony in the territories of the Holy Roman Empire, despite the Catholic Church&#x27;s doctrine that it alone is the one true Church founded by Christ.
Subsequently, each government determined the religion of their own state. Christians living in states where their denomination was &quot;not&quot; the established one were guaranteed the right to practice their faith in public during allotted hours and in private at their will. At times there were mass expulsions of dissenting faiths as happened with the Salzburg Protestants. Some people passed as adhering to the official church, but instead lived as Nicodemites or crypto-protestants.

The European wars of religion are usually taken to have ended with the Treaty of Westphalia (1648), or arguably, including the Nine Years&#x27; War and the War of the Spanish Succession in this period, with the Treaty of Utrecht of 1713. In the 18th century, the focus shifts away from religious conflicts, either between Christian factions or against the external threat of Islamic factions.

===End of Christendom===

The European Miracle, the Age of Enlightenment and the formation of the great colonial empires, together with the beginning decline of the Ottoman Empire, mark the end of the geopolitical &quot;history of Christendom&quot;. Instead, the focus of Western history shifts to the development of the nation-state, accompanied by increasing atheism and secularism, culminating with the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars at the turn of the 19th century.

In his 1964 encyclical letter &quot;Ecclesiam Suam&quot;, Pope Paul VI observed thatWriting in 1997, Canadian theology professor Douglas John Hall argued that Christendom had either fallen already or was in its death throes; although its end was gradual and not as clear to pin down as its 4th-century establishment, the &quot;transition to the post-Constantinian, or post-Christendom, situation (...) has already been in process for a century or two&quot;, beginning with the 18th-century rationalist Enlightenment and the French Revolution (the first attempt to topple the Christian establishment). American Catholic bishop Thomas John Curry stated in 2001 that the end of Christendom came about because modern governments refused to &quot;uphold the teachings, customs, ethos, and practice of Christianity&quot;. He argued the First Amendment to the United States Constitution (1791) and the Second Vatican Council&#x27;s Declaration on Religious Freedom (1965) are two of the most important documents setting the stage for its end. According to British historian Diarmaid MacCulloch (2010), Christendom was &#x27;killed&#x27; by the First World War (1914–18), which led to the fall of the three main Christian empires (Russian, German and Austrian) of Europe, as well as the Ottoman Empire, rupturing the Eastern Christian communities that had existed on its territory. The Christian empires were replaced by secular, even anti-clerical republics seeking to definitively keep the churches out of politics. The only surviving monarchy with an established church, Britain, was severely damaged by the war, lost most of Ireland due to Catholic–Protestant infighting, and was starting to lose grip on its colonies.

Changes in worldwide Christianity over the last century have been significant, since 1900, Christianity has spread rapidly in the Global South and Third World countries. The late 20th century has shown the shift of Christian adherence to the Third World and the Southern Hemisphere in general, by 2010 about 157 countries and territories in the world had Christian majorities.

==Classical culture==

Western culture, throughout most of its history, has been nearly equivalent to Christian culture, and many of the population of the Western hemisphere could broadly be described as cultural Christians. The notion of &quot;Europe&quot; and the &quot;Western World&quot; has been intimately connected with the concept of &quot;Christianity and Christendom&quot;; many even attribute Christianity for being the link that created a unified European identity. Historian Paul Legutko of Stanford University said the Catholic Church is &quot;at the center of the development of the values, ideas, science, laws, and institutions which constitute what we call Western civilization.&quot;

Though Western culture contained several polytheistic religions during its early years under the Greek and Roman Empires, as the centralized Roman power waned, the dominance of the Catholic Church was the only consistent force in Western Europe. Until the Age of Enlightenment, Christian culture guided the course of philosophy, literature, art, music and science. Christian disciplines of the respective arts have subsequently developed into Christian philosophy, Christian art, Christian music, Christian literature etc. Art and literature, law, education, and politics were preserved in the teachings of the Church, in an environment that, otherwise, would have probably seen their loss. The Church founded many cathedrals, universities, monasteries and seminaries, some of which continue to exist today. Medieval Christianity created the first modern universities. The Catholic Church established a hospital system in medieval Europe that vastly improved upon the Roman &quot;valetudinaria&quot;. These hospitals were established to cater to &quot;particular social groups marginalized by poverty, sickness, and age,&quot; according to historian of hospitals, Guenter Risse. Christianity also had a strong impact on all other aspects of life: marriage and family, education, the humanities and sciences, the political and social order, the economy, and the arts.

Christianity had a significant impact on education and science and medicine as the church created the bases of the Western system of education, and was the sponsor of founding universities in the Western world as the university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting. Many clerics throughout history have made significant contributions to science and Jesuits in particular have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science. The cultural influence of Christianity includes social welfare, founding hospitals, economics (as the Protestant work ethic), natural law (which would later influence the creation of international law), politics, architecture, literature, personal hygiene, and family life. Christianity played a role in ending practices common among pagan societies, such as human sacrifice, slavery, infanticide and polygamy.

===Art and literature===
====Writings and poetry====
Christian literature is writing that deals with Christian themes and incorporates the Christian world view. This constitutes a huge body of extremely varied writing. Christian poetry is any poetry that contains Christian teachings, themes, or references. The influence of Christianity on poetry has been great in any area that Christianity has taken hold. Christian poems often directly reference the Bible, while others provide allegory.

====Supplemental arts====
Christian art is art produced in an attempt to illustrate, supplement and portray in tangible form the principles of Christianity. Virtually all Christian groupings use or have used art to some extent. The prominence of art and the media, style, and representations change; however, the unifying theme is ultimately the representation of the life and times of Jesus and in some cases the Old Testament. Depictions of saints are also common, especially in Anglicanism, Roman Catholicism, and Eastern Orthodoxy.

====Illumination====

An illuminated manuscript is a manuscript in which the text is supplemented by the addition of decoration. The earliest surviving substantive illuminated manuscripts are from the period AD 400 to 600, primarily produced in Ireland, Constantinople and Italy. The majority of surviving manuscripts are from the Middle Ages, although many illuminated manuscripts survive from the 15th century Renaissance, along with a very limited number from Late Antiquity.

Most illuminated manuscripts were created as codices, which had superseded scrolls; some isolated single sheets survive. A very few illuminated manuscript fragments survive on papyrus. Most medieval manuscripts, illuminated or not, were written on parchment (most commonly of calf, sheep, or goat skin), but most manuscripts important enough to illuminate were written on the best quality of parchment, called vellum, traditionally made of unsplit calfskin, though high quality parchment from other skins was also called &quot;parchment&quot;.

====Iconography====

Christian art began, about two centuries after Christ, by borrowing motifs from Roman Imperial imagery, classical Greek and Roman religion and popular art. Religious images are used to some extent by the Abrahamic Christian faith, and often contain highly complex iconography, which reflects centuries of accumulated tradition. In the Late Antique period iconography began to be standardised, and to relate more closely to Biblical texts, although many gaps in the canonical Gospel narratives were plugged with matter from the apocryphal gospels. Eventually the Church would succeed in weeding most of these out, but some remain, like the ox and ass in the Nativity of Christ.

An icon is a religious work of art, most commonly a painting, from Eastern Christianity. Christianity has used symbolism from its very beginnings. In both East and West, numerous iconic types of Christ, Mary and saints and other subjects were developed; the number of named types of icons of Mary, with or without the infant Christ, was especially large in the East, whereas Christ Pantocrator was much the commonest image of Christ.

Christian symbolism invests objects or actions with an inner meaning expressing Christian ideas. Christianity has borrowed from the common stock of significant symbols known to most periods and to all regions of the world. Religious symbolism is effective when it appeals to both the intellect and the emotions. Especially important depictions of Mary include the Hodegetria and Panagia types. Traditional models evolved for narrative paintings, including large cycles covering the events of the Life of Christ, the Life of the Virgin, parts of the Old Testament, and, increasingly, the lives of popular saints. Especially in the West, a system of attributes developed for identifying individual figures of saints by a standard appearance and symbolic objects held by them; in the East they were more likely to identified by text labels.

Each saint has a story and a reason why he or she led an exemplary life. Symbols have been used to tell these stories throughout the history of the Church. A number of Christian saints are traditionally represented by a symbol or iconic motif associated with their life, termed an attribute or emblem, in order to identify them. The study of these forms part of iconography in Art history.

====Architecture====

Christian architecture encompasses a wide range of both secular and religious styles from the foundation of Christianity to the present day, influencing the design and construction of buildings and structures in Christian culture.

Buildings were at first adapted from those originally intended for other purposes but, with the rise of distinctively ecclesiastical architecture, church buildings came to influence secular ones which have often imitated religious architecture. In the 20th century, the use of new materials, such as concrete, as well as simpler styles has had its effect upon the design of churches and arguably the flow of influence has been reversed. From the birth of Christianity to the present, the most significant period of transformation for Christian architecture in the west was the Gothic cathedral. In the east, Byzantine architecture was a continuation of Roman architecture.

===Philosophy===
Christian philosophy is a term to describe the fusion of various fields of philosophy with the theological doctrines of Christianity. Scholasticism, which means &quot;that [which] belongs to the school&quot;, and was a method of learning taught by the academics (or &quot;school people&quot;) of medieval universities c. 1100–1500. Scholasticism originally started to reconcile the philosophy of the ancient classical philosophers with medieval Christian theology. Scholasticism is not a philosophy or theology in itself but a tool and method for learning which places emphasis on dialectical reasoning.
==Christian civilization==


===Medieval conditions===
The Byzantine Empire, which was the most sophisticated culture during antiquity, suffered under Muslim conquests limiting its scientific prowess during the Medieval period. Christian Western Europe had suffered a catastrophic loss of knowledge following the fall of the Western Roman Empire. But thanks to the Church scholars such as Aquinas and Buridan, the West carried on at least the spirit of scientific inquiry which would later lead to Europe&#x27;s taking the lead in science during the Scientific Revolution using translations of medieval works.

Medieval technology refers to the technology used in medieval Europe under Christian rule. After the Renaissance of the 12th century, medieval Europe saw a radical change in the rate of new inventions, innovations in the ways of managing traditional means of production, and economic growth. The period saw major technological advances, including the adoption of gunpowder and the astrolabe, the invention of spectacles, and greatly improved water mills, building techniques, agriculture in general, clocks, and ships. The latter advances made possible the dawn of the Age of Exploration. The development of water mills was impressive, and extended from agriculture to sawmills both for timber and stone, probably derived from Roman technology. By the time of the Domesday Book, most large villages in Britain had mills. They also were widely used in mining, as described by Georg Agricola in De Re Metallica for raising ore from shafts, crushing ore, and even powering bellows.

Significant in this respect were advances within the fields of navigation. The compass and astrolabe along with advances in shipbuilding, enabled the navigation of the World Oceans and thus domination of the worlds economic trade. Gutenberg&#x27;s printing press made possible a dissemination of knowledge to a wider population, that would not only lead to a gradually more egalitarian society, but one more able to dominate other cultures, drawing from a vast reserve of knowledge and experience.

===Renaissance innovations===
During the Renaissance, great advances occurred in geography, astronomy, chemistry, physics, math, manufacturing, and engineering. The rediscovery of ancient scientific texts was accelerated after the Fall of Constantinople, and the invention of printing which would democratize learning and allow a faster propagation of new ideas. &quot;Renaissance technology&quot; is the set of artifacts and customs, spanning roughly the 14th through the 16th century. The era is marked by such profound technical advancements like the printing press, linear perspectivity, patent law, double shell domes or Bastion fortresses. Draw-books of the Renaissance artist-engineers such as Taccola and Leonardo da Vinci give a deep insight into the mechanical technology then known and applied.

Renaissance science spawned the Scientific Revolution; science and technology began a cycle of mutual advancement. The &quot;Scientific Renaissance&quot; was the early phase of the Scientific Revolution. In the two-phase model of early modern science: a &quot;Scientific Renaissance&quot; of the 15th and 16th centuries, focused on the restoration of the natural knowledge of the ancients; and a &quot;Scientific Revolution&quot; of the 17th century, when scientists shifted from recovery to innovation. Some scholars and historians attributes Christianity to having contributed to the rise of the Scientific Revolution.

Professor Noah J Efron says that &quot;Generations of historians and sociologists have discovered many ways in which Christians, Christian beliefs, and Christian institutions played crucial roles in fashioning the tenets, methods, and institutions of what in time became modern science. They found that some forms of Christianity provided the motivation to study nature systematically...&quot; Virtually all modern scholars and historians agree that Christianity moved many early-modern intellectuals to study nature systematically.

==Demographics==
===Geographic spread===

In 2009, according to the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, Christianity was the majority religion in Europe (including Russia) with 80%, Latin America with 92%, North America with 81%, and Oceania with 79%. There are also large Christian communities in other parts of the world, such as China, India and Central Asia, where Christianity is the second-largest religion after Islam. The United States is home to the world&#x27;s largest Christian population, followed by Brazil and Mexico.

Many Christians not only live under, but also have an official status in, a state religion of the following nations: Argentina (Roman Catholic Church), Armenia (Armenian Apostolic Church), Costa Rica (Roman Catholic Church), Denmark (Church of Denmark), El Salvador (Roman Catholic Church), England (Church of England), Georgia (Georgian Orthodox Church), Greece (Church of Greece), Iceland (Church of Iceland), Liechtenstein (Roman Catholic Church), Malta (Roman Catholic Church), Monaco (Roman Catholic Church), Romania (Romanian Orthodox Church), Norway (Church of Norway), Vatican City (Roman Catholic Church), Switzerland (Roman Catholic Church, Swiss Reformed Church and Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland).

===Number of adherents===
The estimated number of Christians in the world ranges from 2.2 billion to 2.4 billion people. The faith represents approximately one-third of the world&#x27;s population and is the largest religion in the world, with the three largest groups of Christians being the Catholic Church, Protestantism, and the Eastern Orthodox Church. The largest Christian denomination is the Catholic Church, with an estimated 1.2 billion adherents.

===Notable Christian organizations===
A religious order is a lineage of communities and organizations of people who live in some way set apart from society in accordance with their specific religious devotion, usually characterized by the principles of its founder&#x27;s religious practice. In contrast, the term Holy Orders is used by many Christian churches to refer to ordination or to a group of individuals who are set apart for a special role or ministry. Historically, the word &quot;order&quot; designated an established civil body or corporation with a hierarchy, and ordination meant legal incorporation into an ordo. The word &quot;holy&quot; refers to the Church. In context, therefore, a holy order is set apart for ministry in the Church. Religious orders are composed of initiates (laity) and, in some traditions, ordained clergies.

Various organizations include:
* In the Roman Catholic Church, religious institutes and secular institutes are the major forms of institutes of consecrated life, similar to which are societies of apostolic life. They are organizations of laity or clergy who live a common life under the guidance of a fixed rule and the leadership of a superior. (ed., see :Category: Catholic orders and societies for a particular listing.)
* Anglican religious orders are communities of laity or clergy in the Anglican churches who live under a common rule of life. (ed., see :Category: Anglican organizations for a particular listing)
==Christianity law and ethics==

===Church and state framing===
Within the framework of Christianity, there are at least three possible definitions for Church law. One is the Torah/Mosaic Law (from what Christians consider to be the Old Testament) also called Divine Law or Biblical law. Another is the instructions of Jesus of Nazareth in the Gospel (sometimes referred to as the Law of Christ or the New Commandment or the New Covenant). A third is canon law which is the internal ecclesiastical law governing the Roman Catholic Church, the Eastern Orthodox churches, and the Anglican Communion of churches. The way that such church law is legislated, interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches. In all three traditions, a canon was initially a rule adopted by a council (From Greek &quot;kanon&quot; / κανών, Hebrew kaneh / קנה, for rule, standard, or measure); these canons formed the foundation of canon law.

Christian ethics in general has tended to stress the need for grace, mercy, and forgiveness because of human weakness and developed while Early Christians were subjects of the Roman Empire. From the time Nero blamed Christians for setting Rome ablaze (64 AD) until Galerius (311 AD), persecutions against Christians erupted periodically. Consequently, Early Christian ethics included discussions of how believers should relate to Roman authority and to the empire.

Under the Emperor Constantine I (312–337), Christianity became a legal religion. While some scholars debate whether Constantine&#x27;s conversion to Christianity was authentic or simply matter of political expediency, Constantine&#x27;s decree made the empire safe for Christian practice and belief. Consequently, issues of Christian doctrine, ethics and church practice were debated openly, see for example the First Council of Nicaea and the First seven Ecumenical Councils. By the time of Theodosius I (379–395), Christianity had become the state religion of the empire. With Christianity in power, ethical concerns broaden and included discussions of the proper role of the state.

Render unto Caesar... is the beginning of a phrase attributed to Jesus in the synoptic gospels which reads in full, &quot;Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar&#x27;s, and unto God the things that are God&#x27;s&quot;. This phrase has become a widely quoted summary of the relationship between Christianity and secular authority. The gospels say that when Jesus gave his response, his interrogators &quot;marvelled, and left him, and went their way.&quot; Time has not resolved an ambiguity in this phrase, and people continue to interpret this passage to support various positions that are poles apart. The traditional division, carefully determined, in Christian thought is the state and church have separate spheres of influence.

Thomas Aquinas thoroughly discussed that &quot;human law&quot; is positive law which means that it is natural law applied by governments to societies. All human laws were to be judged by their conformity to the natural law. An unjust law was in a sense no law at all. At this point, the natural law was not only used to pass judgment on the moral worth of various laws, but also to determine what the law said in the first place. This could result in some tension. Late ecclesiastical writers followed in his footsteps.

====Democratic ideology====
Christian democracy is a political ideology that seeks to apply Christian principles to public policy. It emerged in 19th-century Europe, largely under the influence of Catholic social teaching. In a number of countries, the democracy&#x27;s Christian ethos has been diluted by secularisation. In practice, Christian democracy is often considered conservative on cultural, social and moral issues and progressive on fiscal and economic issues. In places, where their opponents have traditionally been secularist socialists and social democrats, Christian democratic parties are moderately conservative, whereas in other cultural and political environments they can lean to the left.

===Women&#x27;s roles===
Attitudes and beliefs about the roles and responsibilities of women in Christianity vary considerably today as they have throughout the last two millennia—evolving along with or counter to the societies in which Christians have lived. The Bible and Christianity historically have been interpreted as excluding women from church leadership and placing them in submissive roles in marriage. Male leadership has been assumed in the church and within marriage, society and government.

Some contemporary writers describe the role of women in the life of the church as having been downplayed, overlooked, or denied throughout much of Christian history. Paradigm shifts in gender roles in society and also many churches has inspired reevaluation by many Christians of some long-held attitudes to the contrary. Christian egalitarians have increasingly argued for equal roles for men and women in marriage, as well as for the ordination of women to the clergy. Contemporary conservatives meanwhile have reasserted what has been termed a &quot;complementarian&quot; position, promoting the traditional belief that the Bible ordains different roles and responsibilities for women and men in the Church and family.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Union of Christendom, a traditional Catholic view of ecumenism

==Notes==
==References==
=== Sources ===
* Bosanquet, Bernard. The Civilization of Christendom, And Other Studies. London: S. Sonnenschein, 1893.
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* (reprint version is available)
* 
* 


==Further reading==
* Bainton, Roland H. (1966). &quot;Christendom: a Short History of Christianity and Its Impact on Western Civilization&quot;, in series, &quot;Harper Colophon Books&quot;. New York: Harper &amp; Row. 2 vol., ill.
*Molland, Einar (1959) &quot;Christendom: the Christian churches, their doctrines, constitutional forms and ways of worship&quot;. London: A. &amp; R. Mowbray &amp; Co. (first published in Norwegian in 1953 as &quot;Konfesjonskunnskap&quot;).
* Whalen, Brett Edward (2009). &quot;Dominion of God: Christendom and Apocalypse in the Middle Ages&quot;. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.

==External links==
;Websites</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="10" end="21" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="25" end="40" title="Christendom" label="Christian world"/>
<link wikidata="Q21286176" start="91" end="106" title="Christian state" label="Christian state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965842" start="109" end="137" title="Christianity by country" label="Christian-majority countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="160" end="172" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="245" end="251" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="255" end="261" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="266" end="278" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="296" end="308" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601774" start="359" end="384" title="Greek East and Latin West" label="Greek East and Latin West"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="396" end="408" title="East–West Schism" label="Great schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="494" end="498" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="500" end="520" title="Western Christianity" label="Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="583" end="597" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="599" end="619" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="680" end="702" title="fall of Constantinople" label="fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="712" end="729" title="Latin Christendom" label="Latin Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="760" end="773" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="789" end="800" title="reformation" label="reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="802" end="815" title="protestantism" label="protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q645717" start="1032" end="1036" title="Christian art" label="arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270912" start="1038" end="1050" title="Architecture of cathedrals and great churches" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084059" start="1052" end="1062" title="Christian literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193140" start="1064" end="1071" title="Christianity and science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q854807" start="1073" end="1083" title="Christian philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116798" start="1085" end="1093" title="Christianity and politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1131" end="1142" title="Old English" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="1291" end="1307" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="1311" end="1317" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="1346" end="1360" title="Paulus Orosius" label="Paulus Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="1496" end="1508" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1546" end="1558" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36395" start="1834" end="1853" title="Late Middle English" label="Late Middle English"/>
<link wikidata="Q22668619" start="1890" end="1907" title="Douglas John Hall" label="Douglas John Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q340167" start="2034" end="2051" title="Thomas John Curry" label="Thomas John Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q965508" start="2088" end="2099" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800439" start="2418" end="2434" title="church history" label="church historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q432994" start="2435" end="2454" title="Diarmaid MacCulloch" label="Diarmaid MacCulloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2635" end="2648" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q911070" start="2662" end="2673" title="history of geography" label="known world"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011772" start="2689" end="2699" title="Free World" label="Free World"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2754" end="2767" title="Western World" label="Western World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294864" start="2941" end="2958" title="European identity" label="European identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="3079" end="3085" title="Judaism" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q262109" start="3121" end="3140" title="Jewish Christianity" label="Jewish Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="3190" end="3206" title="Apostolic Age" label="apostolic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771070" start="3278" end="3299" title="post-apostolic period" label="post-apostolic period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123050" start="3315" end="3334" title="Historical episcopate" label="episcopal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3382" end="3389" title="bishops" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3637" end="3645" title="Four Marks of the Church#Catholic" label="catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771070" start="3688" end="3699" title="Christianity in the 2nd century" label="2nd century"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="3715" end="3734" title="Ignatius of Antioch" label="Ignatius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078506" start="3799" end="3833" title="Persecution of early Christians by the Romans" label="imperial persecution of Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="3857" end="3878" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="3887" end="3901" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="3920" end="3943" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q720681" start="3966" end="3984" title="Malcolm Muggeridge" label="Malcolm Muggeridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q22668619" start="4087" end="4104" title="Douglas John Hall" label="Douglas John Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257878" start="4310" end="4331" title="Edict of Thessalonica" label="Edict of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="4342" end="4353" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="4461" end="4469" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="4474" end="4485" title="renaissance" label="renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="4533" end="4539" title="polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="4616" end="4625" title="theocracy" label="theocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="4629" end="4639" title="Forms of government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084103" start="4667" end="4683" title="Christian values" label="Christian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="4737" end="4755" title="Christian doctrine" label="Christian doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="4798" end="4804" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324355" start="4811" end="4830" title="political authority" label="political authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="4870" end="4886" title="political leader" label="political leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="4896" end="4902" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="5014" end="5038" title="Christian Church" label="church as an institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11499112" start="5045" end="5076" title="Church and state in medieval Europe" label="model of church-state relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787" start="5141" end="5157" title="European history" label="European history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="5232" end="5251" title="Emperor Constantine" label="Emperor Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="5263" end="5277" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3765035" start="5340" end="5347" title="convoke" label="convoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="5353" end="5376" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="5390" end="5402" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="5482" end="5494" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="5500" end="5506" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="Nicene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603670" start="5524" end="5556" title="state church of the Roman Empire" label="state church of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257878" start="5566" end="5587" title="Edict of Thessalonica" label="Edict of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5642" end="5658" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q235329" start="5683" end="5700" title="Christian history" label="Christian history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243324" start="5705" end="5727" title="Christian civilization" label="Christian civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="5733" end="5747" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="5781" end="5796" title="Christian world" label="Christian world"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639386" start="5827" end="5885" title="Greek scholars in the Renaissance" label="There was a renewed interest in classical Greek philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="5958" end="5978" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="5979" end="5992" title="Decline of the Roman Empire" label="disintegrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="5998" end="6012" title="feudalism" label="feudal kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208500" start="6018" end="6032" title="principalities" label="principalities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6076" end="6101" title="Western Christianity#History of Western Christianity" label="western church became one"/>
<link wikidata="Q226106" start="6131" end="6140" title="Pentarchy" label="Pentarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6167" end="6187" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6203" end="6219" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="6308" end="6314" title="Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q649499" start="6387" end="6406" title="communion with Rome" label="communion with Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q132086" start="6434" end="6446" title="Pope Leo III" label="Pope Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="6455" end="6466" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6556" end="6565" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="6577" end="6595" title="Carolingian Empire" label="Carolingian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="6729" end="6736" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="6891" end="6896" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q333911" start="7199" end="7210" title="Will Durant" label="Will Durant"/>
<link wikidata="Q123397" start="7282" end="7297" title="The Republic (Plato)" label="ideal community"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="8712" end="8749" title="collapse of Charlemagne&amp;#x27;s empire" label="collapse of Charlemagne&amp;#x27;s empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="8780" end="8797" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="8821" end="8845" title="papal states" label="states loosely connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="8853" end="8869" title="Holy See" label="Holy See of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q128076" start="8888" end="8905" title="Pope Innocent III" label="Pope Innocent III"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365614" start="8942" end="8949" title="pontiff" label="pontiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799209" start="9031" end="9042" title="pontificate" label="pontificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="9127" end="9145" title="Corpus Christianum" label="Corpus Christianum"/>
<link wikidata="Q177634" start="9193" end="9202" title="community" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="9210" end="9220" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9238" end="9259" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="9386" end="9407" title="Canon Law" label="corpus iuris canonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9488" end="9504" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="9544" end="9559" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="expanding Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="9568" end="9593" title="Muslim conquest of Persia" label="Muslim conquest of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="9678" end="9694" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="9930" end="9944" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="9951" end="9960" title="Crusades" label="Crusaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750892" start="9961" end="10010" title="Siege of Constantinople (1204)" label="conquered the Byzantine capital of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q16085469" start="10028" end="10059" title="decline of the Byzantine Empire" label="decline of the Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q630259" start="10067" end="10090" title="Byzantine–Ottoman Wars" label="path to its destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="10318" end="10333" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="10460" end="10468" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="10492" end="10497" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="10505" end="10522" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="10539" end="10547" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="10555" end="10562" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q43173" start="10962" end="10973" title="Inquisition" label="Inquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q575970" start="10978" end="10989" title="Anti-Judaism" label="anti-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="10990" end="10997" title="pogroms" label="pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="11212" end="11228" title="late Middle Ages" label="late Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="11239" end="11244" title="monarch" label="kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="11374" end="11412" title="Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation" label="Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="11427" end="11441" title="Western Schism" label="Western Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="11621" end="11635" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="11761" end="11781" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q276442" start="11865" end="11882" title="Renaissance Papacy" label="Renaissance Popes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404472" start="12359" end="12378" title="Italian Renaissance" label="Italian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q211133" start="12503" end="12525" title="Baldassare Castiglione" label="Baldassare Castiglione"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517519" start="12533" end="12557" title="The Book of the Courtier" label="The Book of the Courtier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="12624" end="12635" title="Machiavelli" label="Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q131719" start="12739" end="12749" title="The Prince" label="The Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935255" start="12834" end="12839" title="Virtù" label="Virtù"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="12890" end="12899" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="12903" end="12923" title="renaissance humanism" label="renaissance humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048501" start="12925" end="12928" title="cf." label="cf."/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="12929" end="12936" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q80516" start="13457" end="13471" title="Pope Julius II" label="Pope Julius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="13829" end="13845" title="Rome" label="The Eternal City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797271" start="14903" end="14944" title="Art patronage of Julius II" label="greatest patron of the Renaissance period"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="15185" end="15197" title="Pope Pius II" label="Pope Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q619" start="15199" end="15218" title="Nicolaus Copernicus" label="Nicolaus Copernicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182046" start="15220" end="15241" title="Leon Battista Alberti" label="Leon Battista Alberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="15243" end="15261" title="Desiderius Erasmus" label="Desiderius Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="15267" end="15278" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="15280" end="15302" title="Bartolomé de Las Casas" label="Bartolomé de Las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="15304" end="15321" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q174880" start="15326" end="15341" title="Teresa of Ávila" label="Teresa of Ávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q237833" start="15343" end="15359" title="George Santayana" label="George Santayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747205" start="15378" end="15396" title="The Life of Reason" label="The Life of Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="15517" end="15536" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="16626" end="16644" title="western philosophy" label="western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="16737" end="16760" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="16867" end="16897" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="strong, centralized monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="16935" end="16944" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="16948" end="16958" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="17122" end="17139" title="Wars of the Roses" label="Wars of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="17141" end="17152" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184037" start="17194" end="17202" title="Absolutism (European history)" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="17208" end="17218" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="17236" end="17250" title="Church of England" label="English church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="17256" end="17270" title="modern history" label="modern history"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="17272" end="17287" title="the Reformation" label="the Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="17300" end="17309" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="17400" end="17417" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="17423" end="17440" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q707722" start="17573" end="17598" title="cuius regio, eius religio" label="cuius regio, eius religio"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="17766" end="17786" title="Treaty of Westphalia" label="Treaty of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="17916" end="17931" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q328163" start="18361" end="18381" title="Salzburg Protestants" label="Salzburg Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894162" start="18459" end="18469" title="Nicodemite" label="Nicodemite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790388" start="18474" end="18492" title="crypto-protestantism" label="crypto-protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490042" start="18499" end="18524" title="European wars of religion" label="European wars of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q152218" start="18622" end="18642" title="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Nine Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="18651" end="18680" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q154674" start="18706" end="18723" title="Treaty of Utrecht" label="Treaty of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238584" start="18919" end="18935" title="European Miracle" label="European Miracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="18941" end="18961" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790360" start="18993" end="19008" title="colonial empire" label="colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393556" start="19039" end="19068" title="decline of the Ottoman Empire" label="decline of the Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="19210" end="19222" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q659777" start="19250" end="19257" title="History of atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="19262" end="19272" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="19295" end="19312" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="19321" end="19336" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="19383" end="19400" title="encyclical letter" label="encyclical letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q667873" start="19407" end="19421" title="Ecclesiam Suam" label="Ecclesiam Suam"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="19429" end="19441" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="19481" end="19489" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22668619" start="19500" end="19517" title="Douglas John Hall" label="Douglas John Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q340167" start="19997" end="20014" title="Thomas John Curry" label="Thomas John Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12616" start="20201" end="20250" title="First Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="First Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="20266" end="20288" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q905362" start="20296" end="20328" title="Dignitatis humanae" label="Declaration on Religious Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="20508" end="20523" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="20594" end="20601" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="20603" end="20609" title="German Empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="20614" end="20622" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="20984" end="20999" title="Irish Free State" label="most of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="21217" end="21229" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="21329" end="21340" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965842" start="21442" end="21462" title="Christianity by country" label="Christian majorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="21488" end="21503" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="21567" end="21584" title="Christian culture" label="Christian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110159" start="21669" end="21687" title="cultural Christian" label="cultural Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="21710" end="21716" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="21737" end="21750" title="Western World" label="Western World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294864" start="21924" end="21941" title="European identity" label="European identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="21943" end="21952" title="Historian" label="Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="21969" end="21988" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21998" end="22013" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="22266" end="22271" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="22276" end="22288" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="22425" end="22445" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Age of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q854807" start="22612" end="22632" title="Christian philosophy" label="Christian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q645717" start="22634" end="22647" title="Christian art" label="Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452410" start="22649" end="22664" title="Christian music" label="Christian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084059" start="22666" end="22686" title="Christian literature" label="Christian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977" start="22884" end="22894" title="cathedrals" label="cathedrals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="22896" end="22908" title="university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="22910" end="22921" title="Monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="22926" end="22936" title="Seminary" label="seminaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775692" start="22977" end="22998" title="History of Christianity during the Middle Ages" label="Medieval Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143413" start="23017" end="23036" title="Medieval university" label="modern universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143413" start="23713" end="23725" title="Medieval university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q235329" start="23832" end="23850" title="History of Christianity" label="Medieval Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115122" start="23865" end="23872" title="List of Roman Catholic cleric-scientists" label="clerics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115122" start="23943" end="23950" title="List of Jesuit scientists" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="24017" end="24039" title="History of science" label="development of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="24089" end="24103" title="social welfare" label="social welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="24114" end="24123" title="hospitals" label="hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16024056" start="24143" end="24164" title="Protestant work ethic" label="Protestant work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="24167" end="24178" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="24224" end="24241" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q380913" start="24280" end="24296" title="Ablution in Christianity" label="personal hygiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="24375" end="24380" title="pagan" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="24381" end="24390" title="societies" label="societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q119094" start="24400" end="24415" title="human sacrifice" label="human sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="24417" end="24424" title="slavery" label="slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="24426" end="24437" title="infanticide" label="infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q170585" start="24442" end="24450" title="polygamy" label="polygamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084059" start="24506" end="24526" title="Christian literature" label="Christian literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3906975" start="24672" end="24688" title="Christian poetry" label="Christian poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="24696" end="24702" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="24717" end="24726" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053916" start="24738" end="24743" title="theme (arts)" label="theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q482" start="24794" end="24800" title="poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="24907" end="24912" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="24935" end="24943" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q645717" start="24972" end="24985" title="Christian art" label="Christian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="25089" end="25101" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="25332" end="25337" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="25360" end="25373" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="25427" end="25438" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="25440" end="25457" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="25463" end="25480" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="25508" end="25530" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="25536" end="25546" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="25560" end="25564" title="Writing" label="text"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="25691" end="25693" title="AD" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="25737" end="25751" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="25814" end="25825" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="25895" end="25906" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="25946" end="25960" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q213924" start="26008" end="26015" title="codex" label="codices"/>
<link wikidata="Q125576" start="26139" end="26146" title="papyrus" label="papyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q226697" start="26211" end="26220" title="parchment" label="parchment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507067" start="26239" end="26243" title="calfskin" label="calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q378274" start="26373" end="26379" title="vellum" label="vellum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507067" start="26411" end="26419" title="calfskin" label="calfskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="26609" end="26614" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="26615" end="26623" title="Roman Empire" label="Imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817665" start="26624" end="26631" title="imagery" label="imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="26633" end="26648" title="classical Greek" label="classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311362" start="26685" end="26701" title="Religious images" label="Religious images"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="26733" end="26742" title="Abrahamic religion" label="Abrahamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="26864" end="26876" title="Late Antique" label="Late Antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="26952" end="26960" title="Biblical" label="Biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="26994" end="27010" title="canonical Gospel" label="canonical Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092752" start="27056" end="27074" title="apocrypha" label="apocryphal gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3083867" start="27186" end="27204" title="Nativity of Jesus in art" label="Nativity of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="27210" end="27214" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="27274" end="27294" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="27402" end="27408" title="Christ" label="Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="27410" end="27414" title="Mary (mother of Jesus)" label="Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q752121" start="27582" end="27600" title="Christ Pantocrator" label="Christ Pantocrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q467420" start="27642" end="27661" title="Christian symbolism" label="Christian symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60469796" start="27865" end="27884" title="Religious symbolism" label="Religious symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q132413" start="28006" end="28016" title="Hodegetria" label="Hodegetria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485229" start="28021" end="28028" title="Panagia" label="Panagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446512" start="28158" end="28176" title="Life of the Virgin" label="Life of the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="28246" end="28251" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="28290" end="28300" title="emblem" label="attributes"/>
<link wikidata="Q204231" start="28315" end="28337" title="Saint symbology" label="identifying individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="28554" end="28561" title="Symbols" label="Symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="28711" end="28723" title="Icon" label="iconic motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="28775" end="28781" title="emblem" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="28843" end="28854" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="28858" end="28869" title="Art history" label="Art history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="28894" end="28916" title="Christian architecture" label="Christian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907236" start="29106" end="29123" title="Christian culture" label="Christian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860334" start="29660" end="29682" title="Christian architecture" label="Christian architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="29703" end="29719" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q47591" start="29734" end="29756" title="Byzantine architecture" label="Byzantine architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q223750" start="29779" end="29797" title="Roman architecture" label="Roman architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q854807" start="29817" end="29837" title="Christian philosophy" label="Christian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="29892" end="29902" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="29912" end="29923" title="Theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="29951" end="29964" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="30069" end="30077" title="academic" label="academic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="30122" end="30134" title="university" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="30149" end="30162" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="30199" end="30209" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9453" start="30398" end="30419" title="dialectical reasoning" label="dialectical reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="30480" end="30496" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="30572" end="30588" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Muslim conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="30632" end="30647" title="Medieval period" label="Medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="30659" end="30673" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="30746" end="30766" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30786" end="30792" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="30810" end="30817" title="Aquinas" label="Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q275500" start="30822" end="30829" title="Buridan" label="Buridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="30971" end="30992" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052959" start="30999" end="31029" title="Latin translations of the 12th century" label="translations of medieval works"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180036" start="31032" end="31051" title="Medieval technology" label="Medieval technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="31066" end="31076" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="31085" end="31100" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q755709" start="31133" end="31164" title="Renaissance of the 12th century" label="Renaissance of the 12th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="31345" end="31358" title="technology" label="technological"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="31395" end="31404" title="gunpowder" label="gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="31413" end="31422" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37501" start="31441" end="31451" title="spectacles" label="spectacles"/>
<link wikidata="Q185187" start="31474" end="31484" title="water mill" label="water mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="31487" end="31495" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="31508" end="31519" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="31532" end="31537" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11446" start="31544" end="31548" title="ship" label="ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="31601" end="31619" title="Age of Exploration" label="Age of Exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="31701" end="31708" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q282413" start="31759" end="31775" title="Roman technology" label="Roman technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="31796" end="31809" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="31834" end="31841" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="31883" end="31889" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q76579" start="31907" end="31921" title="Georg Agricola" label="Georg Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193676" start="31925" end="31940" title="De Re Metallica" label="De Re Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q208103" start="32002" end="32009" title="bellows" label="bellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q102066" start="32075" end="32085" title="navigation" label="navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="32091" end="32098" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q164992" start="32103" end="32112" title="astrolabe" label="astrolabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="32180" end="32192" title="Ocean" label="World Oceans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8958" start="32243" end="32252" title="Johann Gutenberg" label="Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="32260" end="32274" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="32386" end="32405" title="egalitarian society" label="egalitarian society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="32552" end="32563" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q11034" start="32787" end="32795" title="printing" label="printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312473" start="32880" end="32902" title="Renaissance technology" label="Renaissance technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="33065" end="33079" title="printing press" label="printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="33081" end="33101" title="Perspective (graphical)" label="linear perspectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="33103" end="33113" title="patent law" label="patent law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="33115" end="33133" title="Santa Maria del Fiore" label="double shell domes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12797" start="33137" end="33153" title="Bastion fortress" label="Bastion fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398560" start="33212" end="33219" title="Taccola" label="Taccola"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="33224" end="33241" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288583" start="33318" end="33337" title="History of science in the Renaissance" label="Renaissance science"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="33350" end="33371" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="33548" end="33560" title="early modern" label="early modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q214078" start="33916" end="33937" title="Scientific Revolution" label="Scientific Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41634593" start="33950" end="33962" title="Noah Efron" label="Noah J Efron"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="34657" end="34670" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="34681" end="34694" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="34709" end="34716" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="34824" end="34836" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="34894" end="34899" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="34989" end="34995" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="35085" end="35099" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="35126" end="35135" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="35161" end="35168" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q683724" start="35170" end="35195" title="Armenian Apostolic Church" label="Armenian Apostolic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="35198" end="35208" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="35234" end="35241" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q855585" start="35243" end="35260" title="Church of Denmark" label="Church of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="35263" end="35274" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="35300" end="35307" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="35309" end="35326" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="35329" end="35336" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192173" start="35338" end="35362" title="Georgian Orthodox Church" label="Georgian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="35365" end="35371" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q59778" start="35373" end="35389" title="Church of Greece" label="Church of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="35392" end="35399" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413245" start="35401" end="35418" title="Church of Iceland" label="Church of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="35421" end="35434" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="35460" end="35465" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="35491" end="35497" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="35523" end="35530" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q181901" start="35532" end="35556" title="Romanian Orthodox Church" label="Romanian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="35559" end="35565" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q666860" start="35567" end="35583" title="Church of Norway" label="Church of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="35586" end="35598" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="35624" end="35635" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q338309" start="35660" end="35681" title="Swiss Reformed Church" label="Swiss Reformed Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q671244" start="35686" end="35726" title="Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland" label="Christian Catholic Church of Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="35780" end="35790" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q941621" start="35978" end="36012" title="List of Christian denominations" label="three largest groups of Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="36023" end="36038" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="36040" end="36053" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="36063" end="36086" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061186" start="36229" end="36244" title="religious order" label="religious order"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="36503" end="36514" title="Holy Orders" label="Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135744" start="37102" end="37121" title="religious institute" label="religious institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q467356" start="37127" end="37144" title="secular institute" label="secular institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q225446" start="37169" end="37199" title="institute of consecrated life" label="institutes of consecrated life"/>
<link wikidata="Q732948" start="37222" end="37249" title="society of apostolic life" label="societies of apostolic life"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37395" end="37435" title=":Category: Catholic orders and societies" label=":Category: Catholic orders and societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065176" start="37465" end="37489" title="Anglican religious order" label="Anglican religious order"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37599" end="37632" title=":Category: Anglican organizations" label=":Category: Anglican organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="37892" end="37905" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559849" start="37919" end="37929" title="Divine Law" label="Divine Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903283" start="37933" end="37945" title="Biblical law" label="Biblical law"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="37978" end="37995" title="Jesus" label="Jesus of Nazareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="38003" end="38009" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503381" start="38036" end="38053" title="the Law of Christ" label="the Law of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753552" start="38061" end="38076" title="New Commandment" label="New Commandment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672123" start="38084" end="38096" title="New Covenant" label="New Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="38110" end="38119" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38142" end="38156" title="ecclesiastical" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="38175" end="38196" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="38202" end="38218" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="38237" end="38255" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="38301" end="38311" title="legislative power" label="legislated"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="38338" end="38349" title="court" label="adjudicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="38469" end="38476" title="ecumenical council" label="council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="38516" end="38522" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665156" start="38619" end="38635" title="Christian ethics" label="Christian ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="38681" end="38686" title="divine grace" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q336392" start="38688" end="38693" title="mercy" label="mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q537963" start="38699" end="38710" title="forgiveness" label="forgiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="38757" end="38773" title="Early Christians" label="Early Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="38795" end="38807" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q172168" start="38884" end="38892" title="Galerius" label="Galerius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568524" start="39095" end="39116" title="Constantine I and Christianity" label="Emperor Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="39303" end="39328" title="Edict of Milan" label="Constantine&amp;#x27;s decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="39497" end="39520" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="First Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543393" start="39529" end="39560" title="First seven Ecumenical Councils" label="First seven Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="39577" end="39589" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="39629" end="39643" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q504136" start="39771" end="39792" title="Render unto Caesar..." label="Render unto Caesar..."/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="39849" end="39864" title="synoptic gospel" label="synoptic gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="40460" end="40465" title="Sovereign state" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q34651" start="40470" end="40476" title="Christian Church" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="40491" end="40511" title="sphere of influence" label="spheres of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="40514" end="40528" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q914661" start="40580" end="40592" title="positive law" label="positive law"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="40616" end="40627" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q209158" start="41063" end="41082" title="Christian democracy" label="Christian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="41232" end="41256" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="41341" end="41355" title="secularisation" label="secularisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414298" start="41410" end="41422" title="social conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="41464" end="41475" title="progressivism" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="41575" end="41585" title="socialism" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="41590" end="41606" title="social democracy" label="social democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="41652" end="41664" title="conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531006" start="41834" end="41855" title="women in Christianity" label="women in Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q689971" start="42420" end="42434" title="Paradigm shift" label="Paradigm shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110328" start="42576" end="42598" title="Christian egalitarianism" label="Christian egalitarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043387" start="42661" end="42669" title="Christian views of marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q419529" start="42690" end="42709" title="ordination of women" label="ordination of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q177826" start="42717" end="42723" title="clergy" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156416" start="42807" end="42822" title="Complementarianism" label="complementarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="42881" end="42886" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q467345" start="43007" end="43027" title="Union of Christendom" label="Union of Christendom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6710" wikidata="Q44299" url="?curid=6710" title="Coyote">
<text>The coyote (Canis latrans), also known as the American jackal, prairie wolf, or brush wolf, is a species of canine native to North America. It is smaller than its close relative, the gray wolf, and slightly smaller than the closely related eastern wolf and red wolf. It fills much of the same ecological niche as the golden jackal does in Eurasia; however, the coyote is generally larger.

The coyote is listed as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature, due to its wide distribution and abundance throughout North America. The species is versatile, able to adapt to and expand into environments modified by humans; urban coyotes are common in many cities. The coyote was sighted in eastern Panama (across the Panama Canal from their home range) for the first time in 2013.

The coyote has 19 recognized subspecies. The average male weighs and the average female . Their fur color is predominantly light gray and red or fulvous interspersed with black and white, though it varies somewhat with geography. It is highly flexible in social organization, living either in a family unit or in loosely knit packs of unrelated individuals. Primarily carnivorous, its diet consists mainly of deer, rabbits, hares, rodents, birds, reptiles, amphibians, fish, and invertebrates, though it may also eat fruits and vegetables on occasion. Its characteristic vocalization is a howl made by solitary individuals. Humans are the coyote&#x27;s greatest threat, followed by cougars and gray wolves. Despite predation by gray wolves, coyotes sometimes mate with them, and with eastern, or red wolves, producing &quot;coywolf&quot; hybrids. In the northeastern regions of North America, the eastern coyote (a larger subspecies, though still smaller than wolves) is the result of various historical and recent matings with various types of wolves. Genetic studies show that most North American wolves contain some level of coyote DNA.

The coyote is a prominent character in Native American folklore, mainly in Aridoamerica, usually depicted as a trickster that alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or a man. As with other trickster figures, the coyote uses deception and humor to rebel against social conventions. The animal was especially respected in Mesoamerican cosmology as a symbol of military might. After the European colonization of the Americas, it was seen in Anglo-American culture as a cowardly and untrustworthy animal. Unlike wolves, which have seen their public image improve, attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative.

==Description==
Coyote males average in weight, while females average , though size varies geographically. Northern subspecies, which average , tend to grow larger than the southern subspecies of Mexico, which average . Total length ranges on average from ; comprising a tail length of , with females being shorter in both body length and height. The largest coyote on record was a male killed near Afton, Wyoming, on November19, 1937, which measured from nose to tail, and weighed . Scent glands are located at the upper side of the base of the tail and are a bluish-black color.

The color and texture of the coyote&#x27;s fur vary somewhat geographically. The hair&#x27;s predominant color is light gray and red or fulvous, interspersed around the body with black and white. Coyotes living at high elevations tend to have more black and gray shades than their desert-dwelling counterparts, which are more fulvous or whitish-gray. The coyote&#x27;s fur consists of short, soft underfur and long, coarse guard hairs. The fur of northern subspecies is longer and denser than in southern forms, with the fur of some Mexican and Central American forms being almost hispid (bristly). Generally, adult coyotes (including coywolf hybrids) have a sable coat color, dark neonatal coat color, bushy tail with an active supracaudal gland, and a white facial mask. Albinism is extremely rare in coyotes. Out of a total of 750,000 coyotes killed by federal and cooperative hunters between March 1938 and June 1945, only two were albinos.

The coyote is typically smaller than the gray wolf, but has longer ears and a relatively larger braincase, as well as a thinner frame, face, and muzzle. The scent glands are smaller than the gray wolf&#x27;s, but are the same color. Its fur color variation is much less varied than that of a wolf. The coyote also carries its tail downwards when running or walking, rather than horizontally as the wolf does.

Coyote tracks can be distinguished from those of dogs by their more elongated, less rounded shape. Unlike dogs, the upper canines of coyotes extend past the mental foramina.

==Taxonomy and evolution==

===History===

At the time of the European colonization of the Americas, coyotes were largely confined to open plains and arid regions of the western half of the continent. In early post-Columbian historical records, determining whether the writer is describing coyotes or wolves is often difficult. One record from 1750 in Kaskaskia, Illinois, written by a local priest, noted that the &quot;wolves&quot; encountered there were smaller and less daring than European wolves. Another account from the early 1800s in Edwards County mentioned wolves howling at night, though these were likely coyotes. This species was encountered several times during the Lewis and Clark Expedition (1804–1806), though it was already well known to European traders on the upper Missouri. Meriwether Lewis, writing on 5 May 1805, in northeastern Montana, described the coyote in these terms:
The coyote was first scientifically described by naturalist Thomas Say in September 1819, on the site of Lewis and Clark&#x27;s Council Bluffs, up the Missouri River from the mouth of the Platte during a government-sponsored expedition with Major Stephen Long. He had the first edition of the Lewis and Clark journals in hand, which contained Biddle&#x27;s edited version of Lewis&#x27;s observations dated 5 May 1805. His account was published in 1823. Say was the first person to document the difference between a &quot;prairie wolf&quot; (coyote) and on the next page of his journal a wolf which he named &quot;Canis nubilus&quot; (Great Plains wolf). Say described the coyote as:
===Naming and etymology===
The first published usage of the word &quot;coyote&quot; (which is a Spanish borrowing of its Nahuatl name &quot;coyōtl&quot; ) comes from the historian Francisco Javier Clavijero&#x27;s &quot;Historia de México&quot; in 1780. The first time it was used in English occurred in William Bullock&#x27;s &quot;Six months&#x27; residence and travels in Mexico&quot; (1824), where it is variously transcribed as &quot;cayjotte&quot; and &quot;cocyotie&quot;. The word&#x27;s spelling was standardized as &quot;coyote&quot; by the 1880s. 

The English pronunciation is heard both as a two-syllable word (with the final &quot;e&quot; silent) and as three-syllables (with the final &quot;e&quot; pronounced), with a tendency for the three-syllable pronunciation in eastern states and near the Mexican border, and outside the United States, with two syllables in western and central states.

Alternative English names for the coyote include &quot;prairie wolf&quot;, &quot;brush wolf&quot;, &quot;cased wolf&quot;, &quot;little wolf&quot; and &quot;American jackal&quot;. Its binomial name &quot;Canis latrans&quot; translates to &quot;barking dog&quot;, a reference to the many vocalizations they produce.

===Evolution===
====Fossil record====
Xiaoming Wang and Richard H. Tedford, one of the foremost authorities on carnivore evolution, proposed that the genus &quot;Canis&quot; was the descendant of the coyote-like &quot;Eucyon davisi&quot; and its remains first appeared in the Miocene 6million years ago (Mya) in the southwestern US and Mexico. By the Pliocene (5Mya), the larger &quot;Canis lepophagus&quot; appeared in the same region and by the early Pleistocene (1Mya) &quot;C.latrans&quot; (the coyote) was in existence. They proposed that the progression from &quot;Eucyon davisi&quot; to &quot;C.lepophagus&quot; to the coyote was linear evolution. 

&quot;C.latrans&quot; and &quot;C.aureus&quot; are closely related to &quot;C.edwardii&quot;, a species that appeared earliest spanning the mid-Blancan (late Pliocene) to the close of the Irvingtonian (late Pleistocene), and coyote remains indistinguishable from &quot;C. latrans&quot; were contemporaneous with &quot;C.edwardii&quot; in North America. Johnston describes &quot;C.lepophagus&quot; as having a more slender skull and skeleton than the modern coyote. Ronald Nowak found that the early populations had small, delicate, narrowly proportioned skulls that resemble small coyotes and appear to be ancestral to &quot;C. latrans&quot;.

&quot;C. lepophagus&quot; was similar in weight to modern coyotes, but had shorter limb bones that indicate a less cursorial lifestyle. The coyote represents a more primitive form of &quot;Canis&quot; than the gray wolf, as shown by its relatively small size and its comparatively narrow skull and jaws, which lack the grasping power necessary to hold the large prey in which wolves specialize. This is further corroborated by the coyote&#x27;s sagittal crest, which is low or totally flattened, thus indicating a weaker bite than the wolves. The coyote, unlike the wolf, is not a specialized carnivore, as shown by the larger chewing surfaces on the molars, reflecting the species&#x27; relative dependence on vegetable matter. In these respects, the coyote resembles the fox-like progenitors of the genus more so than the wolf.

The oldest fossils that fall within the range of the modern coyote date to 0.74–0.85 Ma (million years) in Hamilton Cave, West Virginia; 0.73 Ma in Irvington, California; 0.35–0.48 Ma in Porcupine Cave, Colorado, and in Cumberland Cave, Pennsylvania. Modern coyotes arose 1,000 years after the Quaternary extinction event. Compared to their modern Holocene counterparts, Pleistocene coyotes (&quot;C.l. orcutti&quot;) were larger and more robust, likely in response to larger competitors and prey. Pleistocene coyotes were likely more specialized carnivores than their descendants, as their teeth were more adapted to shearing meat, showing fewer grinding surfaces suited for processing vegetation. Their reduction in size occurred within 1,000 years of the Quaternary extinction event, when their large prey died out. Furthermore, Pleistocene coyotes were unable to exploit the big-game hunting niche left vacant after the extinction of the dire wolf (&quot;Aenocyondirus&quot;), as it was rapidly filled by gray wolves, which likely actively killed off the large coyotes, with natural selection favoring the modern gracile morph.

====DNA evidence====
In 1993, a study proposed that the wolves of North America display skull traits more similar to the coyote than wolves from Eurasia. In 2010, a study found that the coyote was a basal member of the clade that included the Tibetan wolf, the domestic dog, the Mongolian wolf and the Eurasian wolf, with the Tibetan wolf diverging early from wolves and domestic dogs.

In 2016, a whole-genome DNA study proposed, based on the assumptions made, that all of the North American wolves and coyotes diverged from a common ancestor about 51,000 years ago. However, the proposed timing of the wolf / coyote divergence conflicts with the discovery of a coyote-like specimen in strata dated to 1 Mya. The study also indicated that all North American wolves have a significant amount of coyote ancestry and all coyotes some degree of wolf ancestry, and that the red wolf and eastern wolf are highly admixed with different proportions of gray wolf and coyote ancestry.

Genetic studies relating to wolves or dogs have inferred phylogenetic relationships based on the only reference genome available, that of the Boxer dog. In 2017, the first reference genome of the wolf &quot;Canis lupus lupus&quot; was mapped to aid future research. In 2018, a study looked at the genomic structure and admixture of North American wolves, wolf-like canids, and coyotes using specimens from across their entire range that mapped the largest dataset of nuclear genome sequences against the wolf reference genome.

The study supports the findings of previous studies that North American gray wolves and wolf-like canids were the result of complex gray wolf and coyote mixing. A polar wolf from Greenland and a coyote from Mexico represented the purest specimens. The coyotes from Alaska, California, Alabama, and Quebec show almost no wolf ancestry. Coyotes from Missouri, Illinois, and Florida exhibit 5–10% wolf ancestry. There was 40% wolf to 60% coyote ancestry in red wolves, 60% wolf to 40% coyote in Eastern timber wolves, and 75% wolf to 25% coyote in the Great Lakes wolves. There was 10% coyote ancestry in Mexican wolves and the Atlantic Coast wolves, 5% in Pacific Coast and Yellowstone wolves, and less than 3% in Canadian archipelago wolves. If a third canid had been involved in the admixture of the North American wolf-like canids, then its genetic signature would have been found in coyotes and wolves, which it has not.

In 2018, whole genome sequencing was used to compare members of the genus &quot;Canis&quot;. The study indicates that the common ancestor of the coyote and gray wolf has genetically admixed with a ghost population of an extinct, unidentified canid. The &quot;ghost&quot; canid was genetically close to the dhole, and had evolved after the divergence of the African wild dog from the other canid species. The basal position of the coyote compared to the wolf is proposed to be due to the coyote retaining more of the mitochondrial genome from the unknown extinct canid.

===Subspecies===
, 19 subspecies are recognized.
Geographic variation in coyotes is not great, though taken as a whole, the eastern subspecies ( and ) are large, dark-colored animals, with a gradual paling in color and reduction in size westward and northward (, , , and ), a brightening of &#x27;ochraceous&#x27; tones – deep orange or brown – towards the Pacific coast (, ), a reduction in size in Aridoamerica (, ) and a general trend towards dark reddish colors and short muzzles in Mexican and Central American populations.


===Hybridization===

Coyotes occasionally mate with domestic dogs, sometimes producing crosses colloquially known as &quot;coydogs&quot;. Such matings are rare in the wild, as the mating cycles of dogs and coyotes do not coincide, and coyotes are usually antagonistic towards dogs. Hybridization usually only occurs when coyotes are expanding into areas where conspecifics are few, and dogs are the only alternatives. Even then, pup survival rates are lower than normal, as dogs do not form pair bonds with coyotes, thus making the rearing of pups more difficult. In captivity, F1 hybrids (first generation) tend to be more mischievous and less manageable as pups than dogs, and are less trustworthy on maturity than wolf-dog hybrids. 

Hybrids vary in appearance, but generally retain the coyote&#x27;s usual characteristics. F1 hybrids tend to be intermediate in form between dogs and coyotes, while F2 hybrids (second generation) are more varied. Both F1 and F2 hybrids resemble their coyote parents in terms of shyness and intrasexual aggression. Hybrids are fertile and can be successfully bred through four generations. Melanistic coyotes owe their black pelts to a mutation that first arose in domestic dogs. A population of non-albino white coyotes in Newfoundland owe their coloration to a melanocortin 1 receptor mutation inherited from Golden Retrievers.
Coyotes have hybridized with wolves to varying degrees, particularly in eastern North America. The so-called &quot;eastern coyote&quot; of northeastern North America probably originated in the aftermath of the extermination of gray and eastern wolves in the northeast, thus allowing coyotes to colonize former wolf ranges and mix with the remnant wolf populations. This hybrid is smaller than either the gray or eastern wolf, and holds smaller territories, but is in turn larger and holds more extensive home ranges than the typical western coyote. , the eastern coyote&#x27;s genetic makeup is fairly uniform, with minimal influence from eastern wolves or western coyotes. 

Adult eastern coyotes are larger than western coyotes, with female eastern coyotes weighing 21% more than male western coyotes. Physical differences become more apparent by the age of 35 days, with eastern coyote pups having longer legs than their western counterparts. Differences in dental development also occurs, with tooth eruption being later, and in a different order in the eastern coyote. Aside from its size, the eastern coyote is physically similar to the western coyote. The four color phases range from dark brown to blond or reddish blond, though the most common phase is gray-brown, with reddish legs, ears, and flanks. 

No significant differences exist between eastern and western coyotes in aggression and fighting, though eastern coyotes tend to fight less, and are more playful. Unlike western coyote pups, in which fighting precedes play behavior, fighting among eastern coyote pups occurs after the onset of play. Eastern coyotes tend to reach sexual maturity at two years of age, much later than in western coyotes.

Eastern and red wolves are also products of varying degrees of wolf-coyote hybridization. The eastern wolf probably was a result of a wolf-coyote admixture, combined with extensive backcrossing with parent gray wolf populations. The red wolf may have originated during a time of declining wolf populations in the Southeastern Woodlands, forcing a wolf-coyote hybridization, as well as backcrossing with local parent coyote populations to the extent that about 75–80% of the modern red wolf&#x27;s genome is of coyote derivation.

==Behavior==

===Social and reproductive behaviors===

Like the Eurasian golden jackal, the coyote is gregarious, but not as dependent on conspecifics as more social canid species like wolves are. This is likely because the coyote is not a specialized hunter of large prey as the latter species is. The basic social unit of a coyote pack is a family containing a reproductive female. However, unrelated coyotes may join forces for companionship, or to bring down prey too large to attack on their own. Such &quot;nonfamily&quot; packs are only temporary, and may consist of bachelor males, nonreproductive females and subadult young. Families are formed in midwinter, when females enter estrus. Pair bonding can occur 2–3 months before actual copulation takes place. 

The copulatory tie can last 5–45 minutes. A female entering estrus attracts males by scent marking and howling with increasing frequency. A single female in heat can attract up to seven reproductive males, which can follow her for as long as a month. Although some squabbling may occur among the males, once the female has selected a mate and copulates, the rejected males do not intervene, and move on once they detect other estrous females. Unlike the wolf, which has been known to practice both monogamous and bigamous matings, the coyote is strictly monogamous, even in areas with high coyote densities and abundant food. 

Females that fail to mate sometimes assist their sisters or mothers in raising their pups, or join their siblings until the next time they can mate. The newly mated pair then establishes a territory and either constructs their own den or cleans out abandoned badger, marmot, or skunk earths. During the pregnancy, the male frequently hunts alone and brings back food for the female. The female may line the den with dried grass or with fur pulled from her belly. The gestation period is 63 days, with an average litter size of six, though the number fluctuates depending on coyote population density and the abundance of food.

Coyote pups are born in dens, hollow trees, or under ledges, and weigh at birth. They are altricial, and are completely dependent on milk for their first 10 days. The incisors erupt at about 12 days, the canines at 16, and the second premolars at 21. Their eyes open after 10 days, by which point the pups become increasingly more mobile, walking by 20 days, and running at the age of six weeks. The parents begin supplementing the pup&#x27;s diet with regurgitated solid food after 12–15 days. By the age of four to six weeks, when their milk teeth are fully functional, the pups are given small food items such as mice, rabbits, or pieces of ungulate carcasses, with lactation steadily decreasing after two months. 

Unlike wolf pups, coyote pups begin seriously fighting (as opposed to play fighting) prior to engaging in play behavior. A common play behavior includes the coyote &quot;hip-slam&quot;. By three weeks of age, coyote pups bite each other with less inhibition than wolf pups. By the age of four to five weeks, pups have established dominance hierarchies, and are by then more likely to play rather than fight. The male plays an active role in feeding, grooming, and guarding the pups, but abandons them if the female goes missing before the pups are completely weaned. The den is abandoned by June to July, and the pups follow their parents in patrolling their territory and hunting. Pups may leave their families in August, though can remain for much longer. The pups attain adult dimensions at eight months and gain adult weight a month later.

===Territorial and sheltering behaviors===

Individual feeding territories vary in size from , with the general concentration of coyotes in a given area depending on food abundance, adequate denning sites, and competition with conspecifics and other predators. The coyote generally does not defend its territory outside of the denning season, and is much less aggressive towards intruders than the wolf is, typically chasing and sparring with them, but rarely killing them. Conflicts between coyotes can arise during times of food shortage. Coyotes mark their territories by raised-leg urination and ground-scratching.

Like wolves, coyotes use a den, usually the deserted holes of other species, when gestating and rearing young, though they may occasionally give birth under sagebrushes in the open. Coyote dens can be located in canyons, washouts, coulees, banks, rock bluffs, or level ground. Some dens have been found under abandoned homestead shacks, grain bins, drainage pipes, railroad tracks, hollow logs, thickets, and thistles. The den is continuously dug and cleaned out by the female until the pups are born. Should the den be disturbed or infested with fleas, the pups are moved into another den. A coyote den can have several entrances and passages branching out from the main chamber. A single den can be used year after year.

===Hunting and feeding behaviors===
While the popular consensus is that olfaction is very important for hunting, two studies that experimentally investigated the role of olfactory, auditory, and visual cues found that visual cues are the most important ones for hunting in red foxes and coyotes.
When hunting large prey, the coyote often works in pairs or small groups. Success in killing large ungulates depends on factors such as snow depth and crust density. Younger animals usually avoid participating in such hunts, with the breeding pair typically doing most of the work. The coyote pursues large prey, typically hamstringing the animal, and subsequently then harassing it until the prey falls. Like other canids, the coyote caches excess food. Coyotes catch mouse-sized rodents by pouncing, whereas ground squirrels are chased. Although coyotes can live in large groups, small prey is typically caught singly. 

Coyotes have been observed to kill porcupines in pairs, using their paws to flip the rodents on their backs, then attacking the soft underbelly. Only old and experienced coyotes can successfully prey on porcupines, with many predation attempts by young coyotes resulting in them being injured by their prey&#x27;s quills. Coyotes sometimes urinate on their food, possibly to claim ownership over it. Recent evidence demonstrates that at least some coyotes have become more nocturnal in hunting, presumably to avoid humans.

Coyotes may occasionally form mutualistic hunting relationships with American badgers, assisting each other in digging up rodent prey. The relationship between the two species may occasionally border on apparent &quot;friendship&quot;, as some coyotes have been observed laying their heads on their badger companions or licking their faces without protest. The amicable interactions between coyotes and badgers were known to pre-Columbian civilizations, as shown on a jar found in Mexico dated to 1250–1300 CE depicting the relationship between the two.

Food scraps, pet food, and animal feces may attract a coyote to a trash can.

===Communication===

====Body language====
Being both a gregarious and solitary animal, the variability of the coyote&#x27;s visual and vocal repertoire is intermediate between that of the solitary foxes and the highly social wolf. The aggressive behavior of the coyote bears more similarities to that of foxes than it does that of wolves and dogs. An aggressive coyote arches its back and lowers its tail. Unlike dogs, which solicit playful behavior by performing a &quot;play-bow&quot; followed by a &quot;play-leap&quot;, play in coyotes consists of a bow, followed by side-to-side head flexions and a series of &quot;spins&quot; and &quot;dives&quot;. Although coyotes will sometimes bite their playmates&#x27; scruff as dogs do, they typically approach low, and make upward-directed bites. 

Pups fight each other regardless of sex, while among adults, aggression is typically reserved for members of the same sex. Combatants approach each other waving their tails and snarling with their jaws open, though fights are typically silent. Males tend to fight in a vertical stance, while females fight on all four paws. Fights among females tend to be more serious than ones among males, as females seize their opponents&#x27; forelegs, throat, and shoulders.

====Vocalizations====

The coyote has been described as &quot;the most vocal of all [wild] North American mammals&quot;. Its loudness and range of vocalizations was the cause for its binomial name &quot;Canis latrans&quot;, meaning &quot;barking dog&quot;. At least 11 different vocalizations are known in adult coyotes. These sounds are divided into three categories: agonistic and alarm, greeting, and contact. Vocalizations of the first category include woofs, growls, huffs, barks, bark howls, yelps, and high-frequency whines. Woofs are used as low-intensity threats or alarms and are usually heard near den sites, prompting the pups to immediately retreat into their burrows.

Growls are used as threats at short distances but have also been heard among pups playing and copulating males. Huffs are high-intensity threat vocalizations produced by rapid expiration of air. Barks can be classed as both long-distance threat vocalizations and alarm calls. Bark howls may serve similar functions. Yelps are emitted as a sign of submission, while high-frequency whines are produced by dominant animals acknowledging the submission of subordinates. Greeting vocalizations include low-frequency whines, &#x27;wow-oo-wows&#x27;, and group yip howls. Low-frequency whines are emitted by submissive animals and are usually accompanied by tail wagging and muzzle nibbling.

The sound known as &#x27;wow-oo-wow&#x27; has been described as a &quot;greeting song&quot;. The group yip howl is emitted when two or more pack members reunite and may be the final act of a complex greeting ceremony. Contact calls include lone howls and group howls, as well as the previously mentioned group yip howls. The lone howl is the most iconic sound of the coyote and may serve the purpose of announcing the presence of a lone individual separated from its pack. Group howls are used as both substitute group yip howls and as responses to either lone howls, group howls, or group yip howls.

==Ecology==

===Habitat===

Prior to the near extermination of wolves and cougars, the coyote was most numerous in grasslands inhabited by bison, pronghorn, elk, and other deer, doing particularly well in short-grass areas with prairie dogs, though it was just as much at home in semiarid areas with sagebrush and jackrabbits or in deserts inhabited by cactus, kangaroo rats, and rattlesnakes. As long as it was not in direct competition with the wolf, the coyote ranged from the Sonoran Desert to the alpine regions of adjoining mountains or the plains and mountainous areas of Alberta. With the extermination of the wolf, the coyote&#x27;s range expanded to encompass broken forests from the tropics of Guatemala and the northern slope of Alaska.

Coyotes walk around per day, often along trails such as logging roads and paths; they may use iced-over rivers as travel routes in winter. They are often crepuscular, being more active around evening and the beginning of the night than during the day. However, in urban areas coyotes are known to be more nocturnal, likely to avoid encounters with humans. Like many canids, coyotes are competent swimmers, reported to be able to travel at least across water.

===Diet===

The coyote is ecologically the North American equivalent of the Eurasian golden jackal. Likewise, the coyote is highly versatile in its choice of food, but is primarily carnivorous, with 90% of its diet consisting of meat. Prey species include bison (largely as carrion), white-tailed deer, mule deer, moose, elk, bighorn sheep, pronghorn, rabbits, hares, rodents, birds (especially galliformes, roadrunners, young water birds and pigeons and doves), amphibians (except toads), lizards, snakes, turtles and tortoises, fish, crustaceans, and insects. Coyotes may be picky over the prey they target, as animals such as shrews, moles, and brown rats do not occur in their diet in proportion to their numbers.

Terrestrial animals or burrowing small mammals such as ground squirrels and associated species (marmots, prairie dogs, chipmunks) as well as voles, pocket gophers, kangaroo rats and other ground-favoring rodents may be quite common foods, especially for lone coyotes. Examples of specific, primary mammal prey include eastern cottontail rabbits, thirteen-lined ground squirrels, and white-footed mice. More unusual prey include fishers, young black bear cubs, harp seals and rattlesnakes. Coyotes kill rattlesnakes mostly for food, but also to protect their pups at their dens, by teasing the snakes until they stretch out and then biting their heads and snapping and shaking the snakes. Birds taken by coyotes may range in size from thrashers, larks and sparrows to adult wild turkeys and, rarely, brooding adult swans and pelicans. 

If working in packs or pairs, coyotes may have access to larger prey than lone individuals normally take, such as various prey weighing more than . In some cases, packs of coyotes have dispatched much larger prey such as adult &quot;Odocoileus&quot; deer, cow elk, pronghorns and wild sheep, although the young fawn, calves and lambs of these animals are considerably more often taken even by packs, as well as domestic sheep and domestic cattle. In some cases, coyotes can bring down prey weighing up to or more. When it comes to adult ungulates such as wild deer, they often exploit them when vulnerable such as those that are infirm, stuck in snow or ice, otherwise winter-weakened or heavily pregnant, whereas less wary domestic ungulates may be more easily exploited.

Although coyotes prefer fresh meat, they will scavenge when the opportunity presents itself. Excluding the insects, fruit, and grass eaten, the coyote requires an estimated of food daily, or annually. The coyote readily cannibalizes the carcasses of conspecifics, with coyote fat having been successfully used by coyote hunters as a lure or poisoned bait. The coyote&#x27;s winter diet consists mainly of large ungulate carcasses, with very little plant matter. Rodent prey increases in importance during the spring, summer, and fall.

The coyote feeds on a variety of different produce, including strawberries, blackberries, blueberries, sarsaparillas, peaches, pears, apples, prickly pears, chapotes, persimmons, peanuts, watermelons, cantaloupes, and carrots. During the winter and early spring, the coyote eats large quantities of grass, such as green wheat blades. It sometimes eats unusual items such as cotton cake, soybean meal, domestic animal droppings, beans, and cultivated grain such as maize, wheat, and sorghum.

In coastal California, coyotes now consume a higher percentage of marine-based food than their ancestors, which is thought to be due to the extirpation of the grizzly bear from this region. In Death Valley, coyotes may consume great quantities of hawkmoth caterpillars or beetles in the spring flowering months.

===Enemies and competitors===
In areas where the ranges of coyotes and gray wolves overlap, interference competition and predation by wolves has been hypothesized to limit local coyote densities. Coyote ranges expanded during the 19th and 20th centuries following the extirpation of wolves, while coyotes were driven to extinction on Isle Royale after wolves colonized the island in the 1940s. One study conducted in Yellowstone National Park, where both species coexist, concluded that the coyote population in the Lamar River Valley declined by 39% following the reintroduction of wolves in the 1990s, while coyote populations in wolf inhabited areas of the Grand Teton National Park are 33% lower than in areas where they are absent. Wolves have been observed to not tolerate coyotes in their vicinity, though coyotes have been known to trail wolves to feed on their kills.

Coyotes may compete with cougars in some areas. In the eastern Sierra Nevada, coyotes compete with cougars over mule deer. Cougars normally outcompete and dominate coyotes, and may kill them occasionally, thus reducing coyote predation pressure on smaller carnivores such as foxes and bobcats. Coyotes that are killed are sometimes not eaten, perhaps indicating that these comprise competitive interspecies interactions, however there are multiple confirmed cases of cougars also eating coyotes. In northeastern Mexico, cougar predation on coyotes continues apace but coyotes were absent from the prey spectrum of sympatric jaguars, apparently due to differing habitat usages.

Other than by gray wolves and cougars, predation on adult coyotes is relatively rare but multiple other predators can be occasional threats. In some cases, adult coyotes have been preyed upon by both American black and grizzly bears, American alligators, large Canada lynx and golden eagles. At kill sites and carrion, coyotes, especially if working alone, tend to be dominated by wolves, cougars, bears, wolverines and, usually but not always, eagles (i.e., bald and golden). When such larger, more powerful or more aggressive predators such as these come to a shared feeding site, a coyote may either try to fight, wait until the other predator is done or occasionally share a kill, but if a major danger such as wolves or an adult cougar is present, the coyote will tend to flee.

Coyotes rarely kill healthy adult red foxes, and have been observed to feed or den alongside them, though they often kill foxes caught in traps. Coyotes may kill fox kits, but this is not a major source of mortality. In southern California, coyotes frequently kill gray foxes, and these smaller canids tend to avoid areas with high coyote densities.

In some areas, coyotes share their ranges with bobcats. These two similarly-sized species rarely physically confront one another, though bobcat populations tend to diminish in areas with high coyote densities. However, several studies have demonstrated interference competition between coyotes and bobcats, and in all cases coyotes dominated the interaction. Multiple researchers reported instances of coyotes killing bobcats, whereas bobcats killing coyotes is more rare. Coyotes attack bobcats using a bite-and-shake method similar to what is used on medium-sized prey. Coyotes, both single individuals and groups, have been known to occasionally kill bobcats. In most cases, the bobcats were relatively small specimens, such as adult females and juveniles. 

Coyote attacks, by an unknown number of coyotes, on adult male bobcats have occurred. In California, coyote and bobcat populations are not negatively correlated across different habitat types, but predation by coyotes is an important source of mortality in bobcats. Biologist Stanley Paul Young noted that in his entire trapping career, he had never successfully saved a captured bobcat from being killed by coyotes, and wrote of two incidents wherein coyotes chased bobcats up trees. Coyotes have been documented to directly kill Canada lynx on occasion, and compete with them for prey, especially snowshoe hares. In some areas, including central Alberta, lynx are more abundant where coyotes are few, thus interactions with coyotes appears to influence lynx populations more than the availability of snowshoe hares.

==Range==

Due to the coyote&#x27;s wide range and abundance throughout North America, it is listed as Least Concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The coyote&#x27;s pre-Columbian range was limited to the Southwest and Plains regions of North America, and northern and central Mexico. By the 19th century, the species expanded north and east, expanding further after 1900, coinciding with land conversion and the extirpation of wolves. By this time, its range encompassed the entire North American continent, including all of the contiguous United States and Mexico, southward into Central America, and northward into most of Canada and Alaska. This expansion is ongoing, and the species now occupies the majority of areas between 8°N (Panama) and 70°N (northern Alaska).

Although it was once widely believed that coyotes are recent immigrants to southern Mexico and Central America, aided in their expansion by deforestation, Pleistocene and Early Holocene records, as well as records from the pre-Columbian period and early European colonization show that the animal was present in the area long before modern times. Range expansion occurred south of Costa Rica during the late 1970s and northern Panama in the early 1980s, following the expansion of cattle-grazing lands into tropical rain forests.

The coyote is predicted to appear in northern Belize in the near future, as the habitat there is favorable to the species. Concerns have been raised of a possible expansion into South America through the Panamanian Isthmus, should the Darién Gap ever be closed by the Pan-American Highway. This fear was partially confirmed in January 2013, when the species was recorded in eastern Panama&#x27;s Chepo District, beyond the Panama Canal.

A 2017 genetic study proposes that coyotes were originally not found in the area of the eastern United States. From the 1890s, dense forests were transformed into agricultural land and wolf control implemented on a large scale, leaving a niche for coyotes to disperse into. There were two major dispersals from two populations of genetically distinct coyotes. The first major dispersal to the northeast came in the early 20th century from those coyotes living in the northern Great Plains. These came to New England via the northern Great Lakes region and southern Canada, and to Pennsylvania via the southern Great Lakes region, meeting together in the 1940s in New York and Pennsylvania.

These coyotes have hybridized with the remnant gray wolf and eastern wolf populations, which has added to coyote genetic diversity and may have assisted adaptation to the new niche. The second major dispersal to the southeast came in the mid-20th century from Texas and reached the Carolinas in the 1980s. These coyotes have hybridized with the remnant red wolf populations before the 1970s when the red wolf was extirpated in the wild, which has also added to coyote genetic diversity and may have assisted adaptation to this new niche as well. Both of these two major coyote dispersals have experienced rapid population growth and are forecast to meet along the mid-Atlantic coast. The study concludes that for coyotes the long range dispersal, gene flow from local populations, and rapid population growth may be inter-related.

==Diseases and parasites==

Among large North American carnivores, the coyote probably carries the largest number of diseases and parasites, likely due to its wide range and varied diet. Viral diseases known to infect coyotes include rabies, canine distemper, infectious canine hepatitis, four strains of equine encephalitis, and oral papillomatosis. By the late 1970s, serious rabies outbreaks in coyotes had ceased to be a problem for over 60 years, though sporadic cases every 1–5 years did occur. Distemper causes the deaths of many pups in the wild, though some specimens can survive infection. &quot;Tularemia&quot;, a bacterial disease, infects coyotes from tick bites and through their rodent and lagomorph prey, and can be deadly for pups.

Coyotes can be infected by both demodectic and sarcoptic mange, the latter being the most common. Mite infestations are rare and incidental in coyotes, while tick infestations are more common, with seasonal peaks depending on locality (May–August in the Northwest, March–November in Arkansas). Coyotes are only rarely infested with lice, while fleas infest coyotes from puphood, though they may be more a source of irritation than serious illness. &quot;Pulex simulans&quot; is the most common species to infest coyotes, while &quot;Ctenocephalides canis&quot; tends to occur only in places where coyotes and dogs (its primary host) inhabit the same area. Although coyotes are rarely host to flukes, they can nevertheless have serious effects on coyotes, particularly &quot;Nanophyetus salmincola&quot;, which can infect them with salmon poisoning disease, a disease with a 90% mortality rate. Trematode &quot;Metorchis conjunctus&quot; can also infect coyotes. 

Tapeworms have been recorded to infest 60–95% of all coyotes examined. The most common species to infest coyotes are &quot;Taenia pisiformis&quot; and &quot;Taenia crassiceps&quot;, which uses cottontail rabbits and rodents as intermediate hosts. The largest species known in coyotes is &quot;T. hydatigena&quot;, which enters coyotes through infected ungulates, and can grow to lengths of . Although once largely limited to wolves, &quot;Echinococcus granulosus&quot; has expanded to coyotes since the latter began colonizing former wolf ranges.

The most frequent ascaroid roundworm in coyotes is &quot;Toxascaris leonina&quot;, which dwells in the coyote&#x27;s small intestine and has no ill effects, except for causing the host to eat more frequently. Hookworms of the genus &quot;Ancylostoma&quot; infest coyotes throughout their range, being particularly prevalent in humid areas. In areas of high moisture, such as coastal Texas, coyotes can carry up to 250 hookworms each. The blood-drinking &quot;A. caninum&quot; is particularly dangerous, as it damages the coyote through blood loss and lung congestion. A 10-day-old pup can die from being host to as few as 25 &quot;A. caninum&quot; worms.

==Relationships with humans==
===In folklore and mythology===
Coyote features as a trickster figure and skin-walker in the folktales of some Native Americans, notably several nations in the Southwestern and Plains regions, where he alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or that of a man. As with other trickster figures, Coyote acts as a picaresque hero who rebels against social convention through deception and humor. Folklorists such as Harris believe coyotes came to be seen as tricksters due to the animal&#x27;s intelligence and adaptability. After the European colonization of the Americas, Anglo-American depictions of Coyote are of a cowardly and untrustworthy animal. Unlike the gray wolf, which has undergone a radical improvement of its public image, Anglo-American cultural attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative.

In the Maidu creation story, Coyote introduces work, suffering, and death to the world. Zuni lore has Coyote bringing winter into the world by stealing light from the kachinas. The Chinook, Maidu, Pawnee, Tohono O&#x27;odham, and Ute portray the coyote as the companion of The Creator. A Tohono O&#x27;odham flood story has Coyote helping Montezuma survive a global deluge that destroys humanity. After The Creator creates humanity, Coyote and Montezuma teach people how to live. The Crow creation story portrays Old Man Coyote as The Creator. In The Dineh creation story, Coyote was present in the First World with First Man and First Woman, though a different version has it being created in the Fourth World. The Navajo Coyote brings death into the world, explaining that without death, too many people would exist, thus no room to plant corn.
Prior to the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire, Coyote played a significant role in Mesoamerican cosmology. The coyote symbolized military might in Classic era Teotihuacan, with warriors dressing up in coyote costumes to call upon its predatory power. The species continued to be linked to Central Mexican warrior cults in the centuries leading up to the post-Classic Aztec rule. 

In Aztec mythology, Huehuecóyotl (meaning &quot;old coyote&quot;), the god of dance, music and carnality, is depicted in several codices as a man with a coyote&#x27;s head. He is sometimes depicted as a womanizer, responsible for bringing war into the world by seducing Xochiquetzal, the goddess of love. Epigrapher David H. Kelley argued that the god Quetzalcoatl owed its origins to pre-Aztec Uto-Aztecan mythological depictions of the coyote, which is portrayed as mankind&#x27;s &quot;Elder Brother&quot;, a creator, seducer, trickster, and culture hero linked to the morning star.

===Attacks on humans===
Coyote attacks on humans are uncommon and rarely cause serious injuries, due to the relatively small size of the coyote, but have been increasingly frequent, especially in California. By the middle of the 19th century, the coyote was already marked as an enemy by humans. (Sharp &amp; Hall, 1978 Pg. 41-54) There have been only two confirmed fatal attacks: one on three-year-old Kelly Keen in Glendale, California and another on nineteen-year-old singer-songwriter Taylor Mitchell in Nova Scotia, Canada. In the 30 years leading up to March 2006, at least 160 attacks occurred in the United States, mostly in the Los Angeles County area. Data from United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) Wildlife Services, the California Department of Fish and Game, and other sources show that while 41 attacks occurred during the period of 1988–1997, 48 attacks were verified from 1998 through 2003. The majority of these incidents occurred in Southern California near the suburban-wildland interface.

In the absence of the harassment of coyotes practiced by rural people, urban coyotes are losing their fear of humans, which is further worsened by people intentionally or unintentionally feeding coyotes. In such situations, some coyotes have begun to act aggressively toward humans, chasing joggers and bicyclists, confronting people walking their dogs, and stalking small children. Albeit rarely, coyotes in these areas have targeted small children, mostly under the age of 10, though some adults have been bitten.

Although media reports of such attacks generally identify the animals in question as simply &quot;coyotes&quot;, research into the genetics of the eastern coyote indicates those involved in attacks in northeast North America, including Pennsylvania, New York, New England, and eastern Canada, may have actually been coywolves, hybrids of &quot;Canis latrans&quot; and &quot;C. lupus,&quot; not fully coyotes.

===Livestock and pet predation===

, coyotes were the most abundant livestock predators in western North America, causing the majority of sheep, goat, and cattle losses. For example, according to the National Agricultural Statistics Service, coyotes were responsible for 60.5% of the 224,000 sheep deaths attributed to predation in 2004. The total number of sheep deaths in 2004 comprised 2.22% of the total sheep and lamb population in the United States, which, according to the National Agricultural Statistics Service USDA report, totaled 4.66 million and 7.80 million heads respectively as of July 1, 2005. 

Because coyote populations are typically many times greater and more widely distributed than those of wolves, coyotes cause more overall predation losses. United States government agents routinely shoot, poison, trap, and kill about 90,000 coyotes each year to protect livestock. An Idaho census taken in 2005 showed that individual coyotes were 5% as likely to attack livestock as individual wolves. In Utah, more than 11,000 coyotes were killed for bounties totaling over $500,000 in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2017.

Livestock guardian dogs are commonly used to aggressively repel predators and have worked well in both fenced pasture and range operations. A 1986 survey of sheep producers in the USA found that 82% reported the use of dogs represented an economic asset.

Re-wilding cattle, which involves increasing the natural protective tendencies of cattle, is a method for controlling coyotes discussed by Temple Grandin of Colorado State University. This method is gaining popularity among producers who allow their herds to calve on the range and whose cattle graze open pastures throughout the year.
Coyotes typically bite the throat just behind the jaw and below the ear when attacking adult sheep or goats, with death commonly resulting from suffocation. Blood loss is usually a secondary cause of death. Calves and heavily fleeced sheep are killed by attacking the flanks or hindquarters, causing shock and blood loss. When attacking smaller prey, such as young lambs, the kill is made by biting the skull and spinal regions, causing massive tissue and bone damage. Small or young prey may be completely carried off, leaving only blood as evidence of a kill. Coyotes usually leave the hide and most of the skeleton of larger animals relatively intact, unless food is scarce, in which case they may leave only the largest bones. Scattered bits of wool, skin, and other parts are characteristic where coyotes feed extensively on larger carcasses.

Tracks are an important factor in distinguishing coyote from dog predation. Coyote tracks tend to be more oval-shaped and compact than those of domestic dogs, and their claw marks are less prominent and the tracks tend to follow a straight line more closely than those of dogs. With the exception of sighthounds, most dogs of similar weight to coyotes have a slightly shorter stride. Coyote kills can be distinguished from wolf kills by less damage to the underlying tissues in the former. Also, coyote scat tends to be smaller than wolf scat.

Coyotes are often attracted to dog food and animals that are small enough to appear as prey. Items such as garbage, pet food, and sometimes feeding stations for birds and squirrels attract coyotes into backyards. About three to five pets attacked by coyotes are brought into the Animal Urgent Care hospital of South Orange County (California) each week, the majority of which are dogs, since cats typically do not survive the attacks. Scat analysis collected near Claremont, California, revealed that coyotes relied heavily on pets as a food source in winter and spring. 

At one location in Southern California, coyotes began relying on a colony of feral cats as a food source. Over time, the coyotes killed most of the cats and then continued to eat the cat food placed daily at the colony site by people who were maintaining the cat colony.
Coyotes usually attack smaller-sized dogs, but they have been known to attack even large, powerful breeds such as the Rottweiler in exceptional cases. Dogs larger than coyotes, such as greyhounds, are generally able to drive them off and have been known to kill coyotes. Smaller breeds are more likely to suffer injury or death.

=== Hunting ===

Coyote hunting is one of the most common forms of predator hunting that humans partake in. There are not many regulations with regard to the taking of the coyote which means there are many different methods that can be used to hunt the animal. The most common forms are trapping, calling, and hound hunting. Since coyotes are colorblind, seeing only in shades of gray and subtle blues, open camouflages and plain patterns can be used. As the average male coyote weighs 8 to 20 kg (18 to 44 lbs) and the average female coyote 7 to 18 kg (15 to 40 lbs), a universal projectile that can perform between those weights is the .223 Remington, so that the projectile expands in the target after entry, but before the exit, thus delivering the most energy. 

Coyotes being the light and agile animals they are, they often leave a very light impression on terrain. The coyote&#x27;s footprint is oblong, approximately 6.35 cm (2.5-inches) long and 5.08 cm (2-inches) wide. There are four claws in both their front and hind paws. The coyote&#x27;s center pad is relatively shaped like that of a rounded triangle. Like the domestic dog the coyote&#x27;s front paw is slightly larger than the hind paw. The coyote&#x27;s paw is most similar to that of the domestic dog.

The hunting of coyotes often results in grey wolves being shot in places where the two species still coexist, as a result of mistaken identity.

===Fur uses===

Prior to the mid-19th century, coyote fur was considered worthless. This changed with the diminution of beavers, and by 1860, the hunting of coyotes for their fur became a great source of income (75 cents to $1.50 per skin) for wolfers in the Great Plains. Coyote pelts were of significant economic importance during the early 1950s, ranging in price from $5 to $25 per pelt, depending on locality. The coyote&#x27;s fur is not durable enough to make rugs, but can be used for coats and jackets, scarves, or muffs. The majority of pelts are used for making trimmings, such as coat collars and sleeves for women&#x27;s clothing. Coyote fur is sometimes dyed black as imitation silver fox.

Coyotes were occasionally eaten by trappers and mountain men during the western expansion. Coyotes sometimes featured in the feasts of the Plains Indians, and coyote pups were eaten by the indigenous people of San Gabriel, California. The taste of coyote meat has been likened to that of the wolf and is more tender than pork when boiled. Coyote fat, when taken in the fall, has been used on occasion to grease leather or eaten as a spread.

===Tameability===
Coyotes were likely semidomesticated by various pre-Columbian cultures. Some 19th-century writers wrote of coyotes being kept in native villages in the Great Plains. The coyote is easily tamed as a pup, but can become destructive as an adult. Both full-blooded and hybrid coyotes can be playful and confiding with their owners, but are suspicious and shy of strangers, though coyotes being tractable enough to be used for practical purposes like retrieving and pointing have been recorded. A tame coyote named &quot;Butch&quot;, caught in the summer of 1945, had a short-lived career in cinema, appearing in &quot;Smoky&quot; (1946) and &quot;Ramrod&quot; (1947) before being shot while raiding a henhouse.

==In popular culture==
*Wile E. Coyote features prominently in the &quot;Looney Tunes&quot; and &quot;Merrie Melodies&quot; series of animated short films, in which he makes numerous ill-fated attempts to capture an elusive roadrunner.
*Dag and his coyote pack are the main antagonists in Nickelodeon&#x27;s 2006 animated film &quot;Barnyard&quot;. 
*The NHL team in Arizona (1996–2024) was named the Arizona Coyotes to pay tribute to the large population of coyotes in the region.
*The famous &quot;oo-wee-oo-wee-oo wah-wah-wah&quot; scream in &quot;The Good, The Bad and The Ugly&quot; (1966) was inspired by the howl of the coyote.
*Copper, a coyote, was one of three mascots for the 2002 Winter Olympics.
*An animated coyote voiced by Johnny Cash plays a pivotal role as a spirit guide to Homer Simpson in the &quot;Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer&quot;.
*The 2013 documentary film &quot;Bad Coyote&quot; profiles the expansion of coyotes into Atlantic Canada, centred in part on the 2009 death of singer-songwriter Taylor Mitchell in a coyote attack.
*Athletic teams at the University of South Dakota are called the Coyotes.
*&quot;The Daily Coyote&quot;, a 2008 autobiographical book about a woman who raises a coyote pup.

== Explanatory notes==
== Citations ==
== General and cited sources ==
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
=== Books ===
* Dixon, J. S. (1920). &quot;Control of the coyote in California&quot;. Berkeley, Cal. : Agricultural Experiment Station
* Flores, D. (2016). &quot;Coyote America: A Natural and Supernatural History&quot;. Basic Books. 
* Harding, A. R. (1909). &quot;Wolf and coyote trapping; an up-to-date wolf hunter&#x27;s guide, giving the most successful methods of experienced &quot;wolfers&quot; for hunting and trapping these animals, also gives their habits in detail&quot;. Columbus, Ohio, A. R. Harding pub. co.
* 
* Murie, A. (1940). &quot;Ecology of the coyote in the Yellowstone&quot;. Washington, D.C. : U.S. G.P.O.
* Parker, Gerry. (1995). &quot;Eastern Coyote: Story of Its Success&quot;, Nimbus Publishing, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada.
* Van Nuys, Frank (2015). &quot;Varmints and Victims: Predator Control in the American West.&quot; Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.
* Wagner, M. M. (c. 1920). &quot;The autobiography of a tame coyote&quot;. San Francisco, Harr Wagner pub. co.

=== Video ===
*Shelly, Priya (June 2016). &quot;Living with Coyote&quot; (18 minutes). &quot;Aeon&quot;.

=== Audiobooks ===
* Olson, Jack (May 2015). &quot;The Last Coyote&quot; (8 hours). Narrated by Gary MacFadden. Originally published as &quot;Slaughter the Animals, Poison the Earth&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster, Oct. 11, 1971. .

==External links==

* 
* Arizona Game &amp; Fish Department, &quot;Living with Coyotes&quot; 
* Western coyote , Wolf and Coyote DNA Bank @ Trent University
* View occurrences of &quot;Canis latrans&quot; in the Biodiversity Heritage Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="4" end="10" title="Coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="46" end="61" title="Coyote" label="American jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="63" end="75" title="Coyote" label="prairie wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="80" end="90" title="Coyote" label="brush wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="97" end="104" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q149892" start="108" end="114" title="canis" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="125" end="138" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="188" end="192" title="wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q677746" start="240" end="252" title="eastern wolf" label="eastern wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q200442" start="257" end="265" title="red wolf" label="red wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="293" end="309" title="ecological niche" label="ecological niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q128098" start="317" end="330" title="golden jackal" label="golden jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="339" end="346" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="414" end="427" title="Least Concern" label="least concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="435" end="481" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900110" start="644" end="656" title="urban coyote" label="urban coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="719" end="725" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="738" end="750" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="832" end="842" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508507" start="948" end="955" title="fulvous" label="fulvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="1171" end="1182" title="carnivorous" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="1212" end="1216" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="1218" end="1224" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="1227" end="1231" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="1234" end="1240" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="1243" end="1247" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="1250" end="1257" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="1260" end="1269" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="1272" end="1276" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="1282" end="1294" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755925" start="1392" end="1396" title="howling" label="howl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="1427" end="1433" title="Humans" label="Humans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044439" start="1485" end="1491" title="North American cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696387" start="1627" end="1634" title="coywolf" label="coywolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032441" start="1700" end="1714" title="eastern coyote" label="eastern coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="1983" end="1998" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q613648" start="2019" end="2031" title="Aridoamerica" label="Aridoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="2055" end="2064" title="trickster" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="2274" end="2285" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="2287" end="2296" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="2338" end="2375" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q27353" start="2392" end="2405" title="Anglo-America" label="Anglo-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q389436" start="2968" end="2982" title="Afton, Wyoming" label="Afton, Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508507" start="3287" end="3294" title="fulvous" label="fulvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="3432" end="3438" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527439" start="3880" end="3897" title="supracaudal gland" label="supracaudal gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q81867" start="3924" end="3932" title="Albinism" label="Albinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148039" start="4193" end="4202" title="Neurocranium" label="braincase"/>
<link wikidata="Q833871" start="4664" end="4679" title="mental foramina" label="mental foramina"/>
<link wikidata="Q999403" start="5034" end="5053" title="Kaskaskia, Illinois" label="Kaskaskia, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q112488" start="5225" end="5239" title="Edwards County, Illinois" label="Edwards County"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="5363" end="5389" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="5469" end="5477" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="5479" end="5495" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="5536" end="5543" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="5631" end="5641" title="naturalist" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q546079" start="5642" end="5652" title="Thomas Say" label="Thomas Say"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5786" end="5817" title="Stephen Harriman Long#1817-23 expeditions up the Missouri and Platte Rivers" label="government-sponsored expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712366" start="5829" end="5841" title="Stephen Harriman Long" label="Stephen Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q546079" start="6036" end="6039" title="Thomas Say" label="Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q718688" start="6217" end="6234" title="Great Plains wolf" label="Great Plains wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q13300" start="6387" end="6394" title="Nahuatl" label="Nahuatl"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="6436" end="6445" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442029" start="6446" end="6472" title="Francisco Javier Clavijero" label="Francisco Javier Clavijero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="6550" end="6557" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q919862" start="6570" end="6585" title="William Bullock (collector)" label="William Bullock"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="7359" end="7372" title="binomial name" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044281" start="7529" end="7542" title="Xiaoming Wang (paleontologist)" label="Xiaoming Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326187" start="7547" end="7565" title="Richard H. Tedford" label="Richard H. Tedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q788451" start="7587" end="7598" title="Author citation (zoology)" label="authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791493" start="7709" end="7722" title="Eucyon davisi" label="Eucyon davisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="7767" end="7774" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="7842" end="7850" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032444" start="7876" end="7892" title="Canis lepophagus" label="Canis lepophagus"/>
<link wikidata="Q444693" start="7938" end="7955" title="early Pleistocene" label="early Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661310" start="8224" end="8234" title="Canis edwardii" label="C.edwardii"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924779" start="8292" end="8299" title="Blancan" label="Blancan"/>
<link wikidata="Q514873" start="8301" end="8314" title="late Pliocene" label="late Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154626" start="8336" end="8348" title="Irvingtonian" label="Irvingtonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195335" start="8907" end="8916" title="cursorial" label="cursorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232942" start="9237" end="9251" title="sagittal crest" label="sagittal crest"/>
<link wikidata="Q189218" start="9443" end="9449" title="molar (tooth)" label="molars"/>
<link wikidata="Q577" start="9708" end="9710" title="Megaannum" label="Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759232" start="9917" end="9944" title="Quaternary extinction event" label="Quaternary extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="9971" end="9979" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720501" start="9994" end="10012" title="Pleistocene coyote" label="Pleistocene coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q45767" start="10099" end="10110" title="Competition (biology)" label="competitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="10519" end="10524" title="Ecological niche" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q496689" start="10565" end="10574" title="dire wolf" label="dire wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="10702" end="10719" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10955" end="10960" title="lineage (genetic)#Basal lineage" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468673" start="10999" end="11011" title="Tibetan wolf" label="Tibetan wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="11017" end="11029" title="Dog" label="domestic dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q266883" start="11035" end="11049" title="Mongolian wolf" label="Mongolian wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q898061" start="11058" end="11071" title="Eurasian wolf" label="Eurasian wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="11154" end="11166" title="Whole genome sequencing" label="whole-genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532875" start="11663" end="11670" title="Genetic admixture" label="admixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="13194" end="13217" title="whole genome sequencing" label="whole genome sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="13346" end="13350" title="wolf" label="wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532875" start="13367" end="13374" title="Genetic admixture" label="admixed"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304522" start="13382" end="13398" title="ghost population" label="ghost population"/>
<link wikidata="Q132585" start="13491" end="13496" title="dhole" label="dhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q173651" start="13542" end="13558" title="African wild dog" label="African wild dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="13593" end="13598" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="14046" end="14068" title="Ochre" label="&amp;#x27;ochraceous&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q613648" start="14155" end="14167" title="Aridoamerica" label="Aridoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="14338" end="14350" title="Dog" label="domestic dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622157" start="14409" end="14415" title="coydog" label="coydog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293576" start="14864" end="14873" title="F1 hybrid" label="F1 hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068902" start="15003" end="15018" title="Wolfdog" label="wolf-dog hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15090" end="15111" title="#Description" label="usual characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q725450" start="15412" end="15422" title="Melanism" label="Melanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21173746" start="15585" end="15608" title="melanocortin 1 receptor" label="melanocortin 1 receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q38686" start="15633" end="15649" title="Golden Retriever" label="Golden Retriever"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="15732" end="15745" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032441" start="15767" end="15781" title="eastern coyote" label="eastern coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q15178060" start="16650" end="16664" title="tooth eruption" label="tooth eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="17294" end="17309" title="sexual maturity" label="sexual maturity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004691" start="17549" end="17561" title="backcrossing" label="backcrossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q905014" start="17681" end="17703" title="Southeastern Woodlands" label="Southeastern Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782625" start="18036" end="18048" title="Biological specificity" label="conspecifics"/>
<link wikidata="Q388121" start="18585" end="18591" title="estrus" label="estrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q30600878" start="18641" end="18651" title="Copulation (zoology)" label="copulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13538358" start="18671" end="18685" title="copulatory tie" label="copulatory tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901585" start="19165" end="19175" title="Monogamy in animals" label="monogamous"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="19554" end="19560" title="American badger" label="badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="19562" end="19568" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="19573" end="19578" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490716" start="19762" end="19778" title="gestation period" label="gestation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q110576835" start="20013" end="20022" title="altricial" label="altricial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8495" start="20056" end="20060" title="milk" label="milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q273543" start="20090" end="20097" title="incisor" label="incisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19625" start="20127" end="20133" title="canine teeth" label="canine"/>
<link wikidata="Q839483" start="20157" end="20165" title="premolar" label="premolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q281524" start="20462" end="20472" title="milk teeth" label="milk teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="20567" end="20575" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="20592" end="20601" title="lactation" label="lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q616914" start="21092" end="21100" title="social grooming" label="grooming"/>
<link wikidata="Q333203" start="21201" end="21207" title="Weaning" label="weaned"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="22062" end="22082" title="raised-leg urination" label="raised-leg urination"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="22319" end="22325" title="canyon" label="canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896442" start="22328" end="22335" title="Washout (erosion)" label="washout"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176129" start="22338" end="22344" title="coulee" label="coulee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2897058" start="22347" end="22351" title="Bank (geography)" label="bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541064" start="22903" end="22912" title="olfaction" label="olfaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="23226" end="23234" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646435" start="23450" end="23462" title="hamstringing" label="hamstringing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874546" start="23562" end="23567" title="Hoarding (animal behavior)" label="cache"/>
<link wikidata="Q389250" start="23637" end="23652" title="ground squirrel" label="ground squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10758828" start="23785" end="23794" title="North American porcupine" label="porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q105726" start="24090" end="24097" title="urination" label="urinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q186368" start="24304" end="24315" title="mutualism (biology)" label="mutualistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q232129" start="24343" end="24358" title="American badger" label="American badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="24781" end="24783" title="Current era" label="CE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="28255" end="28264" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="28279" end="28284" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="28286" end="28295" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="28297" end="28300" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q30359" start="28368" end="28379" title="prairie dog" label="prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399162" start="28440" end="28449" title="sagebrush" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="28454" end="28464" title="jackrabbit" label="jackrabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14560" start="28493" end="28499" title="cactus" label="cactus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120094" start="28501" end="28513" title="kangaroo rat" label="kangaroo rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282840" start="28520" end="28531" title="rattlesnake" label="rattlesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q189429" start="28620" end="28634" title="Sonoran Desert" label="Sonoran Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="28719" end="28726" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="28845" end="28854" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="28881" end="28887" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255068" start="29044" end="29055" title="crepuscular" label="crepuscular"/>
<link wikidata="Q128098" start="29435" end="29448" title="golden jackal" label="golden jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q81875" start="29531" end="29542" title="carnivorous" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q82728" start="29606" end="29611" title="American bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="29624" end="29631" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q215887" start="29634" end="29651" title="white-tailed deer" label="white-tailed deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="29653" end="29662" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="29664" end="29669" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="29671" end="29674" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q189466" start="29676" end="29689" title="bighorn sheep" label="bighorn sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="29691" end="29700" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="29702" end="29708" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q46076" start="29711" end="29715" title="hare" label="hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="29718" end="29724" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="29727" end="29731" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q21659" start="29745" end="29756" title="galliformes" label="galliformes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452250" start="29758" end="29768" title="roadrunner" label="roadrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303681" start="29777" end="29787" title="water bird" label="water bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856" start="29793" end="29810" title="Columbidae" label="pigeons and doves"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="29813" end="29822" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453151" start="29832" end="29836" title="toad" label="toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="29840" end="29846" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="29849" end="29854" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q223044" start="29857" end="29863" title="turtle" label="turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="29869" end="29877" title="tortoise" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="29880" end="29884" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="29886" end="29896" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="29903" end="29909" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q41631" start="29979" end="29984" title="shrew" label="shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189180" start="29987" end="29992" title="Mole (animal)" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184224" start="29998" end="30007" title="brown rat" label="brown rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="30069" end="30088" title="Terrestrial animals" label="Terrestrial animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q389250" start="30124" end="30139" title="ground squirrel" label="ground squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q131567" start="30165" end="30171" title="marmot" label="marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q30359" start="30174" end="30185" title="prairie dog" label="prairie dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752125" start="30188" end="30196" title="chipmunk" label="chipmunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10952397" start="30210" end="30214" title="vole" label="vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q756901" start="30217" end="30230" title="pocket gopher" label="pocket gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q120094" start="30233" end="30245" title="kangaroo rat" label="kangaroo rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q774716" start="30387" end="30413" title="Eastern cottontail" label="eastern cottontail rabbits"/>
<link wikidata="Q960501" start="30415" end="30445" title="thirteen-lined ground squirrel" label="thirteen-lined ground squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q732863" start="30452" end="30469" title="white-footed mice" label="white-footed mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q584064" start="30497" end="30504" title="Fisher (animal)" label="fishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="30512" end="30522" title="American black bear" label="black bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q209324" start="30529" end="30538" title="harp seal" label="harp seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q10282840" start="30544" end="30555" title="rattlesnake" label="rattlesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797138" start="30803" end="30811" title="thrasher" label="thrasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q29858" start="30814" end="30818" title="lark" label="lark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425706" start="30824" end="30832" title="Passerellidae" label="sparrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844" start="30842" end="30853" title="wild turkey" label="wild turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q733375" start="30883" end="30888" title="Trumpeter swan" label="swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q735190" start="30893" end="30901" title="American white pelican" label="pelicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334923" start="31138" end="31148" title="Odocoileus" label="Odocoileus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180404" start="31165" end="31168" title="elk" label="elk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187943" start="31170" end="31179" title="pronghorn" label="pronghorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22724" start="31185" end="31195" title="Ovis" label="wild sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="31316" end="31330" title="domestic sheep" label="domestic sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="31335" end="31350" title="Cattle" label="domestic cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="31725" end="31733" title="scavenge" label="scavenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44595" start="31899" end="31911" title="cannibalism (zoology)" label="cannibalizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782625" start="31929" end="31941" title="conspecifics" label="conspecifics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913301" start="32258" end="32265" title="produce" label="produce"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="32277" end="32289" title="strawberry" label="strawberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q19842373" start="32291" end="32303" title="blackberry" label="blackberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="32305" end="32316" title="blueberry" label="blueberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q165315" start="32318" end="32330" title="Smilax" label="sarsaparilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="32333" end="32338" title="peach" label="peach"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="32342" end="32346" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="32349" end="32354" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q158991" start="32357" end="32370" title="Opuntia" label="prickly pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279625" start="32372" end="32379" title="chapote" label="chapote"/>
<link wikidata="Q29526" start="32382" end="32391" title="persimmon" label="persimmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37383" start="32394" end="32400" title="peanut" label="peanut"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507129" start="32403" end="32413" title="watermelon" label="watermelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q477179" start="32416" end="32426" title="cantaloupe" label="cantaloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81" start="32433" end="32439" title="carrot" label="carrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15645384" start="32535" end="32540" title="wheat" label="wheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175773" start="32589" end="32600" title="Cottonseed meal" label="cotton cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="32602" end="32609" title="soybean" label="soybean"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="32643" end="32647" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995529" start="32665" end="32670" title="grain" label="grain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="32679" end="32684" title="maize" label="maize"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="32697" end="32704" title="sorghum" label="sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q118388" start="32900" end="32912" title="Death Valley" label="Death Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q157683" start="32954" end="32962" title="hawkmoth" label="hawkmoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q81825" start="32963" end="32974" title="caterpillar" label="caterpillar"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="32979" end="32985" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q163503" start="33354" end="33365" title="Isle Royale" label="Isle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="33437" end="33462" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6480908" start="33536" end="33554" title="Lamar River" label="Lamar River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q222695" start="33680" end="33705" title="Grand Teton National Park" label="Grand Teton National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="33923" end="33929" title="cougar" label="cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q26777" start="33961" end="33974" title="Sierra Nevada" label="Sierra Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q338831" start="34010" end="34019" title="mule deer" label="mule deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131907" start="34183" end="34189" title="bobcat" label="bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="34410" end="34416" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q35694" start="34522" end="34528" title="jaguar" label="jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122783" start="34776" end="34790" title="American black bear" label="American black"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="34795" end="34807" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q193327" start="34810" end="34828" title="American alligator" label="American alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="34837" end="34848" title="Canada lynx" label="Canada lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="34853" end="34865" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="34981" end="34990" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="35021" end="35026" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="35035" end="35039" title="Bald eagle" label="bald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="35394" end="35401" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q215250" start="35625" end="35633" title="gray fox" label="gray fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006685" start="36749" end="36767" title="Stanley Paul Young" label="Stanley Paul Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q146457" start="37004" end="37015" title="Canada lynx" label="Canada lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q81063" start="37072" end="37085" title="snowshoe hare" label="snowshoe hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q211005" start="37395" end="37408" title="Least Concern" label="Least Concern"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="37416" end="37462" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="38477" end="38487" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q242" start="38673" end="38679" title="Belize" label="Belize"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="38831" end="38849" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Panamanian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q917276" start="38862" end="38872" title="Darién Gap" label="Darién Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q271839" start="38895" end="38915" title="Pan-American Highway" label="Pan-American Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2215925" start="39023" end="39037" title="Chepo District" label="Chepo District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="39050" end="39062" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928978" start="40775" end="40789" title="Viral diseases" label="Viral diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="40822" end="40828" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q601037" start="40830" end="40846" title="canine distemper" label="canine distemper"/>
<link wikidata="Q486550" start="40848" end="40875" title="infectious canine hepatitis" label="infectious canine hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q67375735" start="40893" end="40912" title="equine encephalitis" label="equine encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099389" start="40918" end="40937" title="Oral florid papillomatosis" label="oral papillomatosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153861" start="41194" end="41203" title="Tularemia" label="Tularemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q804517" start="41213" end="41230" title="bacterial disease" label="bacterial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030785" start="41370" end="41380" title="Demodicosis" label="demodectic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358140" start="41385" end="41400" title="sarcoptic mange" label="sarcoptic mange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="41436" end="41440" title="Mite" label="Mite"/>
<link wikidata="Q10304508" start="41496" end="41500" title="tick" label="tick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6481228" start="41670" end="41674" title="Louse" label="lice"/>
<link wikidata="Q388162" start="41682" end="41686" title="flea" label="flea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120770" start="41792" end="41806" title="Pulex" label="Pulex simulans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366855" start="41871" end="41892" title="Ctenocephalides canis" label="Ctenocephalides canis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207547" start="42030" end="42035" title="Trematoda" label="fluke"/>
<link wikidata="Q18519866" start="42112" end="42134" title="Nanophyetus salmincola" label="Nanophyetus salmincola"/>
<link wikidata="Q50231157" start="42169" end="42193" title="salmon poisoning disease" label="salmon poisoning disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032083" start="42248" end="42268" title="Metorchis conjunctus" label="Metorchis conjunctus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280912" start="42302" end="42310" title="Tapeworm" label="Tapeworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q291919" start="42425" end="42442" title="Taenia pisiformis" label="Taenia pisiformis"/>
<link wikidata="Q287611" start="42459" end="42476" title="Taenia crassiceps" label="Taenia crassiceps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1732239" start="42595" end="42608" title="Taenia hydatigena" label="T. hydatigena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="42654" end="42663" title="ungulates" label="ungulates"/>
<link wikidata="Q630200" start="42741" end="42764" title="Echinococcus granulosus" label="Echinococcus granulosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q763856" start="42868" end="42876" title="Ascarididae" label="ascaroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q145041" start="42907" end="42925" title="Toxascaris leonina" label="Toxascaris leonina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12212063" start="43059" end="43067" title="Hookworm" label="Hookworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490891" start="43088" end="43099" title="Ancylostoma" label="Ancylostoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q291499" start="43309" end="43319" title="Ancylostoma caninum" label="A. caninum"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="43589" end="43598" title="trickster" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6632346" start="43610" end="43621" title="skin-walker" label="skin-walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="43647" end="43663" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q65081865" start="43696" end="43708" title="Indigenous peoples of the North American Southwest" label="Southwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="43713" end="43719" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q27353" start="44115" end="44128" title="Anglo-America" label="Anglo-America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533493" start="44366" end="44371" title="Maidu" label="Maidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q231317" start="44447" end="44451" title="Zuni people" label="Zuni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570159" start="44526" end="44533" title="kachina" label="kachina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074448" start="44540" end="44547" title="Chinookan peoples" label="Chinook"/>
<link wikidata="Q750947" start="44556" end="44562" title="Pawnee people" label="Pawnee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937531" start="44564" end="44583" title="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham" label="Tohono O&amp;#x27;odham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253290" start="44589" end="44592" title="Ute people" label="Ute"/>
<link wikidata="Q635155" start="44632" end="44643" title="Creator deity" label="The Creator"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="44667" end="44678" title="flood myth" label="flood story"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317756" start="44698" end="44707" title="Montezuma (mythology)" label="Montezuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q331789" start="44843" end="44847" title="Crow Nation" label="Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278771" start="44906" end="44930" title="Diné Bahaneʼ" label="The Dineh creation story"/>
<link wikidata="Q828435" start="45219" end="45255" title="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire" label="Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45357" end="45368" title="Mesoamerican chronology#Classic Era" label="Classic era"/>
<link wikidata="Q172613" start="45369" end="45380" title="Teotihuacan" label="Teotihuacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q391184" start="45594" end="45609" title="Aztec mythology" label="Aztec mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425920" start="45611" end="45623" title="Huehuecoyotl" label="Huehuecóyotl"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="45794" end="45803" title="Promiscuity" label="womanizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q149042" start="45861" end="45873" title="Xochiquetzal" label="Xochiquetzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="45896" end="45906" title="Epigraphy" label="Epigrapher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018032" start="45907" end="45922" title="David H. Kelley" label="David H. Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q34073" start="45986" end="45997" title="Uto-Aztecan languages" label="Uto-Aztecan"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="46374" end="46384" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386116" start="46581" end="46591" title="Kelly Keen coyote attack" label="Kelly Keen"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="46595" end="46615" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q267622" start="46667" end="46682" title="Taylor Mitchell" label="Taylor Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952" start="46686" end="46697" title="Nova Scotia" label="Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="46815" end="46833" title="Los Angeles County" label="Los Angeles County"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="46850" end="46889" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001322" start="46897" end="46914" title="Wildlife Services" label="Wildlife Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q3696387" start="48031" end="48040" title="Coywolf" label="coywolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q861855" start="48325" end="48365" title="National Agricultural Statistics Service" label="National Agricultural Statistics Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q38920" start="49263" end="49285" title="Livestock guardian dog" label="Livestock guardian dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q232810" start="49658" end="49672" title="Temple Grandin" label="Temple Grandin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798312" start="49873" end="49888" title="Throat clamp" label="bite the throat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39344" start="51004" end="51014" title="sighthound" label="sighthound"/>
<link wikidata="Q38420" start="51280" end="51288" title="dog food" label="dog food"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="51559" end="51578" title="South Orange County" label="South Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q506398" start="51713" end="51734" title="Claremont, California" label="Claremont, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404562" start="51899" end="51908" title="feral cat" label="feral cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q39093" start="52211" end="52221" title="Rottweiler" label="Rottweiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q38571" start="52278" end="52287" title="greyhound" label="greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q34168" start="52710" end="52718" title="trapping" label="trapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131737" start="52720" end="52727" title="Imitation" label="calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="52733" end="52738" title="Dog" label="hound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076678" start="53061" end="53075" title=".223 Remington" label=".223 Remington"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="53964" end="53970" title="North American beaver" label="beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q161604" start="54059" end="54063" title="Penny (United States coin)" label="cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="54068" end="54069" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030007" start="54088" end="54095" title="wolfers (hunting)" label="wolfers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12707" start="54103" end="54115" title="Great Plains" label="Great Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398005" start="54417" end="54425" title="Trim (sewing)" label="trimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574250" start="54536" end="54546" title="Silver fox (animal)" label="silver fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q474184" start="54621" end="54638" title="Manifest destiny" label="western expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q907924" start="54688" end="54702" title="Plains Indians" label="Plains Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q953437" start="54759" end="54782" title="San Gabriel, California" label="San Gabriel, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="54870" end="54874" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472481" start="54982" end="54988" title="Spread (food)" label="spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q39017" start="55455" end="55465" title="Retriever" label="retrieving"/>
<link wikidata="Q39125" start="55470" end="55478" title="Pointing breed" label="pointing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="55596" end="55602" title="Film" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546130" start="55623" end="55628" title="Smoky (1946 film)" label="Smoky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068250" start="55652" end="55658" title="Ramrod (film)" label="Ramrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q822524" start="55741" end="55755" title="Wile E. Coyote and the Road Runner" label="Wile E. Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="55790" end="55802" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750628" start="55819" end="55834" title="Merrie Melodies" label="Merrie Melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452250" start="55941" end="55951" title="roadrunner" label="roadrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129308" start="56050" end="56058" title="Barnyard (film)" label="Barnyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="56072" end="56075" title="National Hockey League" label="NHL"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="56084" end="56091" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q206312" start="56118" end="56133" title="Arizona Coyotes" label="Arizona Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41483" start="56268" end="56298" title="The Good, The Bad and The Ugly" label="The Good, The Bad and The Ugly"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="56404" end="56424" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q42775" start="56456" end="56467" title="Johnny Cash" label="Johnny Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="56537" end="56545" title="The Simpsons" label="Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986112" start="56566" end="56602" title="El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer (The Mysterious Voyage of Homer)" label="El Viaje Misterioso de Nuestro Jomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q127038402" start="56643" end="56653" title="Bad Coyote" label="Bad Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q246972" start="56699" end="56714" title="Atlantic Canada" label="Atlantic Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q267622" start="56771" end="56786" title="Taylor Mitchell" label="Taylor Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305521" start="56830" end="56856" title="University of South Dakota" label="University of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566956" start="56872" end="56879" title="South_Dakota_Coyotes" label="Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728641" start="56888" end="56904" title="The Daily Coyote" label="The Daily Coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687893" start="58180" end="58184" title="Aeon (digital magazine)" label="Aeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172266" start="58634" end="58663" title="Biodiversity Heritage Library" label="Biodiversity Heritage Library"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6711" wikidata="Q341563" url="?curid=6711" title="Compressor (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[compressor]] is a mechanical device that increases the pressure of a gas by reducing its volume. 

Compressor may also refer to:

* A device that performs Compression (disambiguation)
* Compressor (audio signal processor), for dynamic range compression
* Compressor (software), a video and audio media compression and encoding application 

==See also==
*
* Compression (disambiguation)
* Compaction (disambiguation)
* Decompression (disambiguation)
* Expansion (disambiguation)
* Kompressor (disambiguation) 
* Compressor Hot Springs, a place in California, U.S.
* Supercharger
* Turbocharger</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q341563" start="2" end="16" title="Compressor (disambiguation)" label="[[compressor]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q341563" start="103" end="113" title="Compressor (disambiguation)" label="Compressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q230216" start="159" end="187" title="Compression (disambiguation)" label="Compression (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18433212" start="190" end="225" title="Compressor (audio signal processor)" label="Compressor (audio signal processor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720274" start="259" end="280" title="Compressor (software)" label="Compressor (software)"/>
<link wikidata="Q230216" start="362" end="390" title="Compression (disambiguation)" label="Compression (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476308" start="393" end="420" title="Compaction (disambiguation)" label="Compaction (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524708" start="423" end="453" title="Decompression (disambiguation)" label="Decompression (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q253338" start="456" end="482" title="Expansion (disambiguation)" label="Expansion (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q92771423" start="485" end="512" title="Kompressor (disambiguation)" label="Kompressor (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872403" start="516" end="538" title="Compressor Hot Springs" label="Compressor Hot Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079988" start="570" end="582" title="Supercharger" label="Supercharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="585" end="597" title="Turbocharger" label="Turbocharger"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6713" wikidata="Q189169" url="?curid=6713" title="Conan the Barbarian">
<text>Conan the Barbarian (also known as Conan the Cimmerian) is a fictional sword and sorcery hero who originated in pulp magazines and has since been adapted to books, comics, films (including &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; and &quot;Conan the Destroyer&quot;), television programs (animated and live-action), video games, and role-playing games. Robert E. Howard created the character in 1932 for a series of fantasy stories published in &quot;Weird Tales&quot; magazine.

The earliest appearance of a Robert E. Howard character named Conan was that of a black-haired barbarian with heroic attributes in the 1931 short story &quot;People of the Dark&quot;. By 1932, Howard had fully conceptualized Conan. Before his death, Howard had written 21 stories starring the barbarian. Over the years many other writers have written works featuring Conan.

Many Conan the Barbarian stories feature Conan embarking on heroic adventures filled with common fantasy elements such as princesses and wizards. Howard&#x27;s mythopoeia has the stories set in the legendary Hyborian Age in the times after the fall of Atlantis. Conan is a Cimmerian, who are descendants of the Atlanteans and ancestors of the modern Gaels. Conan is himself a descendant of Kull of Atlantis (an earlier adventurer of Howard&#x27;s). He was born on a battlefield and is the son of a blacksmith. Conan is characterized as chivalric due to his penchant to save damsels in distress. He is honorable and has a sense of enduring loyalty. In contrast to his brooding ancestor, Kull, Conan has a sense of humor. He possesses great strength, combativeness, intelligence, agility, and endurance. The barbarian&#x27;s appearance is iconic, with square-cut black hair, blue eyes, tanned skin, and giant stature, often wearing a barbarian&#x27;s garb.

Licensed comics published in the 1970s by Marvel Comics drew further popularity to the character, introducing the now iconic image of Conan in his loincloth. The most popular cinematic adaptation is the 1982 film, &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; directed by John Milius and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger as Conan, in which the plot revolves around Conan facing the villainous Thulsa Doom.

==Publication history==
Robert E. Howard created Conan the Barbarian in a series of fantasy stories published in &quot;Weird Tales&quot; from 1932. Howard was searching for a new character to market to the burgeoning pulp outlets of the early 1930s. In October 1931, he submitted the short story &quot;People of the Dark&quot; to Clayton Publications&#x27; new magazine, &quot;Strange Tales of Mystery and Terror&quot; (June 1932). &quot;People of the Dark&quot; is a story about the remembrance of &quot;past lives&quot;, and in its first-person narrative, the protagonist describes one of his previous incarnations: Conan is a black-haired barbarian hero who swears by a deity called Crom. Some Howard scholars believe this Conan to be a forerunner of the more famous character.

In February 1932, Howard vacationed at a border town on the lower Rio Grande. During this trip, he further conceived the character of Conan and also wrote the poem &quot;Cimmeria&quot;, much of which echoes specific passages in Plutarch&#x27;s &quot;Lives&quot;. According to some scholars, reading Thomas Bulfinch inspired Howard to &quot;coalesce into a coherent whole his literary aspirations and the strong physical, autobiographical elements underlying the creation of Conan&quot;.

Having digested these influences upon returning from his trip, Howard rewrote a rejected story, &quot;By This Axe I Rule!&quot; (May 1929), replacing his existing character Kull of Atlantis with his new hero and re-titling it &quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot;. Howard also wrote &quot;The Scarlet Citadel&quot; and &quot;The Frost-Giant&#x27;s Daughter&quot;, inspired by the Greek myth of Daphne, and submitted both stories to &quot;Weird Tales&quot; magazine. Although &quot;The Frost-Giant&#x27;s Daughter&quot; was rejected, the magazine accepted &quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot; after it received the requested polishing, and published it in the December 1932 issue. &quot;The Scarlet Citadel&quot; was published the following month.

&quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot; appeared in &quot;Weird Tales&quot; cover-dated December 1932. Editor Farnsworth Wright subsequently prompted Howard to write an 8,000-word essay for personal use detailing &quot;the Hyborian Age&quot;, the fictional setting for Conan. Using this essay as his guideline, Howard began plotting &quot;The Tower of the Elephant&quot;, a new Conan story that was the first to integrate his new conception of the Hyborian world.

The publication and success of &quot;The Tower of the Elephant&quot; spurred Howard to write more Conan stories for &quot;Weird Tales&quot;. By the time of Howard&#x27;s suicide in 1936, he had written 21 complete stories, 17 of which had been published, as well as multiple unfinished fragments.

Following Howard&#x27;s death, the copyright of the Conan stories passed through several hands. Eventually L. Sprague de Camp was entrusted with management of the fiction line and, beginning with 1967&#x27;s &quot;Conan&quot; released by Lancer Books, oversaw a paperback series collecting all of Howard&#x27;s stories (Lancer folded in 1973 and Ace Books picked up the line, reprinting the older volumes with new trade dress and continuing to release new ones). Howard&#x27;s original stories received additional edits by de Camp, and de Camp also decided to create additional Conan stories to publish alongside the originals, working with Björn Nyberg and especially Lin Carter. These new stories were created from a mixture of already-complete Howard stories with different settings and characters that were altered to feature Conan and the Hyborian setting instead, incomplete fragments and outlines for Conan stories that were never completed by Howard, and all-new pastiches. Lastly, de Camp created prefaces for each story, fitting them into a timeline of Conan&#x27;s life that he created.

For roughly 40 years, the original versions of Howard&#x27;s Conan stories remained out of print. In 1977, the publisher Berkley Books issued three volumes using the earliest published form of the texts from &quot;Weird Tales&quot; and thus no de Camp edits, with Karl Edward Wagner as series editor, but these were halted by action from de Camp before the remaining three intended volumes could be released. In the 1980s and 1990s, the copyright holders permitted Howard&#x27;s stories to go out of print entirely as the public demand for sword &amp; sorcery dwindled, but continued to release the occasional new Conan novel by other authors such as Leonard Carpenter, Roland Green, and Harry Turtledove.

In 2000, the British publisher Gollancz Science Fiction issued a two-volume, complete edition of Howard&#x27;s Conan stories as part of its &quot;Fantasy Masterworks&quot; imprint, which included several stories that had never seen print in their original form. The Gollancz edition mostly used the versions of the stories as published in &quot;Weird Tales&quot;.

The two volumes were combined and the stories restored to chronological order as &quot;The Complete Chronicles of Conan: Centenary Edition&quot; (Gollancz Science Fiction, 2006; edited and with an Afterword by Steve Jones).

In 2003, another British publisher, Wandering Star Books, made an effort both to restore Howard&#x27;s original manuscripts and to provide a more scholarly and historical view of the Conan stories. It published hardcover editions in England, which were republished in the United States by the Del Rey imprint of Ballantine Books. The first book, &quot;Conan of Cimmeria: Volume One (1932–1933)&quot; (2003; published in the US as &quot;The Coming of Conan the Cimmerian&quot;) includes Howard&#x27;s notes on his fictional setting as well as letters and poems concerning the genesis of his ideas. This was followed by &quot;Conan of Cimmeria: Volume Two (1934)&quot; (2004; published in the US as &quot;The Bloody Crown of Conan&quot;) and &quot;Conan of Cimmeria: Volume Three (1935–1936)&quot; (2005; published in the US as &quot;The Conquering Sword of Conan&quot;). These three volumes include all the original Conan stories.

==Setting==
The stories occur in the fictional &quot;Hyborian Age&quot;, set after the destruction of Atlantis and before the rise of any historical ancient civilization. This is a specific epoch in a fictional timeline created by Howard for many of the low fantasy tales of his artificial legendary.

Howard invented the Hyborian Age as a useful literary device. He had an intense love for history and historical dramas, but he also recognized the difficulties and the time-consuming research work needed in maintaining historical accuracy. Also, the poorly-stocked libraries in the rural part of Texas where Howard lived did not have the material needed for such research. By conceiving a fictional &quot;&quot;vanished&quot; age&quot; and choosing names that resembled historical ones, Howard avoided anachronisms and the need for lengthy exposition.

According to &quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot;, the adventures of Conan take place &quot;Between the years when the oceans drank Atlantis and the gleaming cities, and the years of the rise of the Sons of Aryas.&quot;

==Personality and character==
Conan is a Cimmerian. The writings of Robert E. Howard (particularly his essay &quot;The Hyborian Age&quot;) suggests that his Cimmerians are based on the Celts or perhaps the historic Cimmerians. Conan was born on a battlefield and is the son of a village blacksmith. Conan matured quickly as a youth and, by age fifteen, he was already a respected warrior who had participated in the destruction of the Aquilonian fortress of Venarium. After its demise, he was struck by wanderlust and began the adventures chronicled by Howard, encountering skulking monsters, evil wizards, tavern wenches, and beautiful princesses. He roamed throughout the Hyborian Age nations as a thief, outlaw, mercenary, and pirate. As he grew older, he began commanding vast units of warriors and escalating his ambitions. In his forties, he seized the crown from the tyrannical king of Aquilonia, the most powerful kingdom of the Hyborian Age, having strangled the previous ruler on the steps of his own throne. Conan&#x27;s adventures often result in him performing heroic feats, though his motivation for doing so is largely to protect his own survival or for personal gain.

A conspicuous element of Conan&#x27;s character is his chivalry. He is extremely reluctant to fight women (even when they fight him) and has a strong tendency to save a damsel in distress. In &quot;Jewels of Gwahlur&quot;, he has to make a split-second decision whether to save the dancing girl Muriela or the chest of priceless gems which he spent months in search of. So, without hesitation, he rescues Muriela and allows for the treasure to be irrevocably lost. In &quot;The Black Stranger&quot;, Conan saves the exile Zingaran Lady Belesa at considerable risk to himself, giving her as a parting gift his fortune in gems big enough to have a comfortable and wealthy life in Zingara, while asking for no favors in return. Reviewer Jennifer Bard also noted that when Conan is in a pirate crew or a robber gang led by another male, his tendency is to subvert and undermine the leader&#x27;s authority, and eventually supplant (and often, kill) him (e.g. &quot;Pool of the Black One&quot;, &quot;A Witch Shall be Born&quot;, &quot;Shadows in the Moonlight&quot;). Conversely, in &quot;Queen of the Black Coast&quot;, it is noted that Conan &quot;generally agreed to Belit&#x27;s plan. Hers was the mind that directed their raids, his the arm that carried out her ideas. It was a good life.&quot; And at the end of &quot;Red Nails&quot;, Conan and Valeria seem to be headed towards a reasonably amicable piratical partnership.

===Appearance===
Conan has &quot;sullen&quot;, &quot;smoldering&quot;, and &quot;volcanic&quot; blue eyes with a black &quot;square-cut mane&quot;. Howard once describes him as having a hairy chest and, while comic book interpretations often portray Conan as wearing a loincloth or other minimalist clothing to give him a more barbaric image, Howard describes the character as wearing whatever garb is typical for the kingdom and culture in which Conan finds himself. Howard never gave a strict height or weight for Conan in a story, only describing him in loose terms like &quot;giant&quot; and &quot;massive&quot;. In the tales, no human is ever described as being stronger than Conan, although a few are mentioned as taller (including the strangler, Baal-Pteor) or of larger bulk. In a letter to P. Schuyler Miller and John D. Clark in 1936, only three months before Howard&#x27;s death, Conan is described as standing 6 ft/183 cm and weighing when he takes part in an attack on Venarium at only 15 years old, though being far from fully grown. At one point, when he is meeting Juma in Kush, he describes Conan as tall as his friend, at nearly 7 ft. in height. Conan himself says in &quot;Beyond the Black River&quot; that he had &quot;not yet seen 15 snows&quot;. at the Battle of Venarium. &quot;At Vanarium he was already a formidable antagonist, though only fifteen, He stood six feet tall [1.83 m] and weighed 180 pounds [82 kg], though he lacked much of having his full growth.&quot;
Although Conan is muscular, Howard frequently compares his agility and way of moving to that of a panther (see, for instance, &quot;Jewels of Gwahlur&quot;, &quot;Beyond the Black River&quot;, or &quot;Rogues in the House&quot;). His skin is frequently characterized as bronzed from constant exposure to the sun. In his younger years, he is often depicted wearing a light chain shirt and a horned helmet, though appearances vary with different stories.

During his reign as king of Aquilonia, Conan was
::[...] a tall man, mightily shouldered and deep of chest, with a massive corded neck and heavily muscled limbs. He was clad in silk and velvet, with the royal lions of Aquilonia worked in gold upon his rich jupon, and the crown of Aquilonia shone on his square-cut black mane; but the great sword at his side seemed more natural to him than the regal accoutrements. His brow was low and broad, his eyes a volcanic blue that smoldered as if with some inner fire. His dark, scarred, almost sinister face was that of a fighting-man, and his velvet garments could not conceal the hard, dangerous lines of his limbs.

Howard imagined the Cimmerians as a pre-Celtic people with mostly black hair and blue or grey eyes. Ethnically, the Cimmerians to which Conan belongs are descendants of the Atlanteans, though they do not remember their ancestry. In his fictional historical essay &quot;The Hyborian Age&quot;, Howard describes how the people of Atlantis—the land where his character King Kull originated—had to move east after a great cataclysm changed the face of the world and sank their island, settling where Ireland and Scotland would eventually be located. Thus they are (in Howard&#x27;s work) the ancestors of the Irish and Scottish (the Celtic Gaels) and not the Picts, the other ancestor of modern Scots who also appear in Howard&#x27;s work. In the same work, Howard also described how the Cimmerians eventually moved south and east after the age of Conan (presumably in the vicinity of the Black Sea, where the historical Cimmerians dwelt).

===Abilities===

Despite his brutish appearance, Conan uses his brains as well as his brawn. The Cimmerian is a highly skilled warrior, possibly without peer with a sword, but his travels have given him vast experience in other trades, especially as a thief. He&#x27;s also a talented commander, tactician, and strategist, as well as a born leader. In addition, Conan has advanced knowledge of languages and codes and is able to recognize, or even decipher, certain ancient or secret signs and writings. For example, in &quot;Jewels of Gwahlur&quot; Howard states: &quot;In his roaming about the world the giant adventurer had picked up a wide smattering of knowledge, particularly including the speaking and reading of many alien tongues. Many a sheltered scholar would have been astonished at the Cimmerian&#x27;s linguistic abilities.&quot; He also has incredible stamina, enabling him to go without sleep for a few days. In &quot;A Witch Shall be Born&quot;, Conan fights armed men until he is overwhelmed, captured, and crucified, before going an entire night and day without water. However, Conan still possesses the strength to pull the nails from his feet, while hoisting himself into a horse&#x27;s saddle and riding for ten miles.

Another noticeable trait is his sense of humor, largely absent in the comics and movies, but very much a part of Howard&#x27;s original vision of the character (particularly apparent in &quot;Xuthal of the Dusk&quot;, also known as &quot;The Slithering Shadow&quot;.) His sense of humor can also be rather grimly ironic, as was demonstrated by how he unleashes his own version of justice on the treacherous—and ill-fated—innkeeper Aram Baksh in &quot;Shadows in Zamboula&quot;.

He is a loyal friend to those true to him, with a barbaric code of conduct that often marks him as more honorable than the more sophisticated people he meets in his travels. Indeed, his straightforward nature and barbarism are constants in all the tales.

Conan is a formidable combatant both armed and unarmed. With his back to the wall, Conan is capable of engaging and killing opponents by the score. This is seen in several stories, such as &quot;Queen of the Black Coast&quot;, &quot;The Scarlet Citadel&quot;, and &quot;A Witch Shall Be Born&quot;. Conan is not superhuman, though; he needed the providential help of Zelata&#x27;s wolf to defeat four Nemedian soldiers in Howard&#x27;s novel &quot;The Hour of the Dragon&quot;. Some of his hardest victories have come from fighting single opponents of inhuman strength: one such as Thak, an ape-like humanoid from &quot;Rogues in the House&quot;, or the strangler Baal-Pteor in &quot;Shadows in Zamboula&quot;. Conan is far from untouchable and has been captured or defeated several times (on one occasion, knocking himself out after drunkenly running into a wall).

===Influences===

Howard frequently corresponded with H. P. Lovecraft, and the two would sometimes insert references or elements of each other&#x27;s settings in their works. Later editors reworked many of the original Conan stories by Howard, thus diluting this connection. Nevertheless, many of Howard&#x27;s unedited Conan stories are arguably part of the Cthulhu Mythos. Additionally, many of the Conan stories by Howard, de Camp, and Carter used geographical place names from Clark Ashton Smith&#x27;s Hyperborean Cycle.

==Original Robert E. Howard Conan stories==
===Conan stories published in &quot;Weird Tales&quot;===
# &quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot; (novelette; vol. 20, #6, December 1932)
# &quot;The Scarlet Citadel&quot; (novelette; vol. 21, #1, January 1, 1933)
# &quot;The Tower of the Elephant&quot; (novelette; vol. 21, #3, March 1933)
# &quot;Black Colossus&quot; (novelette; vol. 21, #6, June 1933)
# &quot;The Slithering Shadow&quot; (novelette; vol. 22, #3, September 1933, alternate title &quot;Xuthal of the Dusk&quot;)
# &quot;The Pool of the Black One&quot; (novelette; vol. 22, #4, October 1933)
# &quot;Rogues in the House&quot; (novelette; vol. 23, #1, January 1934)
# &quot;Iron Shadows in the Moon&quot; (novelette; vol. 23, #4, April 1934, published as &quot;Shadows in the Moonlight&quot;)
# &quot;Queen of the Black Coast&quot; (novelette; vol. 23, #5, May 1934)
# &quot;The Devil in Iron&quot; (novelette; vol. 24, #2, August 1934)
# &quot;The People of the Black Circle&quot; (novella; vol. 24, #3–5, September–November 1934)
# &quot;A Witch Shall Be Born&quot; (novelette; vol. 24, #6, December 1934)
# &quot;Jewels of Gwahlur&quot; (novelette; vol. 25, #3, March 1935, author&#x27;s original title &quot;The Servants of Bit-Yakin&quot;)
# &quot;Beyond the Black River&quot; (novella; vol. 25, #5–6, May–June 1935)
# &quot;Shadows in Zamboula&quot; (novelette; vol. 26, #5, November 1935, author&#x27;s original title &quot;The Man-Eaters of Zamboula&quot;)
# &quot;The Hour of the Dragon&quot; (novel; vol. 26, #6 &amp; vol. 27, #1–4, December 1935, January–April 1936)
# &quot;Red Nails&quot; (novella; vol. 28, #1–3, July, September, October 1936)

===Conan stories published in &quot;Fantasy Fan magazine&quot;===
* &quot;Gods of the North&quot; (March 1934) – published as &quot;The Frost-Giant&#x27;s Daughter&quot; in &quot;The Coming of Conan&quot;, 1953.

===Conan stories not published in Howard&#x27;s lifetime===
* &quot;The God in the Bowl&quot; – Published in &quot;Space Science Fiction&quot;, Sep. 1952.
* &quot;The Black Stranger&quot; – Published in &quot;Fantasy Magazine&quot;, Feb. 1953.
* &quot;The Vale of Lost Women&quot; – Published in &quot;The Magazine of Horror&quot;, Spring 1967.

===Unfinished Conan stories by Howard===
* &quot;The Drums of Tombalku&quot; – Fragment. Published in &quot;Conan the Adventurer&quot;, 1966.
* &quot;The Hall of the Dead&quot; – Synopsis. Published in &quot;The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction&quot;, February 1967.
* &quot;The Hand of Nergal&quot; – Fragment. Published in &quot;Conan&quot;, 1967.
* &quot;The Snout in the Dark&quot; – Fragment. Published in &quot;Conan of Cimmeria&quot;, 1969.

A number of untitled synopses for Conan stories also exist.

===Other Conan-related material by Howard===
* &quot;Wolves Beyond the Border&quot; – A non-Conan story set in Conan&#x27;s world. Fragment. Published in 1967 in &quot;Conan the Usurper&quot;
* &quot;The Hyborian Age&quot; – An essay written in 1932. Published in 1938 in &quot;The Hyborian Age&quot;.
* &quot;Cimmeria&quot; – A poem written in 1932. Published in 1965 in &quot;The Howard Collector&quot;.

==Book editions==

The character of Conan has proven durably popular, resulting in Conan stories by later writers such as Poul Anderson, Leonard Carpenter, Lin Carter, L. Sprague de Camp, Roland J. Green, John C. Hocking, Robert Jordan, Sean A. Moore, Björn Nyberg, Andrew J. Offutt, Steve Perry, John Maddox Roberts, Harry Turtledove, and Karl Edward Wagner. Some of these writers have finished incomplete Conan manuscripts by Howard. Others were created by rewriting Howard stories which originally featured entirely different characters from entirely different milieus. Most, however, are completely original works. In total, more than fifty novels and dozens of short stories featuring the Conan character have been written by authors other than Howard.

The Gnome Press edition (1950–1957) was the first hardcover collection of Howard&#x27;s Conan stories, including all the original Howard material known to exist at the time, some left unpublished in his lifetime. The later volumes contain some stories rewritten by L. Sprague de Camp (like &quot;The Treasure of Tranicos&quot;), including several non-Conan Howard stories, mostly historical exotica situated in the Levant at the time of the Crusades, which he turned into Conan yarns. The Gnome edition also issued the first Conan story written by an author other than Howard—the final volume published, which is by Björn Nyberg and revised by de Camp.

The Lancer/Ace editions (1966–1977), under the direction of de Camp and Lin Carter, were the first comprehensive paperbacks, compiling the material from the Gnome Press series together in a chronological order with all the remaining original Howard material, including that left unpublished in his lifetime and fragments and outlines. These were completed by de Camp and Carter. The series also included Howard stories originally featuring other protagonists that were rewritten by de Camp as Conan stories. New Conan stories written entirely by de Camp and Carter were added as well. Lancer Books went out of business before bringing out the entire series, the publication of which was completed by Ace Books. Eight of the eventual twelve volumes published featured dynamic cover paintings by Frank Frazetta that, for many fans, presented the definitive, iconic impression of Conan and his world. For decades to come, most other portrayals of the Cimmerian and his imitators were heavily influenced by the cover paintings of this series.

Most editions after the Lancer/Ace series have been of either the original Howard stories or Conan material by others, but not both. The exception are the Ace Maroto editions (1978–1981), which include both new material by other authors and older material by Howard, though the latter are some of the non-Conan tales by Howard rewritten as Conan stories by de Camp. Notable later editions of the original Howard Conan stories include the Donald M. Grant editions (1974–1989, incomplete); Berkley editions (1977); Gollancz editions (2000–2006), and Wandering Star/Del Rey editions (2003–2005). Later series of new Conan material include the Bantam editions (1978–1982) and Tor editions (1982–2004).

==Conan chronologies==
In an attempt to provide a coherent timeline which fit the numerous adventures of Conan penned by Robert E. Howard and later writers, various &quot;Conan chronologies&quot; have been prepared by many people from the 1930s onward. Note that no consistent timeline has yet accommodated every single Conan story. The following are the principal theories that have been advanced over the years.
* Miller/Clark chronology – &quot;A Probable Outline of Conan&#x27;s Career&quot; (1936) was the first effort to put the tales in chronological order. Completed by P. Schuyler Miller and John Drury Clark, the chronology was later revised by Clark and L. Sprague de Camp in &quot;An Informal Biography of Conan the Cimmerian&quot; (1952).
* Robert Jordan chronology – &quot;A Conan Chronology by Robert Jordan&quot; (1987) was a new chronology written by Conan writer Robert Jordan that included all written Conan material up to that point. It was heavily influenced by the Miller/Clark/de Camp chronologies, though it departed from them in a number of idiosyncratic instances.
* William Galen Gray chronology – &quot;Timeline of Conan&#x27;s Journeys&quot; (1997, rev. 2004), was fan William Galen Gray&#x27;s attempt to create &quot;a chronology of all the stories, both Howard and pastiche.&quot; Drawing on the earlier Miller/Clark and Jordan chronologies, it represents the ultimate expression of their tradition to date.
* Joe Marek chronology – Joe Marek&#x27;s chronology is limited to stories written (or devised) by Howard, though within that context it is essentially a revision of the Miller/Clark tradition to better reflect the internal evidence of the stories and avoid forcing Conan into what he perceives as a &quot;mad dash&quot; around the Hyborian world within timeframes too rapid to be credible.
* Dale Rippke chronology – &quot;The Darkstorm Conan Chronology&quot; (2003) was a completely revised and heavily researched chronology, radically repositioning a number of stories and including only those stories written or devised by Howard. The Dark Horse comic series follows this chronology.

==Media==
===Films===
====Schwarzenegger as Conan (1980s)====
The first Conan cinematic project was planned by Edward Summer. Summer envisioned a series of Conan films, much like the James Bond franchise. He outlined six stories for this film series, but none was ever made. An original screenplay by Summer and Roy Thomas was written, but their lore-authentic screen story was never filmed. However, the resulting film, &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; (1982), was a combination of director John Milius&#x27;s ideas and plots from Conan stories (written also by Howard&#x27;s successors, notably Lin Carter and L. Sprague de Camp). A Nietzschean motto and Conan&#x27;s life philosophy were notably added in this adaptation.

The plot of &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; (1982) begins with Conan being enslaved by the Vanir raiders of Thulsa Doom, a malevolent warlord who is responsible for the slaying of Conan&#x27;s parents and the genocide of his people. Later, Thulsa Doom becomes a cult leader of a religion that worships Set, a Snake God. The vengeful Conan, the archer Subotai and the thief Valeria set out on a quest to rescue a princess held captive by Thulsa Doom. The film was directed by John Milius and produced by Dino De Laurentiis. The character of Conan was played by Jorge Sanz as a child and Arnold Schwarzenegger as an adult.
It was Schwarzenegger&#x27;s break-through role as an actor.

This film was followed by a less popular sequel, &quot;Conan the Destroyer&quot; in 1984. This sequel was a more typical fantasy-genre film and was even less faithful to Howard&#x27;s Conan stories, being just a picaresque story of an assorted bunch of adventurers.

The third film in the &quot;Conan&quot; trilogy was planned for 1987 to be titled &quot;Conan the Conqueror&quot;. The director was to be either Guy Hamilton or John Guillermin. Since Arnold Schwarzenegger was committed to the film &quot;Predator&quot; and De Laurentiis&#x27;s contract with the star had expired after his obligation to &quot;Red Sonja&quot; and &quot;Raw Deal&quot;, he wasn&#x27;t keen to negotiate a new one; thus the third Conan film sank into development hell. The script was eventually turned into &quot;Kull the Conqueror&quot;.

====Momoa as Conan (2011)====

There were rumors in the late 1990s of another Conan sequel, a story about an older Conan titled &quot;King Conan: Crown of Iron&quot;, but Schwarzenegger&#x27;s election in 2003 as governor of California ended this project. Warner Bros. spent seven years trying to get the project off the ground. However, in June 2007 the rights reverted to Paradox Entertainment, though all drafts made under Warner remained with them. In August 2007, it was announced that Millennium Films had acquired the rights to the project. Production was aimed for a Spring 2006 start, with the intention of having stories more faithful to the Robert E. Howard creation. In June 2009, Millennium hired Marcus Nispel to direct. In January 2010, Jason Momoa was selected for the role of Conan. The film was released in August 2011, and met poor critical reviews and box office results.

====Unproduced: &quot;Legend of Conan&quot;====
In 2012, producers Chris Morgan and Frederick Malmberg announced plans for a sequel to the 1982 &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; titled &quot;The Legend of Conan&quot;, with Arnold Schwarzenegger reprising his role as Conan. A year later, &quot;Deadline&quot; reported that Andrea Berloff would write the script. Years passed since the initial announcement as Schwarzenegger worked on other films, but as late as 2016, Schwarzenegger affirmed his enthusiasm for making the film, saying, &quot;Interest is high ... but we are not rushing.&quot; The script was finished, and Schwarzenegger and Morgan were meeting with possible directors. In April 2017, producer Chris Morgan stated that Universal had dropped the project, although there was a possibility of a TV show. The story of the film was supposed to be set 30 years after the first, with some inspiration from Clint Eastwood&#x27;s &quot;Unforgiven&quot;.

==== &quot;She Is Conann&quot; ====
In 2023, French film director Bertrand Mandico released &quot;She Is Conann&quot;, a gender-flipped version of Conan the Barbarian which stars five different actresses playing a female Conann at different stages in her life.

===Television===
There have been three television series related to Conan:
* &quot;&quot;Conan the Adventurer&quot;&quot; is an animated television series produced by &quot;Jetlag Productions&quot; and &quot;Sunbow Productions&quot; that debuted on September 13, 1992, ran for 65 episodes and concluded on November 23, 1993. The series involved Conan chasing Serpent Men across the world in an attempt to release his parents from eternal imprisonment as living statues.
* &quot;Conan and the Young Warriors&quot; is an animated television series that premiered in 1994 and ran for 13 episodes. DiC Entertainment produced the show and CBS aired this series as a spin-off to the previous animated series. This cartoon took place after the finale of &quot;Conan the Adventurer&quot; with Wrath-Amon vanquished and Conan&#x27;s family returned to life from living stone. Conan soon finds that the family of one of his friends are being turned into wolves by an evil sorceress and he must train three warriors in order to aid him in rescuing them.
* &quot;&quot;Conan the Adventurer&quot;&quot; is a live-action television series that premiered on September 22, 1997, and ran for 22 episodes. It starred German bodybuilder Ralf Möller as Conan, Danny Woodburn (Otli), Robert McRay (Zzeben), and TJ Storm (Bayu) as his sidekicks. The storyline was quite different from the Conan lore of Howard. In this adaptation, Conan is a pleasant and jovial person. Also in this version, Conan is not a loner but one member of a merry band of adventurers.
* In September 2020, it was announced that Netflix will develop a new Conan TV series as a part of a larger deal involving and Mark Wheeler from Pathfinder Media between Netflix and Conan Properties International, owned by Cabinet Entertainment, for the exclusive rights to the Conan library for the rights for live-action and animated films and TV shows. Deadline had previously reported that a Conan show was in the works at Amazon Prime, but nothing came of it.

===Comics===
Comic adaptations of Conan are arguably, apart from the books, the vehicle that had the greatest influence on the longevity and popularity of the character. The earliest comic book adaptation of Conan was written in Spanish and first published in Mexico in the fifties. This version, which was done without authorization from the estate of Robert E. Howard, is loosely based on the short story &quot;Queen of the Black Coast&quot;. The first licensed comic adaptations were written in English and first published by Marvel Comics in the seventies, beginning with &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; (1970–1993) and the classic &quot;Savage Sword of Conan&quot; (1974–1995). Dark Horse Comics launched their &quot;Conan&quot; series in 2003. Dark Horse Comics published compilations of the 1970s Marvel Comics series in trade paperback format.

Barack Obama, former President of the United States, is a fan of the character and collects Conan the Barbarian comic books. Obama also appeared as a character in a comic book called &quot;Barack the Barbarian&quot; from Devil&#x27;s Due.

Marvel Comics introduced a relatively lore-faithful version of Conan the Barbarian in 1970 with &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot;, written by Roy Thomas and illustrated by Barry Windsor-Smith. Smith was succeeded by penciller John Buscema, while Thomas continued to write for many years. Later writers included J. M. DeMatteis, Bruce Jones, Michael Fleisher, Doug Moench, Jim Owsley, Alan Zelenetz, Chuck Dixon and Don Kraar. In 1974, &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; series spawned the more adult-oriented, black-and-white comics magazine &quot;Savage Sword of Conan&quot;, written by Thomas with art mostly by Buscema or Alfredo Alcala. Marvel also published several graphic novels starring the character , and a handbook with detailed information about the Hyborian world. Conan the Barbarian is also officially considered to be part of the larger Marvel Universe and has interacted with heroes and villains alike.

The Marvel Conan stories were also adapted as a newspaper comic strip which appeared daily and Sunday from 4 September 1978 to 12 April 1981. Originally written by Roy Thomas and illustrated by John Buscema, the strip was continued by several different Marvel artists and writers.

Dark Horse Comics began their comic adaptation of the Conan saga in 2003. Entitled simply &quot;Conan&quot;, the series was first written by Kurt Busiek and pencilled by Cary Nord. Tim Truman replaced Busiek, when Busiek signed an exclusive contract with DC Comics. However, Busiek issues were sometimes used for filler. This series is an interpretation of the original Conan material by Robert E. Howard with no connection whatsoever to the earlier Marvel comics or any Conan story not written or envisioned by Howard supplemented by wholly original material.

A second series, &quot;Conan the Cimmerian&quot; was released in 2008 by Tim Truman (writer) and Tomás Giorello (artist). The series ran for twenty-six issues, including an introductory &quot;zero&quot; issue.

Dark Horse&#x27;s third series, &quot;&quot;, began in December 2010 by Roy Thomas (writer) and Mike Hawthorne (artist) and ran for twelve issues.

A fourth series, &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot;, began in February 2012 by Brian Wood (writer) and Becky Cloonan (artist). It ran for twenty-five issues, and expanded on Robert E. Howard&#x27;s &quot;Queen of the Black Coast&quot;.

A fifth series, &quot;Conan the Avenger&quot;, began in April 2014 by Fred Van Lente (writer) and Brian Ching (artist). It ran for twenty-five issues, and expanded on Robert E. Howard&#x27;s The Snout in the Dark and A Witch Shall Be Born.

Dark Horse&#x27;s sixth series, &quot;Conan the Slayer&quot;, began in July 2016 by Cullen Bunn (writer) and Sergio Dávila (artist).

In 2018, Marvel reacquired the rights and started new runs of both &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; and &quot;Savage Sword of Conan&quot; in January/February 2019. Conan is also a lead in the &quot;Savage Avengers&quot; title, which launched in 2019 and received a second volume in 2022.

In 2022, it was revealed that Titan Publishing Group had acquired the rights from Heroic Signatures to make Conan comics, with a new ongoing series set to release in May 2023.

===Games===
====Board games====
* &quot;Hyborian Risk&quot; is an unofficial variant for the Risk boardgame based on the Conan mythos, published in &quot;The Space Gamer&quot; magazine in issue 37 (March, 1981).
* In 2009, Fantasy Flight Games released the &quot;Age of Conan&quot; strategy board game, depicting warfare between the Hyborian nations in the Conan&#x27;s adventures.
* In 2016, Monolith Board Games LLC released a new boardgame with miniatures directly based on Howard&#x27;s short stories. &quot;Conan&quot; (previously known as &quot;Conan: Hyborian Quests&quot;) pits one player, controlling the evil forces, against 2-4 other players controlling Conan and his companions.

====Collectible card games====
* In 2006, Comic Images released the Conan Collectible Card Game designed by Jason Robinette.

====Play-by-mail games====
* &quot;Hyborian War&quot;, introduced by Reality Simulations, Inc. as of 1985, is a play-by-mail game set in the Hyborian Age.

====Role-playing games====
TSR, Inc., which in 1982 had introduced a barbarian character class inspired by the Conan character, made a licensing agreement in 1984 to publish Conan-related gaming material:
* Two modules for Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons:
** CB1 &quot;Conan Unchained!&quot; (1984)
** CB2 &quot;Conan Against Darkness!&quot; (1984)
* The &quot;Conan Role-Playing Game&quot; (1985), with 3 official game adventures:
** CN1 &quot;Conan the Buccaneer&quot; (1985)
** CN2 &quot;Conan the Mercenary&quot; (1985)
** CN3 &quot;Conan Triumphant&quot; (1985)
* Three Endless Quest books by TSR allow the reader to play the role of Conan: 
** &quot;Conan the Undaunted&quot; (1984)
** &quot;Conan and the Prophecy&quot; (1984)
** &quot;Conan the Outlaw&quot; (1984)

In 1988 Steve Jackson Games acquired a Conan license and started publishing Conan solo adventures for its &quot;GURPS&quot; generic system of rules as of 1988 and a &quot;GURPS Conan&quot; core rulebook in 1989:
* &quot;GURPS Conan: Beyond Thunder River&quot; (1988, solo adventure)
* &quot;GURPS Conan&quot; (1989, core rulebook)
* &quot;GURPS Conan and the Queen of the Black Coast&quot; (1989, solo adventure)
* &quot;GURPS Conan: Moon of Blood&quot; (1989, solo adventure)
* &quot;GURPS Conan the Wyrmslayer&quot; (1989, solo adventure)

In 2003 the British company Mongoose Publishing bought a license and acquired in turn the rights to make use of the Conan gaming franchise, publishing a Conan role-playing game from 2004 until 2010. The game ran the OGL System of rules that Mongoose established for its &quot;OGL series&quot; of games:
* &quot;&quot; (2004), with many supplements.

In 2010 Mongoose Publishing dropped the Conan license. In February 2015, another British company, Modiphius Entertainment, acquired the license, announcing plans to put out a new Conan role-playing game in August of that year. Actually, the core rulebook was not launched (via Kickstarter) until a whole year later, in February 2016, reaching by far all funds needed for publication. Long after the Kickstarter ended the core rulebook was launched in PDF format on January 31, 2017. The physical core rulebook finally started distribution in June 2017:
* &quot;&quot; (hardcover, 368 pages, 2017), with two hardcover supplements already published and at least 17 additional supplements in the works (as planned following the Kickstarter).

Several less well known choose your own adventure-style books and gamebooks based on Conan have been published.

====Video games====
Nine video games have been released based on the Conan mythos.
* In 1984, Datasoft released &quot;&quot; for Apple II, Atari 8-bit computers, and Commodore 64.
* In 1991, Mindscape released &quot;&quot; for NES, a Commodore 64 port by System 3.
* In 1991, Virgin Games and Synergistic released &quot;&quot; for Amiga and IBM PC compatibles.
* In 2004, TDK Mediactive released &quot;Conan&quot;, a third-person action game for Windows and consoles.
* In 2007, THQ and Nihilistic released &quot;Conan&quot;, a third-person action game for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360.
* In 2008, Funcom released &quot;Age of Conan&quot;, a MMORPG, on May 20 in the US and May 23 in Europe.
* A RPG game titled &quot;Conan: The Tower of the Elephant&quot; was released for the iOS around the time of the release of the movie &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; as a promotion. The game is based on the short story of the same name.
* In 2013, the side-scrolling shooter game &quot;Broforce&quot; introduced a playable character known as Bronan the Brobarian. In the game, he is one of the few characters who does not fight with a firearm or an explosive. Instead, Bronan fights with a sword that can cause massive shockwaves depending on how long the player holds the attack button.
* On January 31, 2017, Funcom released &quot;Conan Exiles&quot; for PS4, Xbox One and PC. The title is an open world survival game. The game was released in early access, and was released on May 8, 2018.
* In 2019, Funcom released a real time strategy game named &quot;Conan Unconquered&quot;.
* Conan the Barbarian, based on Schwarzenegger&#x27;s likeness, appears as a playable character in &quot;Mortal Kombat 1&quot; via the &quot;Khaos Reigns&quot; DLC pack, voiced by Chris Cox.

==Characters==

===Prose fiction===

* Bêlit – Self-styled Shemite Queen of the Black Coast, captain of the pirate ship &quot;Tigress&quot;, and Conan&#x27;s first serious lover (&quot;Queen of the Black Coast&quot;).
* Ctesphon - The king of Stygia is mentioned only once and in passing, in &quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot;. He is a priest king, like Thugra-Khotan in the Stygian daughter-kingdom of Kutchemes.
* Thoth-Amon – Stygian wizard of great power who appeared in the first Conan story written (&quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot; and was mentioned in &quot;The God in the Bowl&quot; and &quot;The Hour of the Dragon&quot;. L. Sprague de Camp and Lin Carter made Thoth-Amon the nemesis of Conan. In the Marvel comics, Thoth-Amon was also Conan&#x27;s lifelong opponent and had a striking appearance designed by Barry Windsor-Smith; he wore a distinctive ram-horn ornamental headdress. In &quot;The Phoenix on the Sword&quot; though, where Thoth has been robbed of his magical ring, he doesn&#x27;t at all seem very impressive, yet less admirable. He is portrayed by Pat Roach in &quot;Conan the Destroyer&quot;.
* Valeria – Aquilonian female mercenary affiliated with the Red Brotherhood (&quot;Red Nails&quot;).
* Yara – Evil wizard and adversary of Conan (&quot;The Tower of the Elephant&quot;) who enslaved Yag-Kosha, an extraterrestrial being resembling the Hindu god Ganesh.
* Yasmina- Brave, proud, feisty, wise, and warmhearted queen over the ancient kingdom of Vendhya, homeland and stronghold of Asura-worship.
* Zenobia – Seraglio concubine Conan promises to wed and make queen of Aquilonia (&quot;The Hour of the Dragon&quot;).

===Comic books===

* Fafnir – A pastiche of Fafhrd from the sword-and-sorcery stories of Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser by Fritz Leiber. He is a mighty red-bearded Vanir warrior and pirate captain. At first he and Conan are enemies, but they soon become allies after being shipwrecked.
* Jenna – (Marvel comics character). A dancing girl from the city of Shadizar. She becomes Conan&#x27;s girlfriend after he saves her from a monstrous bat, but later betrays him to the authorities. Conan gets his revenge by throwing her into a pool of sewage. Based on an unnamed character in the prose story &quot;Rogues in the House&quot;.
* Mikhal &quot;the Vulture&quot; Oglu – In Marvel comics&#x27; &quot;Conan the Barbarian&quot; #23, Mikhal Oglu is Yezdigerd&#x27;s enforcer and the greatest swordsman in Turan. He challenges Conan but is defeated and his severed head is sent to Yezdigerd in an ornate casket intended for Conan&#x27;s head. He was inspired by a character in a non-Conan story by Robert E. Howard (&quot;The Shadow of the Vulture&quot;).
* Kulan Gath - a prominent evil wizard appearing initially in the Marvel Conan comics and later fully integrated into the Marvel Universe. He has also appeared in Red Sonya comics by Dynamite Entertainment.
* Red Sonja – An Hyrkanian warrior created by Roy Thomas and Barry Windsor-Smith for the Conan comics. She was based on the Howard character, Red Sonya of Rogatino, who appeared in &quot;The Shadow of the Vulture&quot;, a novella set in the 16th century.
* Yezdigerd – Ruler of Turan, a Turkish empire-based civilization. He employs Conan as a mercenary but betrays him after he outlived his usefulness
* Zukala – A character from the Conan comics published by Marvel, inspired by a poem by Robert E. Howard. Zukala is an evil sorcerer who gains his powers from a mask. His daughter, Zephra, falls in love with Conan.
* Elric - A powerful magician and ruler of the ancient empire of Melnibone who befriends Conan and unsuccessfully attempts to prevent Zephra&#x27;s death. Based on the character created by Michael Moorcock.

===Films===

* Akiro – A character from the two Schwarzenegger Conan films. He is a powerful wizard who befriends Conan and Subotai, and serves as the narrator and Conan&#x27;s chronicler. He is played by Japanese actor Mako Iwamatsu.
* Rexor – In the 1982 film, the chief priest of Thulsa Doom&#x27;s snake cult, who stole the sword of Conan&#x27;s father. Played by Ben Davidson.
* Subotai – Hyrkanian thief and archer. He is Conan&#x27;s companion in the 1982 film. Played by Gerry Lopez.
* Malak – A thief. He is Conan&#x27;s traveling companion in the 1984 sequel. Played by Tracey Walter.
* Thorgrim – Hammer-wielding minion of Thulsa Doom in the 1982 film. Played by Sven-Ole Thorsen
* Thulsa Doom – A skull-faced necromancer from a King Kull story, a recurring villain in the Kull comics, and the antagonist in the 1982 film, played by James Earl Jones.

==Copyright and trademark dispute==
The name &quot;Conan&quot; and the names of some of Robert E. Howard&#x27;s other characters are claimed as trademarked by Conan Properties International and licensed to Cabinet Entertainment, both entities controlled by CEO Fredrik Malmberg.

Since Robert E. Howard&#x27;s Conan stories were published at a time when the date of publication was the marker (1932–1963), however, and any new owners failed to renew them to maintain the copyrights, the exact copyright status of all of Howard&#x27;s &#x27;Conan&#x27; works is in question. The majority of Howard&#x27;s Conan fiction exist in at least two versions, subject to different copyright standards, namely 1) the original &quot;Weird Tales&quot; publications before or shortly after Howard&#x27;s death, which are generally understood to be public domain and 2) restored versions based upon manuscripts which were unpublished during Howard&#x27;s lifetime.

The character of Conan will officially enter the public domain worldwide on January 1st, 2028 due to the longest extant term of copyright in the world on work for hire material being 95 years from the date of first publication. The character of Conan first appeared in print in 1932. Current trademarks on Conan can not be used to extend Conan Properties International&#x27;s copyright protections, as established by the United States Supreme Court in the case Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp.. in which Antonin Scalia warned that allowing these types of restrictions on a public domain work could effectively create “a species of mutant copyright law” that would limit the public’s right to copy and use expired copyrights. 

The Australian site of Project Gutenberg hosts digital copies of many of Howard&#x27;s stories, including several works about Conan.

In the United Kingdom, works are released into the public domain 70 years after the death of an author. With Howard having died in 1936, his works have been in the public domain there since 2007. The same standard applies for Malmberg&#x27;s home country of Sweden.

In August 2018, Conan Properties International LLC won by default a suit against Spanish sculptor Ricardo Jove Sanchez after he failed to appear at court in the United States. Jove had started a crowdfunding campaign that raised around €3000 on Kickstarter, with the intent of selling barbarian figurines to online customers, including those in the United States. The Magistrate Judge originally recommended statutory damages for infringement on three Robert E. Howard characters not including Conan, but Jove was eventually fined $3,000 per character used in the campaign, including Conan, for a total of $21,000.

In September 2020, it was announced that Netflix had made a larger deal involving Malmberg and Mark Wheeler from Pathfinder Media between Netflix and Conan Properties International for the exclusive rights to the Conan library for the rights for live-action and animated films and TV shows.

In 2024, British author and Eisner Award winner John Allison started to publish a Conan serial online, with a tongue-in-cheek narrative heavily intermingled with characters from his own works. However, he took the unfinished comic down in late April, after receiving a cease-and-desist letter from Conan Properties International. Allison notes that to his understanding Conan &quot;is in the public domain in the UK (where I live and work)&quot;, but that he doesn&#x27;t have &quot;the time or energy to contest this&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* The Works of Robert E. Howard
* Conan: The Official Website
* Conan: Czech fanpage
* Hyboria: Polish fanpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189169" start="0" end="19" title="Conan the Barbarian" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189169" start="35" end="54" title="Conan the Barbarian" label="Conan the Cimmerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999690" start="71" end="88" title="sword and sorcery" label="sword and sorcery"/>
<link wikidata="Q865585" start="112" end="126" title="pulp magazines" label="pulp magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158106" start="157" end="162" title="Conan (books)" label="books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991604" start="164" end="170" title="Conan (comics)" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309003" start="195" end="214" title="Conan the Barbarian (1982 film)" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q740516" start="231" end="250" title="Conan the Destroyer" label="Conan the Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561069" start="280" end="288" title="Conan the Adventurer (1992 TV series)" label="animated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991584" start="293" end="304" title="Conan the Adventurer (1997 TV series)" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="307" end="318" title="Conan (game)#Video games" label="video games"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="324" end="341" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q207640" start="344" end="360" title="Robert E. Howard" label="Robert E. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136124" start="442" end="453" title="Weird Tales" label="Weird Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165980" start="629" end="647" title="People of the Dark" label="People of the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331891" start="1006" end="1016" title="mythopoeia" label="mythopoeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="1054" end="1066" title="Hyborian Age" label="Hyborian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="1098" end="1106" title="Atlantis" label="Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="1119" end="1128" title="Cimmerian (Conan)" label="Cimmerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="1196" end="1201" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469538" start="1236" end="1252" title="Kull of Atlantis" label="Kull of Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="1382" end="1391" title="Chivalry" label="chivalric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="1420" end="1439" title="Damsel in distress" label="damsels in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="1844" end="1857" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q309003" start="2022" end="2041" title="Conan the Barbarian (1982 film)" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83859" start="2060" end="2071" title="John Milius" label="John Milius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="2085" end="2106" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q108416461" start="2179" end="2190" title="Thulsa Doom" label="Thulsa Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621466" start="2570" end="2605" title="Strange Tales of Mystery and Terror" label="Strange Tales of Mystery and Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q128593" start="2698" end="2708" title="past lives" label="past lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="2835" end="2844" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="2879" end="2883" title="Crom (fictional deity)" label="Crom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="3041" end="3051" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343792" start="3145" end="3153" title="Cimmeria (poem)" label="Cimmeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41523" start="3203" end="3211" title="Plutarch" label="Plutarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q842337" start="3225" end="3230" title="Parallel Lives" label="Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q943991" start="3274" end="3289" title="Thomas Bulfinch" label="Thomas Bulfinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003827" start="3565" end="3584" title="By This Axe I Rule!" label="By This Axe I Rule!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469538" start="3636" end="3652" title="Kull of Atlantis" label="Kull of Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512207" start="3695" end="3719" title="The Phoenix on the Sword" label="The Phoenix on the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747447" start="3751" end="3770" title="The Scarlet Citadel" label="The Scarlet Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069560" start="3787" end="3818" title="The Frost-Giant&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="The Frost-Giant&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="3842" end="3852" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q194015" start="3856" end="3862" title="Daphne" label="Daphne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136124" start="3900" end="3911" title="Weird Tales" label="Weird Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069560" start="3943" end="3974" title="The Frost-Giant&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="The Frost-Giant&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179194" start="4283" end="4293" title="cover-date" label="cover-date"/>
<link wikidata="Q280673" start="4317" end="4334" title="Farnsworth Wright" label="Farnsworth Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="4430" end="4442" title="Hyborian Age" label="Hyborian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061779" start="4546" end="4571" title="The Tower of the Elephant" label="The Tower of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="5077" end="5095" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658873" start="5184" end="5189" title="Conan (short story collection)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483671" start="5208" end="5220" title="Lancer Books" label="Lancer Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="5316" end="5325" title="Ace Books" label="Ace Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832040" start="5384" end="5395" title="trade dress" label="trade dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205443" start="5611" end="5623" title="Björn Nyberg" label="Björn Nyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248054" start="5639" end="5649" title="Lin Carter" label="Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128018" start="5941" end="5949" title="pastiche" label="pastiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q639360" start="6333" end="6351" title="Karl Edward Wagner" label="Karl Edward Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999690" start="6609" end="6628" title="Sword and sorcery" label="sword &amp;amp; sorcery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553892" start="6720" end="6737" title="Leonard Carpenter" label="Leonard Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558680" start="6739" end="6751" title="Roland J. Green" label="Roland Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="6757" end="6773" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="6807" end="6831" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="7287" end="7311" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881141" start="7678" end="7694" title="Ballantine Books" label="Ballantine Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2371925" start="7802" end="7835" title="The Coming of Conan the Cimmerian" label="The Coming of Conan the Cimmerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991583" start="8069" end="8094" title="The Bloody Crown of Conan" label="The Bloody Crown of Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991581" start="8198" end="8227" title="The Conquering Sword of Conan" label="The Conquering Sword of Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="8350" end="8362" title="Hyborian Age" label="Hyborian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="8399" end="8407" title="Atlantis" label="Atlantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41493" start="8446" end="8466" title="Ancient history" label="ancient civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191212" start="8551" end="8562" title="low fantasy" label="low fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331891" start="8576" end="8596" title="artificial mythology" label="artificial legendary"/>
<link wikidata="Q179733" start="9351" end="9364" title="Aryan" label="Sons of Aryas"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="9414" end="9423" title="Cimmeria (Conan)" label="Cimmerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q263321" start="9488" end="9504" title="The Hyborian Age" label="The Hyborian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="9558" end="9563" title="Celts" label="Celts"/>
<link wikidata="Q192730" start="9588" end="9598" title="Cimmerians" label="Cimmerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639825" start="9660" end="9670" title="blacksmith" label="blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250916" start="9753" end="9760" title="warrior" label="warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="9808" end="9818" title="Aquilonia (Conan)" label="Aquilonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="9971" end="9977" title="Magicians in fantasy" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q863048" start="10010" end="10018" title="princess" label="princess"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="10047" end="10059" title="Hyborian Age" label="Hyborian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="10613" end="10621" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="10727" end="10745" title="damsel in distress" label="damsel in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189671" start="10756" end="10773" title="Jewels of Gwahlur" label="Jewels of Gwahlur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718450" start="11032" end="11050" title="The Black Stranger" label="The Black Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q765615" start="11519" end="11540" title="The Pool of the Black One" label="Pool of the Black One"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395895" start="11554" end="11575" title="A Witch Shall be Born" label="A Witch Shall be Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192501" start="11589" end="11613" title="Shadows in the Moonlight (story)" label="Shadows in the Moonlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q531676" start="11643" end="11667" title="Queen of the Black Coast" label="Queen of the Black Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134557" start="11878" end="11887" title="Red Nails" label="Red Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="12784" end="12802" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q899453" start="12807" end="12820" title="John Drury Clark" label="John D. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090062" start="13177" end="13199" title="Beyond the Black River" label="Beyond the Black River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189671" start="13610" end="13627" title="Jewels of Gwahlur" label="Jewels of Gwahlur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090062" start="13641" end="13663" title="Beyond the Black River" label="Beyond the Black River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088946" start="13680" end="13699" title="Rogues in the House" label="Rogues in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q659631" start="13850" end="13855" title="Chainmail" label="chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="14602" end="14625" title="Cimmeria (Conan)" label="imagined the Cimmerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="14631" end="14641" title="pre-Celtic" label="pre-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="14711" end="14744" title="Cimmeria (Conan)" label="Cimmerians to which Conan belongs"/>
<link wikidata="Q25373" start="14768" end="14778" title="Atlantis" label="Atlanteans"/>
<link wikidata="Q263321" start="14864" end="14880" title="The Hyborian Age" label="The Hyborian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469538" start="14961" end="14970" title="King Kull" label="King Kull"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="15091" end="15098" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="15103" end="15111" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="15224" end="15230" title="Celts" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="15231" end="15236" title="Gaels" label="Gaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q102891" start="15250" end="15255" title="Picts" label="Picts"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="15379" end="15389" title="Cimmeria (Conan)" label="Cimmerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q263321" start="15432" end="15444" title="The Hyborian Age" label="age of Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="15480" end="15489" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q192730" start="15501" end="15522" title="Cimmerian" label="historical Cimmerians"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="15629" end="15638" title="Cimmeria (Conan)" label="Cimmerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062990" start="15784" end="15789" title="Thief (character class)" label="thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189671" start="16058" end="16075" title="Jewels of Gwahlur" label="Jewels of Gwahlur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395895" start="16466" end="16487" title="A Witch Shall be Born" label="A Witch Shall be Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235597" start="16557" end="16566" title="crucifixion" label="crucified"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369850" start="16966" end="16984" title="Xuthal of the Dusk" label="Xuthal of the Dusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378273" start="17225" end="17244" title="Shadows in Zamboula" label="Shadows in Zamboula"/>
<link wikidata="Q531676" start="17704" end="17728" title="Queen of the Black Coast" label="Queen of the Black Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747447" start="17742" end="17761" title="The Scarlet Citadel" label="The Scarlet Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395895" start="17779" end="17800" title="A Witch Shall Be Born" label="A Witch Shall Be Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q722594" start="17957" end="17979" title="The Hour of the Dragon" label="The Hour of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088946" start="18129" end="18148" title="Rogues in the House" label="Rogues in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q169566" start="18430" end="18445" title="H. P. Lovecraft" label="H. P. Lovecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q621596" start="18735" end="18749" title="Cthulhu Mythos" label="Cthulhu Mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q555298" start="18857" end="18875" title="Clark Ashton Smith" label="Clark Ashton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q11326115" start="18883" end="18900" title="Hyperborean Cycle" label="Hyperborean Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512207" start="19012" end="19036" title="The Phoenix on the Sword" label="The Phoenix on the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747447" start="19091" end="19110" title="The Scarlet Citadel" label="The Scarlet Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061779" start="19167" end="19192" title="The Tower of the Elephant" label="The Tower of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753161" start="19244" end="19258" title="Black Colossus" label="Black Colossus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369850" start="19309" end="19330" title="The Slithering Shadow" label="The Slithering Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q765615" start="19434" end="19459" title="The Pool of the Black One" label="The Pool of the Black One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088946" start="19513" end="19532" title="Rogues in the House" label="Rogues in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192501" start="19586" end="19610" title="Iron Shadows in the Moon" label="Iron Shadows in the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q531676" start="19713" end="19737" title="Queen of the Black Coast" label="Queen of the Black Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439291" start="19787" end="19804" title="The Devil in Iron" label="The Devil in Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q650791" start="19857" end="19887" title="The People of the Black Circle" label="The People of the Black Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395895" start="19952" end="19973" title="A Witch Shall Be Born" label="A Witch Shall Be Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189671" start="20028" end="20045" title="Jewels of Gwahlur" label="Jewels of Gwahlur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090062" start="20165" end="20187" title="Beyond the Black River" label="Beyond the Black River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378273" start="20242" end="20261" title="Shadows in Zamboula" label="Shadows in Zamboula"/>
<link wikidata="Q722594" start="20385" end="20407" title="The Hour of the Dragon" label="The Hour of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134557" start="20498" end="20507" title="Red Nails" label="Red Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069560" start="20645" end="20662" title="The Frost Giant&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Gods of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726964" start="20750" end="20769" title="The Coming of Conan" label="The Coming of Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792660" start="20852" end="20871" title="The God in the Bowl" label="The God in the Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718450" start="20947" end="20965" title="The Black Stranger" label="The Black Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771914" start="21036" end="21058" title="The Vale of Lost Women" label="The Vale of Lost Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309297" start="21183" end="21200" title="Drums of Tombalku" label="Drums of Tombalku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991591" start="21238" end="21258" title="Conan the Adventurer (collection)" label="Conan the Adventurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738661" start="21280" end="21300" title="The Hall of the Dead" label="The Hall of the Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q937202" start="21338" end="21381" title="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction" label="The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738722" start="21412" end="21430" title="The Hand of Nergal" label="The Hand of Nergal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658873" start="21468" end="21473" title="Conan (collection)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765010" start="21495" end="21516" title="The Snout in the Dark" label="The Snout in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q739383" start="21554" end="21571" title="Conan of Cimmeria" label="Conan of Cimmeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030575" start="21700" end="21724" title="Wolves Beyond the Border" label="Wolves Beyond the Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q263321" start="21847" end="21863" title="The Hyborian Age" label="The Hyborian Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343792" start="21957" end="21965" title="Cimmeria (Poem)" label="Cimmeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="22176" end="22189" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553892" start="22191" end="22208" title="Leonard Carpenter" label="Leonard Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248054" start="22210" end="22220" title="Lin Carter" label="Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="22222" end="22240" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558680" start="22242" end="22257" title="Roland J. Green" label="Roland J. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368005" start="22259" end="22274" title="John C. Hocking" label="John C. Hocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q166351" start="22276" end="22289" title="Robert Jordan" label="Robert Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362476" start="22291" end="22304" title="Sean A. Moore" label="Sean A. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205443" start="22306" end="22318" title="Björn Nyberg" label="Björn Nyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q325664" start="22320" end="22336" title="Andrew J. Offutt" label="Andrew J. Offutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368134" start="22338" end="22349" title="Steve Perry (author)" label="Steve Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q320664" start="22351" end="22370" title="John Maddox Roberts" label="John Maddox Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="22372" end="22388" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
<link wikidata="Q639360" start="22394" end="22412" title="Karl Edward Wagner" label="Karl Edward Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22817" end="22836" title="Conan (books)#Gnome Press series, 1950–1957" label="Gnome Press edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="23078" end="23096" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718450" start="23109" end="23133" title="The Treasure of Tranicos" label="The Treasure of Tranicos"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="23228" end="23234" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="23254" end="23262" title="Crusades" label="Crusades"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205443" start="23429" end="23441" title="Björn Nyberg" label="Björn Nyberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23471" end="23490" title="Conan (books)#Lancer/Ace paperback series, 1966–1977" label="Lancer/Ace editions"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="23527" end="23534" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248054" start="23539" end="23549" title="Lin Carter" label="Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q448205" start="24261" end="24275" title="Frank Frazetta" label="Frank Frazetta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24662" end="24681" title="Conan (books)#Ace Maroto series, 1978–1981" label="Ace Maroto editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24945" end="24969" title="Conan (books)#Donald M. Grant series, 1974–1989" label="Donald M. Grant editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24995" end="25011" title="Conan (books)#Berkley series, 1977" label="Berkley editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25020" end="25037" title="Conan (books)#Gollancz series, 2000–2006" label="Gollancz editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25055" end="25086" title="Conan (books)#Wandering Star/Del Rey series, 2003–2005" label="Wandering Star/Del Rey editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25147" end="25162" title="Conan (books)#Bantam series, 1978–1982" label="Bantam editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25179" end="25191" title="Conan (books)#Tor series, 1982–2004" label="Tor editions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25622" end="25645" title="Conan chronologies#Miller/Clark/de Camp chronology" label="Miller/Clark chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900938" start="25784" end="25802" title="P. Schuyler Miller" label="P. Schuyler Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q899453" start="25807" end="25823" title="John Drury Clark" label="John Drury Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="25871" end="25889" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25960" end="25984" title="Conan chronologies#Robert Jordan chronology" label="Robert Jordan chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q166351" start="26087" end="26100" title="Robert Jordan" label="Robert Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26299" end="26328" title="Conan chronologies#William Galen Gray chronology" label="William Galen Gray chronology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26648" end="26668" title="Conan chronologies#Joe Marek chronology" label="Joe Marek chronology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27039" end="27061" title="Conan chronologies#Dale Rippke chronology" label="Dale Rippke chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201081" start="27285" end="27308" title="Conan (Dark Horse comic)" label="Dark Horse comic series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345504" start="27446" end="27459" title="Edward Summer" label="Edward Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="27518" end="27528" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q981976" start="27647" end="27657" title="Roy Thomas" label="Roy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q309003" start="27762" end="27781" title="Conan the Barbarian (1982 film)" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83859" start="27826" end="27837" title="John Milius" label="John Milius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248054" start="27931" end="27941" title="Lin Carter" label="Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="27946" end="27964" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290848" start="27969" end="27980" title="Nietzschean" label="Nietzschean"/>
<link wikidata="Q108416461" start="28168" end="28179" title="Thulsa Doom (character)" label="Thulsa Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="28194" end="28201" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="28339" end="28347" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="28404" end="28410" title="Archery" label="archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="28427" end="28432" title="thief" label="thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q296796" start="28563" end="28581" title="Dino De Laurentiis" label="Dino De Laurentiis"/>
<link wikidata="Q953237" start="28620" end="28630" title="Jorge Sanz" label="Jorge Sanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="28646" end="28667" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q740516" start="28798" end="28817" title="Conan the Destroyer" label="Conan the Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="28864" end="28871" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44563" start="28955" end="28965" title="picaresque" label="picaresque"/>
<link wikidata="Q363653" start="29155" end="29167" title="Guy Hamilton" label="Guy Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q137489" start="29171" end="29186" title="John Guillermin" label="John Guillermin"/>
<link wikidata="Q200804" start="29248" end="29256" title="Predator (film)" label="Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q858860" start="29353" end="29362" title="Red Sonja (1985 film)" label="Red Sonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q261601" start="29379" end="29387" title="Raw Deal (1986 film)" label="Raw Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081312" start="29475" end="29491" title="development hell" label="development hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780108" start="29537" end="29555" title="Kull the Conqueror" label="Kull the Conqueror"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="29789" end="29799" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="29820" end="29832" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q2257015" start="29938" end="29959" title="Paradox Entertainment" label="Paradox Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3879177" start="30055" end="30071" title="Millennium Films" label="Millennium Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q207640" start="30216" end="30232" title="Robert E. Howard" label="Robert E. Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q77399" start="30274" end="30287" title="Marcus Nispel" label="Marcus Nispel"/>
<link wikidata="Q315271" start="30316" end="30327" title="Jason Momoa" label="Jason Momoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107501" start="30524" end="30536" title="Chris Morgan (screenwriter)" label="Chris Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="30678" end="30699" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="31370" end="31384" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q104137" start="31398" end="31408" title="Unforgiven" label="Unforgiven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899613" start="31483" end="31499" title="Bertrand Mandico" label="Bertrand Mandico"/>
<link wikidata="Q118070772" start="31515" end="31528" title="She Is Conann" label="She Is Conann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2561069" start="31762" end="31794" title="Conan the Adventurer (1992 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Conan the Adventurer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="31807" end="31833" title="animated television series" label="animated television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908409" start="32038" end="32049" title="Serpent Men" label="Serpent Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158131" start="32157" end="32185" title="Conan and the Young Warriors" label="Conan and the Young Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q515708" start="32273" end="32290" title="DiC Entertainment" label="DiC Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="32313" end="32316" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991584" start="32730" end="32762" title="Conan the Adventurer (1997 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Conan the Adventurer&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q517386" start="32774" end="32785" title="live-action" label="live-action"/>
<link wikidata="Q61112" start="32897" end="32908" title="Ralf Möller" label="Ralf Möller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164810" start="32919" end="32933" title="Danny Woodburn" label="Danny Woodburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="33260" end="33267" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257015" start="33440" end="33461" title="Cabinet Entertainment" label="Cabinet Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21086634" start="33644" end="33656" title="Amazon Prime" label="Amazon Prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q531676" start="34096" end="34120" title="Queen of the Black Coast" label="Queen of the Black Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="34212" end="34225" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158148" start="34265" end="34284" title="Conan the Barbarian (comics)" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26970897" start="34325" end="34346" title="Savage Sword of Conan" label="Savage Sword of Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="34366" end="34383" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201081" start="34405" end="34410" title="Conan The Legend" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="34511" end="34526" title="trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperback"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="34536" end="34548" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858115" start="34681" end="34695" title="Barack Obama in comics" label="as a character"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883758" start="34725" end="34745" title="Barack the Barbarian" label="Barack the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025439" start="34757" end="34773" title="Devil&amp;#x27;s Due Publishing" label="Devil&amp;#x27;s Due"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="34776" end="34789" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q981976" start="34916" end="34926" title="Roy Thomas" label="Roy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570004" start="34946" end="34965" title="Barry Windsor-Smith" label="Barry Windsor-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q17098559" start="34990" end="34999" title="penciller" label="penciller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395905" start="35000" end="35012" title="John Buscema" label="John Buscema"/>
<link wikidata="Q354298" start="35085" end="35100" title="J. M. DeMatteis" label="J. M. DeMatteis"/>
<link wikidata="Q129371" start="35102" end="35113" title="Bruce Jones (comics)" label="Bruce Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830329" start="35115" end="35131" title="Michael Fleisher" label="Michael Fleisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q718507" start="35133" end="35144" title="Doug Moench" label="Doug Moench"/>
<link wikidata="Q724576" start="35146" end="35156" title="Jim Owsley" label="Jim Owsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708123" start="35158" end="35171" title="Alan Zelenetz" label="Alan Zelenetz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089124" start="35173" end="35184" title="Chuck Dixon" label="Chuck Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q355082" start="35396" end="35410" title="Alfredo Alcala" label="Alfredo Alcala"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="35442" end="35456" title="graphic novels" label="graphic novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057605" start="35488" end="35496" title="Official Handbook of the Conan Universe" label="handbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q931597" start="35624" end="35639" title="Marvel Universe" label="Marvel Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q838795" start="35750" end="35761" title="comic strip" label="comic strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q373933" start="35974" end="35991" title="Dark Horse Comics" label="Dark Horse Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q971041" start="36115" end="36126" title="Kurt Busiek" label="Kurt Busiek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047647" start="36144" end="36153" title="Cary Nord" label="Cary Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q353897" start="36155" end="36165" title="Tim Truman" label="Tim Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="36229" end="36238" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201081" start="36559" end="36578" title="Conan the Cimmerian (comics)" label="Conan the Cimmerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q353897" start="36609" end="36619" title="Tim Truman" label="Tim Truman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36633" end="36647" title="Tomás Giorello" label="Tomás Giorello"/>
<link wikidata="Q981976" start="36819" end="36829" title="Roy Thomas" label="Roy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847166" start="36843" end="36857" title="Mike Hawthorne" label="Mike Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q913255" start="36971" end="36981" title="Brian Wood (comic creator)" label="Brian Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893489" start="36995" end="37008" title="Becky Cloonan" label="Becky Cloonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q531676" start="37096" end="37120" title="Queen of the Black Coast" label="Queen of the Black Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3086966" start="37199" end="37213" title="Fred Van Lente" label="Fred Van Lente"/>
<link wikidata="Q464739" start="37227" end="37238" title="Brian Ching" label="Brian Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765010" start="37320" end="37341" title="The Snout in the Dark" label="The Snout in the Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395895" start="37346" end="37367" title="A Witch Shall Be Born" label="A Witch Shall Be Born"/>
<link wikidata="Q15267094" start="37454" end="37465" title="Cullen Bunn" label="Cullen Bunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q66731094" start="37822" end="37844" title="Titan Publishing Group" label="Titan Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q12541" start="38062" end="38066" title="Risk (game)" label="Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118748" start="38123" end="38138" title="The Space Gamer" label="The Space Gamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029276" start="38192" end="38212" title="Fantasy Flight Games" label="Fantasy Flight Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158109" start="38729" end="38756" title="Conan Collectible Card Game" label="Conan Collectible Card Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066525" start="38822" end="38834" title="Hyborian War" label="Hyborian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301275" start="38856" end="38881" title="Reality Simulations" label="Reality Simulations, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1129581" start="38899" end="38916" title="play-by-mail game" label="play-by-mail game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543201" start="38970" end="38979" title="TSR (company)" label="TSR, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q3361827" start="39012" end="39037" title="Barbarian (Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons)" label="barbarian character class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305043" start="39154" end="39161" title="List of Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons modules" label="modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375" start="39166" end="39197" title="Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons" label="Advanced Dungeons &amp;amp; Dragons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158118" start="39212" end="39228" title="Conan Unchained!" label="Conan Unchained!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158108" start="39255" end="39278" title="Conan Against Darkness!" label="Conan Against Darkness!"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986620" start="39304" end="39327" title="Conan Role-Playing Game" label="Conan Role-Playing Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000492" start="39349" end="39373" title="Adventure (role-playing games)" label="official game adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986620" start="39388" end="39407" title="Conan the Buccaneer (module)" label="Conan the Buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986620" start="39434" end="39453" title="Conan the Mercenary (module)" label="Conan the Mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17986620" start="39480" end="39496" title="Conan Triumphant" label="Conan Triumphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376187" start="39518" end="39531" title="Endless Quest" label="Endless Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q762392" start="39725" end="39744" title="Steve Jackson Games" label="Steve Jackson Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047814" start="39829" end="39834" title="GURPS" label="GURPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246947" start="39888" end="39899" title="GURPS Conan" label="GURPS Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246947" start="40008" end="40019" title="GURPS Conan" label="GURPS Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575373" start="40287" end="40306" title="Mongoose Publishing" label="Mongoose Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752744" start="40475" end="40485" title="OGL System" label="OGL System"/>
<link wikidata="Q60786159" start="40707" end="40730" title="Modiphius Entertainment" label="Modiphius Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="40886" end="40897" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990994" start="41373" end="41398" title="choose your own adventure" label="choose your own adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q642946" start="41415" end="41424" title="gamebooks" label="gamebooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="41487" end="41497" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="41537" end="41543" title="Mythology" label="mythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172285" start="41556" end="41564" title="Datasoft" label="Datasoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="41591" end="41599" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q249075" start="41601" end="41622" title="Atari 8-bit computers" label="Atari 8-bit computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="41628" end="41640" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045344" start="41653" end="41662" title="The Learning Company" label="Mindscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q172742" start="41689" end="41692" title="Nintendo Entertainment System" label="NES"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="41696" end="41708" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q851989" start="41709" end="41713" title="porting" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517179" start="41717" end="41725" title="System 3 (software company)" label="System 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481820" start="41738" end="41750" title="Virgin Interactive" label="Virgin Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023462" start="41755" end="41766" title="Synergistic Software" label="Synergistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q100047" start="41793" end="41798" title="Amiga" label="Amiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="41803" end="41820" title="IBM PC compatible" label="IBM PC compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136242" start="41834" end="41848" title="TDK Mediactive" label="TDK Mediactive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158104" start="41864" end="41869" title="Conan (2004 video game)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="41908" end="41915" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="41920" end="41928" title="Video game console" label="consoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q580866" start="41941" end="41944" title="THQ" label="THQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388106" start="41949" end="41959" title="Nihilistic Software" label="Nihilistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615859" start="41975" end="41980" title="Conan (2007 video game)" label="Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10683" start="42019" end="42032" title="PlayStation 3" label="PlayStation 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q48263" start="42037" end="42045" title="Xbox 360" label="Xbox 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q918638" start="42058" end="42064" title="Funcom" label="Funcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q392183" start="42080" end="42092" title="Age of Conan" label="Age of Conan"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="42102" end="42108" title="Massively multiplayer online role-playing game" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="42238" end="42241" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123629" start="42292" end="42311" title="Conan the Barbarian (2011 film)" label="Conan the Barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061779" start="42378" end="42387" title="The Tower of the Elephant" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q14558333" start="42438" end="42446" title="Broforce" label="Broforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q28753362" start="42785" end="42797" title="Conan Exiles" label="Conan Exiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="42808" end="42811" title="PS4" label="PS4"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="42813" end="42821" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q867123" start="42846" end="42856" title="open world" label="open world"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030988" start="42857" end="42870" title="survival game" label="survival game"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042291" start="42897" end="42909" title="early access" label="early access"/>
<link wikidata="Q918638" start="42955" end="42961" title="Funcom" label="Funcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="42973" end="42991" title="real time strategy" label="real time strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q118374430" start="43139" end="43154" title="Mortal Kombat 1" label="Mortal Kombat 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q60734080" start="43214" end="43223" title="Chris Cox (voice actor)" label="Chris Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005084" start="43265" end="43270" title="Bêlit (Fiction)" label="Bêlit"/>
<link wikidata="Q531676" start="43411" end="43435" title="Queen of the Black Coast" label="Queen of the Black Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512207" start="43644" end="43654" title="Thoth-Amon" label="Thoth-Amon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512207" start="43740" end="43764" title="The Phoenix on the Sword" label="The Phoenix on the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792660" start="43798" end="43817" title="The God in the Bowl" label="The God in the Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q722594" start="43834" end="43856" title="The Hour of the Dragon" label="The Hour of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="43864" end="43882" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248054" start="43887" end="43897" title="Lin Carter" label="Lin Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570004" start="44051" end="44070" title="Barry Windsor-Smith" label="Barry Windsor-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q747891" start="44306" end="44315" title="Pat Roach" label="Pat Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q740516" start="44325" end="44344" title="Conan the Destroyer" label="Conan the Destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911184" start="44354" end="44361" title="Valeria (Conan the Barbarian)" label="Valeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4134557" start="44435" end="44444" title="Red Nails" label="Red Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061779" start="44504" end="44529" title="The Tower of the Elephant" label="The Tower of the Elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="44602" end="44607" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="44612" end="44618" title="Ganesh" label="Ganesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304525" start="44772" end="44780" title="Seraglio" label="Seraglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q634864" start="44831" end="44840" title="Aquilonia (Conan)" label="Aquilonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q722594" start="44848" end="44870" title="The Hour of the Dragon" label="The Hour of the Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q745315" start="44901" end="44907" title="Fafnir" label="Fafnir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999690" start="44940" end="44957" title="sword-and-sorcery" label="sword-and-sorcery"/>
<link wikidata="Q638565" start="44969" end="44995" title="Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser" label="Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser"/>
<link wikidata="Q313185" start="44999" end="45011" title="Fritz Leiber" label="Fritz Leiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q184826" start="45040" end="45045" title="Vanir" label="Vanir"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="45313" end="45316" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088946" start="45477" end="45496" title="Rogues in the House" label="Rogues in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763582" start="45891" end="45916" title="The Shadow of the Vulture" label="The Shadow of the Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442781" start="45927" end="45937" title="Kulan Gath" label="Kulan Gath"/>
<link wikidata="Q965905" start="46108" end="46130" title="Dynamite Entertainment" label="Dynamite Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q162335" start="46134" end="46143" title="Red Sonja" label="Red Sonja"/>
<link wikidata="Q981976" start="46178" end="46188" title="Roy Thomas" label="Roy Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2570004" start="46193" end="46212" title="Barry Windsor-Smith" label="Barry Windsor-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763582" start="46319" end="46344" title="The Shadow of the Vulture" label="The Shadow of the Vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333353" start="46752" end="46757" title="Elric" label="Elric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333353" start="46815" end="46824" title="Melnibone" label="Melnibone"/>
<link wikidata="Q316138" start="46939" end="46955" title="Michael Moorcock" label="Michael Moorcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q148401" start="47051" end="47057" title="Wizard (fantasy)" label="wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="47163" end="47171" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q318885" start="47178" end="47191" title="Mako Iwamatsu" label="Mako Iwamatsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895392" start="47326" end="47338" title="Ben Davidson" label="Ben Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366460" start="47538" end="47551" title="Tracey Walter" label="Tracey Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25294" start="47566" end="47572" title="Hammer" label="Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388769" start="47632" end="47648" title="Sven-Ole Thorsen" label="Sven-Ole Thorsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108416461" start="47651" end="47662" title="Thulsa Doom" label="Thulsa Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q337935" start="47679" end="47690" title="necromancer" label="necromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469538" start="47698" end="47707" title="Kull of Atlantis" label="King Kull"/>
<link wikidata="Q309003" start="47781" end="47790" title="Conan the Barbarian (1982 film)" label="1982 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q203960" start="47802" end="47818" title="James Earl Jones" label="James Earl Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257015" start="48027" end="48048" title="Cabinet Entertainment" label="Cabinet Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="48655" end="48668" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="49193" end="49220" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834555" start="49233" end="49281" title="Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp." label="Dastar Corp. v. Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="49292" end="49306" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="49538" end="49555" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q19652" start="49700" end="49713" title="public domain" label="public domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="49907" end="49913" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q348303" start="50111" end="50123" title="crowdfunding" label="crowdfunding"/>
<link wikidata="Q34755" start="50161" end="50172" title="Kickstarter" label="Kickstarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="50573" end="50580" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q842614" start="50852" end="50864" title="Eisner Award" label="Eisner Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218810" start="50872" end="50884" title="John Allison (comics)" label="John Allison"/>
</links>
</doc>
