<doc id="5786" wikidata="Q161562" url="?curid=5786" title="California Institute of Technology">
<text>The California Institute of Technology(branded as Caltech) is a private research university in Pasadena, California, United States. The university is responsible for many modern scientific advancements and is among a small group of institutes of technology in the United States that are devoted to the instruction of pure and applied sciences. 

The institution was founded as a preparatory and vocational school by Amos G. Throop in 1891 and began attracting influential scientists such as George Ellery Hale, Arthur Amos Noyes, and Robert Andrews Millikan in the early 20th century. The vocational and preparatory schools were disbanded and spun off in 1910, and the college assumed its present name in 1920. In 1934, Caltech was elected to the Association of American Universities, and the antecedents of NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, which Caltech continues to manage and operate, were established between 1936 and 1943 under Theodore von Kármán.

Caltech has six academic divisions with strong emphasis on science and engineering, managing $332 million in research grants as of 2010. Its primary campus is located approximately northeast of downtown Los Angeles, in Pasadena. First-year students are required to live on campus, and 95% of undergraduates remain in the on-campus housing system at Caltech. Students agree to abide by an honor code which allows faculty to assign take-home examinations. The Caltech Beavers compete in 13 intercollegiate sports in the NCAA Division III&#x27;s Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC).

Scientists and engineers at or from the university have played an essential role in many modern scientific breakthroughs and innovations, including advances in space research, sustainability science, quantum physics, and seismology. , there are 79 Nobel laureates who have been affiliated with Caltech, making it the institution with the highest number of Nobelists per capita in America. This includes 46 alumni and faculty members (47 prizes, with chemist Linus Pauling being the only individual in history to win two unshared prizes). In addition, 66 National Medal of Science Recipients, 43 MacArthur Fellows, 14 National Medal of Technology and Innovation recipients, 11 astronauts, 5 Science Advisors to the President, 4 Fields Medalists, and 6 Turing Award winners have been affiliated with Caltech.

== History ==
=== Throop College ===
Caltech started as a vocational school founded in present-day Old Pasadena on Fair Oaks Avenue and Chestnut Street on September 23, 1891, by local businessman and politician Amos G. Throop. The school was known successively as Throop University, Throop Polytechnic Institute (and Manual Training School) and Throop College of Technology before acquiring its current name in 1920. The vocational school was disbanded and the preparatory program was split off to form the independent Polytechnic School in 1907.

At a time when scientific research in the United States was still in its infancy, George Ellery Hale, a solar astronomer from the University of Chicago, founded the Mount Wilson Observatory in 1904. He joined Throop&#x27;s board of trustees in 1907, and soon began developing the university, and the whole of Pasadena, into a major scientific and cultural destination. He engineered the appointment of James A. B. Scherer, a literary scholar untutored in science but very capable in administration and fund-raising, to Throop&#x27;s presidency in 1908. Scherer persuaded retired businessman and trustee Charles W. Gates to donate $25,000 in seed money () to build Gates Laboratory, the first science building on campus.

=== World Wars ===


In 1910, Throop moved to its current site. Arthur Fleming donated the land for the permanent campus site. Theodore Roosevelt delivered an address at Throop Institute on March 21, 1911, and he declared:

I want to see institutions like Throop turn out perhaps ninety-nine of every hundred students as men who are to do given pieces of industrial work better than any one else can do them; I want to see those men do the kind of work that is now being done on the Panama Canal and on the great irrigation projects in the interior of this country—and the one-hundredth man I want to see with the kind of cultural scientific training that will make him and his fellows the matrix out of which you can occasionally develop a man like your great astronomer, George Ellery Hale.

Also in 1911, a bill was introduced in the California Legislature calling for the establishment of a publicly funded &quot;California Institute of Technology,&quot; with an initial budget of a million dollars, ten times the budget of Throop at the time. The board of trustees offered to turn Throop over to the state, but the presidents of Stanford University and the University of California, Berkeley successfully lobbied to defeat the bill, which allowed Throop to develop as the only scientific research-oriented educational institute in southern California, public or private, until the onset of World War II necessitated the broader development of research-based science education. The promise of Throop attracted physical chemist Arthur Amos Noyes from MIT to develop the institution and assist in establishing it as a center for science and technology.

With the onset of World War I, Hale organized the National Research Council to coordinate and support scientific work on military problems. While he supported the idea of federal appropriations for science, he took exception to a federal bill that would have funded engineering research at land-grant colleges, and instead sought to raise a $1 million national research fund entirely from private sources. To that end, as Hale wrote in &quot;The New York Times&quot;:

Throop College of Technology, in Pasadena California has recently afforded a striking illustration of one way in which the Research Council can secure co-operation and advance scientific investigation. This institution, with its able investigators and excellent research laboratories, could be of great service in any broad scheme of cooperation. President Scherer, hearing of the formation of the council, immediately offered to take part in its work, and with this object, he secured within three days an additional research endowment of one hundred thousand dollars.
Through the National Research Council, Hale simultaneously lobbied for science to play a larger role in national affairs, and for Throop to play a national role in science. The new funds were designated for physics research, and ultimately led to the establishment of the Norman Bridge Laboratory, which attracted experimental physicist Robert Andrews Millikan from the University of Chicago in 1917. During the course of the war, Hale, Noyes and Millikan worked together in Washington on the NRC. Subsequently, they continued their partnership in developing Caltech.
Under the leadership of Hale, Noyes, and Millikan (aided by the booming economy of Southern California), Caltech grew to national prominence in the 1920s and concentrated on the development of Roosevelt&#x27;s &quot;Hundredth Man&quot;. On November 29, 1921, the trustees declared it to be the express policy of the institute to pursue scientific research of the greatest importance and at the same time &quot;to continue to conduct thorough courses in engineering and pure science, basing the work of these courses on exceptionally strong instruction in the fundamental sciences of mathematics, physics, and chemistry; broadening and enriching the curriculum by a liberal amount of instruction in such subjects as English, history, and economics; and vitalizing all the work of the Institute by the infusion in generous measure of the spirit of research&quot;. In 1923, Millikan was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics. In 1925, the school established a department of geology and hired William Bennett Munro, then chairman of the division of History, Government, and Economics at Harvard University, to create a division of humanities and social sciences at Caltech. In 1928, a division of biology was established under the leadership of Thomas Hunt Morgan, the most distinguished biologist in the United States at the time, and discoverer of the role of genes and the chromosome in heredity. In 1930, Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory was established in Corona del Mar under the care of Professor George MacGinitie. In 1926, a graduate school of aeronautics was created, which eventually attracted Theodore von Kármán. Kármán later helped create the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, and played an integral part in establishing Caltech as one of the world&#x27;s centers for rocket science. In 1928, construction of the Palomar Observatory began.

Millikan served as &quot;Chairman of the Executive Council&quot; (effectively Caltech&#x27;s president) from 1921 to 1945, and his influence was such that the institute was occasionally referred to as &quot;Millikan&#x27;s School&quot;. Millikan initiated a visiting-scholars program soon after joining Caltech. Notable scientists who accepted his invitation include Paul Dirac, Erwin Schrödinger, Werner Heisenberg, Hendrik Lorentz and Niels Bohr. Albert Einstein arrived on the Caltech campus for the first time in 1931 to polish up his Theory of General Relativity, and he returned to Caltech subsequently as a visiting professor in 1932 and 1933.

During World War II, Caltech was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. The United States Navy also maintained a naval training school for aeronautical engineering, resident inspectors of ordinance and naval material, and a liaison officer to the National Defense Research Committee on campus. During the war, some scientists from Caltech, including J. Robert Oppenheimer, Richard Tolman, and Robert Bacher, were instrumental in the Manhattan Project and contributed to critical aspects of the atomic bomb&#x27;s development.

Caltech was also directly involved in other bomb-related research with a group led by Charles Lauritsen which assisted in the development of the high-explosive lenses used in the Fat Man implosion bomb, crucial to the Trinity Test and the subsequent bombing of Nagasaki. Lauritsen’s team at Caltech developed detonators that would later be used in atomic bombs. In November 1943, Caltech and the U.S. Navy established the Naval Ordnance Test Station (NOTS) in Inyokern, California, near the Mojave Desert to work on aircraft ordnance and rocket development. One of the most successful innovations was the development of the 5-inch High-Velocity Aircraft Rocket, commonly known as the &quot;Holy Moses,&quot; which was used in combat against enemy fortifications and ships. 

The partnership between the Navy and Caltech continued to deepen throughout the war, leading to the creation of several military technologies, and by 1945, the focus of Caltech’s war contributions expanded further with Project Camel, a collaboration between the Naval Ordnance Test Station and the Manhattan Project. Caltech scientists worked on a variety of assignments, including B-29 airdrop tests of model atomic bombs and the manufacturing of explosives for use in the atomic bomb’s implosion mechanism. Additionally, the Salt Wells Pilot Plant at Inyokern was developed with Caltech scientists in response to concerns about the safety of explosive production at Los Alamos and began producing high explosives just days before the Trinity Test in July 1945. Early in the war, Caltech scientists, including Lauritsen’s son, Thomas Lauritsen, worked on various rocket designs at the Kellogg Radiation Laboratory. These rockets, including the &quot;Tiny Tim&quot; and the &quot;Mighty Mouse,&quot; were used in critical military operations, from naval engagements to land assaults. By the end of the war, Caltech had essentially become an extension of the U.S. Navy’s Bureau of Ordnance, with its rocket research providing important technology to U.S. combat capabilities.

=== Project Vista ===
From April to December 1951, Caltech was the host of a federal classified study, Project Vista. The selection of Caltech as host for the project was based on the university&#x27;s expertise in rocketry and nuclear physics. In response to the war in Korea and the pressure from the Soviet Union, the project was Caltech&#x27;s way of assisting the federal government in its effort to increase national security. The project was created to study new ways of improving the relationship between tactical air support and ground troops. The Army, Air Force, and Navy sponsored the project; however, it was under contract with the Army. The study was named after the hotel, Vista del Arroyo Hotel, which housed the study. The study operated under a committee with the supervision of President Lee A. DuBridge. William A. Fowler, a professor at Caltech, was selected as research director. More than a fourth of Caltech&#x27;s faculty and a group of outside scientists staffed the project. Moreover, the number increases if one takes into account visiting scientists, military liaisons, secretarial, and security staff. In compensation for its participation, the university received about $750,000.

=== Post-war growth ===
From the 1950s to 1980s, Caltech was the home of Murray Gell-Mann and Richard Feynman, whose work was central to the establishment of the Standard Model of particle physics. Feynman was also widely known outside the physics community as an exceptional teacher and a colorful, unconventional character.

During Lee A. DuBridge&#x27;s tenure as Caltech&#x27;s president (1946–1969), Caltech&#x27;s faculty doubled and the campus tripled in size. DuBridge, unlike his predecessors, welcomed federal funding of science. New research fields flourished, including chemical biology, planetary science, nuclear astrophysics, and geochemistry. A 200-inch telescope was dedicated on nearby Palomar Mountain in 1948 and remained the world&#x27;s most powerful optical telescope for over forty years.

Caltech opened its doors to female undergraduates during the presidency of Harold Brown in 1970, and they made up 14% of the entering class. The portion of female undergraduates has been increasing since then.

Protests by Caltech students are rare. The earliest was a 1968 protest outside the NBC Burbank studios, in response to rumors that NBC was to cancel &quot;Star Trek&quot;. In 1973, the students from Dabney House protested a presidential visit with a sign on the library bearing the simple phrase &quot;Impeach Nixon&quot;. The following week, Ross McCollum, president of the National Oil Company, wrote an open letter to Dabney House stating that in light of their actions he had decided not to donate one million dollars to Caltech. The Dabney family, being Republicans, disowned Dabney House after hearing of the protest.

=== 21st century ===
Since 2000, the Einstein Papers Project has been located at Caltech. The project was established in 1986 to assemble, preserve, translate, and publish papers selected from the literary estate of Albert Einstein and from other collections.
In fall 2008, the freshman class was 42% female, a record for Caltech&#x27;s undergraduate enrollment. In the same year, the Institute concluded a six-year-long fund-raising campaign. The campaign raised more than $1.4 billion from about 16,000 donors. Nearly half of the funds went into the support of Caltech programs and projects.

In 2010, Caltech, in partnership with Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory and headed by Professor Nathan Lewis, established a DOE Energy Innovation Hub aimed at developing revolutionary methods to generate fuels directly from sunlight. This hub, the Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis, will receive up to $122 million in federal funding over five years.

Since 2012, Caltech began to offer classes through massive open online courses (MOOCs) under Coursera, from 2013, edX, and bootcamps.

Jean-Lou Chameau, the eighth president, announced on February 19, 2013, that he would be stepping down to accept the presidency at King Abdullah University of Science and Technology. Thomas F. Rosenbaum was announced to be the ninth president of Caltech on October 24, 2013, and his term began on July 1, 2014.

In 2019, Caltech received a gift of $750 million for sustainability research from the Resnick family of The Wonderful Company. The gift is the largest ever for environmental sustainability research and the second-largest private donation to a US academic institution (after Bloomberg&#x27;s gift of $1.8 billion to Johns Hopkins University in 2018).

On account of President Robert A. Millikan&#x27;s affiliation with the Human Betterment Foundation, in January 2021, the Caltech Board of Trustees authorized the removal of Millikan&#x27;s name (and the names of five other historical figures affiliated with the Foundation), from campus buildings.

== Campus ==


Caltech&#x27;s primary campus is located in Pasadena, California, approximately northeast of downtown Los Angeles. It is within walking distance of Old Town Pasadena and the Pasadena Playhouse District and therefore the two locations are frequent getaways for Caltech students.

In 1917 Hale hired architect Bertram Goodhue to produce a master plan for the campus. Goodhue conceived the overall layout of the campus and designed the physics building, Dabney Hall, and several other structures, in which he sought to be consistent with the local climate, the character of the school, and Hale&#x27;s educational philosophy. Goodhue&#x27;s designs for Caltech were also influenced by the traditional Spanish mission architecture of Southern California.


During the 1960s, Caltech underwent considerable expansion, in part due to the philanthropy of alumnus Arnold O. Beckman. In 1953, Beckman was asked to join the Caltech Board of Trustees. In 1964, he became its chairman. Over the next few years, as Caltech&#x27;s president emeritus David Baltimore describes it, Arnold Beckman and his wife Mabel &quot;shaped the destiny of Caltech&quot;.

In 1971 a magnitude-6.6 earthquake in San Fernando caused some damage to the Caltech campus. Engineers who evaluated the damage found that two historic buildings dating from the early days of the Institute—Throop Hall and the Goodhue-designed Culbertson Auditorium—had cracked.

New additions to the campus include the Cahill Center for Astronomy and Astrophysics and the Walter and Leonore Annenberg Center for Information Science and Technology, which opened in 2009, and the Warren and Katherine Schlinger Laboratory for Chemistry and Chemical Engineering followed in March 2010. The institute also concluded an upgrading of the South Houses in 2006. In late 2010, Caltech completed a 1.3 MW solar array projected to produce approximately 1.6 GWh in 2011.

== Organization and administration ==
Caltech is incorporated as a non-profit corporation and is governed by a privately appointed 46-member board of trustees who serve five-year terms of office and retire at the age of 72. The trustees elect a president to serve as the chief executive officer of the institute and administer the affairs on the institute on behalf of the board, a provost who serves as the chief academic officer of the institute below the president, and ten other vice presidential and other senior positions. Thomas F. Rosenbaum became the ninth president of Caltech in 2014. Caltech&#x27;s endowment is governed by a permanent trustee committee and administered by an investment office.

The institute is organized into six primary academic divisions: Biology and Biological Engineering (founded 1927), Chemistry and Chemical Engineering (founded 1926), Engineering and Applied Science (founded 1926), Geological and Planetary Sciences (founded 1927), Humanities and Social Sciences (founded 1926), Physics, Mathematics, and Astronomy (founded 1926). Given Caltech&#x27;s historical prestige and the small size of its faculty in many major fields, the institution is exceptionally careful in selecting candidates. This rigorous process can result in some positions remaining unfilled for several years until the right candidate is found. Caltech dedicates significant resources to attract top-tier faculty and provides them with substantial financial support to foster their research and academic endeavors. The voting faculty of Caltech include all professors, instructors, research associates and fellows, and the University Librarian. Faculty are responsible for establishing admission requirements, academic standards, and curricula. The Faculty Board is the faculty&#x27;s representative body and consists of 18 elected faculty representatives as well as other senior administration officials. Full-time professors are expected to teach classes, conduct research, advise students, and perform administrative work such as serving on committees.

Founded in 1930s, the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) is a federally funded research and development center (FFRDC) owned by NASA and operated as a division of Caltech through a contract between NASA and Caltech. In 2008, JPL spent over $1.6 billion on research and development and employed over 5,000 project-related and support employees. The JPL Director also serves as a Caltech Vice President and is responsible to the President of the Institute for the management of the laboratory.

In December 2023, graduate students and postdoctoral researchers filed to be recognized for collective bargaining as Caltech Grad researchers and Postdocs United, in affiliation with the United Auto Workers (C/GPU-UAW). On January 31st and February 1st, 2024 a vote was held by the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB). In February 2024, the NLRB certified that 1335 of 1997 eligible workers voted, with 78% voting in favor of unionization. In May 2024, contract negotiations began. In December 2024, C/GPU-UAW members held a strike authorization vote, 1441 participating in the vote, and 86% voting in favor of authorizing the C/GPU bargaining team to call a strike, if necessary.

== Academics ==
Caltech is a small four-year, highly residential research university with slightly more students in graduate programs than undergraduate. The institute has been accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges since 1949. Caltech is on the quarter system: the fall term starts in late September and ends before Christmas, the second term starts after New Year&#x27;s Day and ends in mid-March, and the third term starts in late March or early April and ends in early June.

===Rankings===



Caltech was ranked within the top ten universities in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings, QS World University Rankings, and Academic Ranking of World Universities&quot;.&quot; For 2022, U.S. News &amp; World Report ranked Caltech as tied for 9th in the United States among national universities overall, 11th for most innovative, and 15th for best value. &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; also ranked the graduate programs in chemistry and earth sciences first among national universities.

=== Undergraduate admissions===

Admission to Caltech is extremely rigorous. Prior to going test blind, Caltech students had the highest test scores in the nation. In admissions for the Class of 2028 (entering 2024), Caltech was ranked the hardest college in America to gain acceptance to by admit rate, at an all-time low of 2.7%. For the freshmen who enrolled in 2019 (Class of 2023) the middle 50% range of SAT were 740–780 for evidence-based reading and writing and 790–800 for math, and 1530–1570 total. The middle 50% range ACT Composite score was 35–36. The SAT Math Level 2 middle 50% range was 800–800. The middle 50% range for the SAT Physics Subject Test was 760–800; SAT Chemistry Subject Test was 760–800; 
SAT Biology Subject Tests was 760–800. In June 2020, Caltech announced a test-blind policy where they would not require nor consider test scores for the next two years. The moratorium was extended twice, starting July 2021, but was subsequently cancelled starting with the Class of 2029. The institute is need-blind for domestic applicants.

For the Class of 2027 (enrolled Fall 2023), Caltech received 13,136 applications and accepted 412 applicants for a 3.14% admit rate; 270 enrolled. The subsequent year, for the Class of 2028, Caltech reduced the number of seats by almost one hundred, accepting 315 applicants out of approximately 13,000 total applications. For the Class of 2025, 32% were of underrepresented ancestry (which includes students who self-identify as American Indian/Alaska Native, Hispanic/Latino, Black/African American, and/or Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander), and 6% were foreign students.

=== Tuition and financial aid ===
Undergraduate tuition for the 2021–2022 school year was $56,394 and total annual costs were estimated to be $79,947 excluding the Caltech Student Health Insurance Plan. In 2012–2013, Caltech awarded $17.1 million in need-based aid, $438k in non-need-based aid, and $2.51 million in self-help support to enrolled undergraduate students. The average financial aid package of all students eligible for aid was $38,756 and students graduated with an average debt of $15,090.

=== Undergraduate program ===

The full-time, four-year undergraduate program emphasizes instruction in the arts and sciences and has high graduate coexistence. Caltech offers 28 majors (called &quot;options&quot;) and 12 minors across all six academic divisions. Caltech also offers interdisciplinary programs in Applied Physics, Biochemistry, Bioengineering, Computation and Neural Systems, Control and Dynamical Systems, Environmental Science and Engineering, Geobiology and Astrobiology, Geochemistry, and Planetary Astronomy. The most popular options are Chemical Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering and Physics. The most popular majors of the class of 2023 were Computer Science, Mechanical Engineering, Physics, and Electrical Engineering.

Prior to the entering class of 2013, Caltech required students to take a core curriculum of five terms of mathematics, five terms of physics, two terms of chemistry, one term of biology, two terms of lab courses, one term of scientific communication, three terms of physical education, and 12 terms of humanities and social science. Since 2013, only three terms each of mathematics and physics have been required by the institute, with the remaining two terms each required by certain options.

A typical class is worth 9 academic units and given the extensive core curriculum requirements in addition to individual options&#x27; degree requirements, students need to take an average of 40.5 units per term (more than four classes) to graduate in four years. 36 units is the minimum full-time load, 48 units is considered a heavy load, and registrations above 51 units require an overload petition. Approximately 20 percent of students double-major. This is achievable since the humanities and social sciences majors have been designed to be done in conjunction with a science major. Although choosing two options in the same division is discouraged, it is still possible.

First-year students are enrolled in first-term classes based upon results of placement exams in math, physics, chemistry, and writing and take all classes in their first two terms on a Pass/Fail basis. There is little competition; collaboration on homework is encouraged and the honor system encourages take-home tests and flexible homework schedules. Caltech offers co-operative programs with other schools, such as the Pasadena Art Center College of Design and Occidental College.

According to a PayScale study, Caltech graduates earn a median early career salary of $83,400 and $143,100 mid-career, placing them in the top 5 among graduates of US colleges and universities. The average net return on investment over a period of 20 years is $887,000, the tenth-highest among US colleges.

Caltech offers Army and Air Force ROTC in cooperation with the University of Southern California.

=== Graduate program ===
Admission to Caltech&#x27;s graduate study is highly competitive, with faculty evaluating factors such as academic preparation, research experience, scientific interests, and recommendations from teachers or mentors. A key aspect of the admission process is the matching of faculty and an applicant&#x27;s research interests. Historically, many programs required applicants to submit GRE scores. However, in recent years, many departments have made the GRE optional or no longer require it at all.

The graduate instructional programs emphasize doctoral studies and are dominated by science, technology, engineering, and mathematics fields. The institute offers graduate degree programs for the Master of Science, Engineer&#x27;s Degree, Doctor of Philosophy, BS/MS and MD/PhD, with the majority of students in the PhD program. The most popular options are Chemistry, Physics, Biology, Electrical Engineering, and Chemical Engineering.

Initially, most new graduate students are assigned a temporary advisor, allowing time to select a permanent advisor. To aid in this, some graduate options include rotations in research labs, facilitating a better match with faculty research groups that align with the students&#x27; scientific interests. Up to three rotations in the first year are allowed in some options. 

Caltech provides on-campus housing options for incoming graduate students. All new graduate students are guaranteed housing in their first year, with a variety of living experiences available to suit different needs. Approximately half of Caltech&#x27;s graduate student population resides in campus housing. The application period for new student housing opens on April 15, 2023, and closes on April 30, 2023. Post-first year, students participate in a housing lottery, with the results announced two months prior to the contract end date, aiding in planning for those who need to seek off-campus housing.

The research facilities at Caltech are available to graduate students, but there are opportunities for students to work in facilities of other universities, research centers (such as NASA&#x27;s Jet Propulsion Laboratory), and private industries. The graduate student to faculty ratio is 4:1. A joint program also exists between Caltech and the Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California, the UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine, and the Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine, which grants MD/PhD degrees. Students in this program do their preclinical and clinical work at USC, UCLA, or KPSOM, and their PhD work with any member of the Caltech faculty, including the Biology, Chemistry, and Engineering and Applied Sciences Divisions. The MD degree would be from the student&#x27;s respective medical school and the PhD would be awarded from Caltech.

Approximately 99 percent of doctoral students have full financial support. Financial support for graduate students comes in the form of fellowships, research assistantships, teaching assistantships or a combination of fellowship and assistantship support.

Graduate students are bound by the same honor code as the undergraduates, allowing for take-home examinations. The Graduate Honor Council oversees any violations of the code.
== Research ==

Caltech is classified among &quot;R1: Doctoral Universities – Very High Research Activity&quot;. Caltech was elected to the Association of American Universities in 1934 and remains a research university with &quot;very high&quot; research activity, primarily in STEM fields. Caltech manages research expenditures of $270 million annually, 66th among all universities in the U.S. and 17th among private institutions without medical schools for 2008. The largest federal agencies contributing to research are NASA, National Science Foundation, Department of Health and Human Services, Department of Defense, and Department of Energy. Caltech received $144 million in federal funding for the physical sciences, $40.8 million for the life sciences, $33.5 million for engineering, $14.4 million for environmental sciences, $7.16 million for computer sciences, and $1.97 million for mathematical sciences in 2008.

The institute was awarded an all-time high funding of $357 million in 2009. Active funding from the National Science Foundation Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Science (MPS) for Caltech stands at $343 million , the highest for any educational institution in the nation, and higher than the total funds allocated to any state except California and New York.

In 2005, Caltech had dedicated to research: to physical sciences, to engineering, and to biological sciences.

In addition to managing JPL, Caltech also operates the Palomar Observatory in San Diego County, the Owens Valley Radio Observatory in Bishop, California, the Submillimeter Observatory and W. M. Keck Observatory at the Mauna Kea Observatory, the Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory at Livingston, Louisiana and Richland, Washington, and Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory in Corona del Mar, California. The Institute launched the Kavli Nanoscience Institute at Caltech in 2006, the Keck Institute for Space Studies in 2008, and is also the current home for the Einstein Papers Project. The Spitzer Science Center (SSC), part of the Infrared Processing and Analysis Center located on the Caltech campus, is the data analysis and community support center for NASA&#x27;s Spitzer Space Telescope.

Caltech partnered with UCLA to establish a Joint Center for Translational Medicine (UCLA-Caltech JCTM), which conducts experimental research into clinical applications, including the diagnosis and treatment of diseases such as cancer. In 1997, Caltech partnered with UCLA to train physician-scientists. 

Caltech operates several TCCON stations as part of an international collaborative effort of measuring greenhouse gases globally. One station is on campus.
Undergraduates at Caltech are also encouraged to participate in research. About 80% of the class of 2010 did research through the annual Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowships (SURF) program at least once during their stay, and many continued during the school year. Students write and submit SURF proposals for research projects in collaboration with professors, and about 70 percent of applicants are awarded SURFs. The program is open to both Caltech and non-Caltech undergraduate students. It serves as preparation for graduate school and helps to explain why Caltech has the highest percentage of alumni who go on to receive a PhD of all the major universities.

The licensing and transferring of technology to the commercial sector is managed by the Office of Technology Transfer (OTT). OTT protects and manages the intellectual property developed by faculty members, students, other researchers, and JPL technologists. Caltech receives more invention disclosures per faculty member than any other university in the nation. , 1891 patents were granted to Caltech researchers since 1969.

== Students ==
Caltech enrolled 987 undergraduate students and 1,410 graduate students for the 2021–2022 school year. Women made up 45% of the undergraduate and 33% of the graduate student body. The racial demographics of the school substantially differ from those of the nation as a whole.

The four-year graduation rate is 79% and the six-year rate is 92%, which is low compared to most leading U.S. universities, but substantially higher than it was in the 1960s and 1970s. Students majoring in STEM fields traditionally have graduation rates below 70%.

== Student life ==
=== House system ===
During the early 20th century, a Caltech committee visited several universities and decided to transform the undergraduate housing system from fraternities to a house system. Four South Houses (or &quot;Hovses&quot;, as styled in the stone engravings) were built: Blacker House, Dabney House, Fleming House and Ricketts House. In the 1960s, three North Houses were built: Lloyd House, Page House, and Ruddock House, and during the 1990s, Avery House. The four South Houses closed for renovation in 2005 and reopened in 2006. The latest addition to residential life at Caltech is Bechtel Residence, which opened in 2018. It is not affiliated with the house system. All first- and second-year students live on campus in the house system or in the Bechtel Residence.

On account of Albert B. Ruddock&#x27;s affiliation with the Human Betterment Foundation, in January 2021, the Caltech Board of Trustees authorized the removal of Ruddock&#x27;s name from campus buildings. Ruddock House was renamed as the Grant D. Venerable House.

=== Athletics ===

Caltech has athletic teams in baseball, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s basketball, cross country, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s soccer, swimming and diving, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s tennis, track and field, women&#x27;s volleyball, and men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s water polo. Caltech&#x27;s mascot is the Beaver, a homage to nature&#x27;s engineer. Its teams are members of the NCAA Division III and compete in the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC), which Caltech co-founded in 1915.

On January 6, 2007, the Beavers&#x27; men&#x27;s basketball team snapped a 207-game losing streak to Division III schools, beating Bard College 81–52. It was their first Division III victory since 1996.
Until their win over Occidental College on February 22, 2011 the team had not won a game in SCIAC play since 1985. Ryan Elmquist&#x27;s free throw with 3.3 seconds in regulation gave the Beavers the victory. The documentary film &quot;Quantum Hoops&quot; concerns the events of the Beavers&#x27; 2005–06 season.

On January 13, 2007, the Caltech women&#x27;s basketball team snapped a 50-game losing streak, defeating the Pomona-Pitzer Sagehens 55–53. The women&#x27;s program, which entered the SCIAC in 2002, garnered their first conference win. On the bench as honorary coach for the evening was Robert Grubbs, 2005 Nobel laureate in Chemistry. The team went on to beat Whittier College on February 10, for its second SCIAC win, and placed its first member on the All Conference team.

In 2007, 2008, and 2009, the women&#x27;s table tennis team (a club team) competed in nationals. The women&#x27;s Ultimate club team, known as &quot;Snatch&quot;, has also been very successful in recent years, ranking 44 of over 200 college teams in the Ultimate Player&#x27;s Association.

On February 2, 2013, the Caltech baseball team ended a 228-game losing streak, the team&#x27;s first win in nearly 10 years.

The track and field team&#x27;s home venue is at the South Athletic Field in Tournament Park, the site of the first eight Rose Bowl games.

The school also sponsored an intercollegiate football team from 1973 through 1977, and played part of its home schedule at the Rose Bowl.

=== Performing and visual arts ===
The Caltech/Occidental College Orchestra is a full seventy-piece orchestra composed of students, faculty, and staff at Caltech and nearby Occidental College. The orchestra gives three pairs of concerts annually, at both Caltech and Occidental College. There are also two Caltech Jazz Bands and a Concert Band, as well as an active chamber music program. For vocal music, Caltech has a mixed-voice Glee Club and the smaller Chamber Singers. The theater program at Caltech is known as TACIT, or Theater Arts at the California Institute of Technology. There are two to three plays organized by TACIT per year, and they were involved in the production of the PHD Movie, released in 2011.

=== Student life traditions ===
==== Annual events ====
Every Halloween, Dabney House conducts the infamous &quot;Millikan pumpkin-drop experiment&quot; from the top of Millikan Library, the highest point on campus. According to tradition, a claim was once made that the shattering of a pumpkin frozen in liquid nitrogen and dropped from a sufficient height would produce a triboluminescent spark. This yearly event involves a crowd of observers, who try to spot the elusive spark. The title of the event is an oblique reference to the famous Millikan oil-drop experiment which measured &quot;e&quot;, the elemental unit of electrical charge.

On Ditch Day, the seniors ditch school, leaving behind elaborately designed tasks and traps at the doors of their rooms to prevent underclassmen from entering. Over the years this has evolved to the point where many seniors spend months designing mechanical, electrical, and software obstacles to confound the underclassmen. Each group of seniors designs a &quot;stack&quot; to be solved by a handful of underclassmen. The faculty have been drawn into the event as well, and cancel all classes on Ditch Day so the underclassmen can participate in what has become a highlight of the academic year.

Another long-standing tradition is the playing of Wagner&#x27;s &quot;Ride of the Valkyries&quot; at 7:00 each morning during finals week with the largest, loudest speakers available. The playing of that piece is not allowed at any other time (except if one happens to be listening to the entire 14 hours and 5 minutes of &quot;The Ring Cycle&quot;), and any offender is dragged into the showers to be drenched in cold water fully dressed. 
==== Pranks ====
Caltech students have been known for their many pranks (also known as &quot;RFs&quot;).

The two most famous in recent history are the changing of the Hollywood Sign to read &quot;Caltech&quot;, by judiciously covering up certain parts of the letters, and the changing of the scoreboard to read Caltech 38, MIT 9 during the 1984 Rose Bowl Game. But the most famous of all occurred during the 1961 Rose Bowl Game, where Caltech students altered the flip-cards that were raised by the stadium attendees to display &quot;Caltech&quot;, and several other &quot;unintended&quot; messages. This event is now referred to as the Great Rose Bowl Hoax.

In recent years, pranking has been officially encouraged by Tom Mannion, Caltech&#x27;s Assistant VP for Student Affairs and Campus Life. &quot;The grand old days of pranking have gone away at Caltech, and that&#x27;s what we are trying to bring back,&quot; reported the &quot;Boston Globe&quot;.

In December 2011, Caltech students went to New York and pulled a prank in Manhattan&#x27;s Greenwich Village. The prank involved making The Cube sculpture look like the Aperture Science Weighted Companion Cube from the video game &quot;Portal&quot;.

Caltech pranks have been documented in three Legends of Caltech books, the most recent of which was edited by alumni Autumn Looijen &#x27;99 and Mason Porter &#x27;98 and published in May 2007.

===== Rivalry with MIT =====
In 2005, a group of Caltech students pulled a string of pranks during MIT&#x27;s Campus Preview Weekend for admitted students. These include covering up the word Massachusetts in the &quot;Massachusetts Institute of Technology&quot; engraving on the main building façade with a banner so that it read &quot;That Other Institute of Technology&quot;. A group of MIT hackers responded by altering the banner so that the inscription read &quot;The Only Institute of Technology.&quot; Caltech students also passed out T-shirts to MIT&#x27;s incoming freshman class that had MIT written on the front and &quot;...because not everyone can go to Caltech&quot; along with an image of a palm tree on the back.

MIT retaliated in April 2006, when students posing as the Howe &amp; Ser (Howitzer) Moving Company stole the 130-year-old, 1.7-ton Fleming House cannon and moved it over 3,000 miles to their campus in Cambridge, Massachusetts for their 2006 Campus Preview Weekend, repeating a similar prank performed by nearby Harvey Mudd College in 1986. Thirty members of Fleming House traveled to MIT and reclaimed their cannon on April 10, 2006.

On April 13, 2007 (Friday the 13th), a group of students from &quot;The California Tech&quot;, Caltech&#x27;s campus newspaper, arrived and distributed fake copies of &quot;The Tech&quot;, MIT&#x27;s campus newspaper, while prospective students were visiting for their Campus Preview Weekend. Articles included &quot;MIT Invents the Interweb&quot;, &quot;Architects Deem Campus &#x27;Unfortunate, and &quot;Infinite Corridor Not Actually Infinite&quot;.

In December 2009, some Caltech students declared that MIT had been sold and had become the Caltech East campus. A &quot;sold&quot; banner was hung on front of the MIT dome building and a &quot;Welcome to Caltech East: School of the Humanities&quot; banner over the Massachusetts Avenue Entrance. Newspapers and T-shirts were distributed, and door labels and fliers in the infinite corridor were put up in accordance with the &quot;curriculum change.&quot;

In September 2010, MIT students attempted to put a TARDIS, the time machine from the BBC&#x27;s &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, onto a roof. Caught in mid-act, the prank was aborted. In January 2011, Caltech students in conjunction with MIT students helped put the TARDIS on top of Baxter. Caltech students then moved the TARDIS to UC Berkeley and Stanford.

In April 2014, during MIT&#x27;s Campus Preview Weekend, a group of Caltech students handed out mugs emblazoned with the MIT logo on the front and the words &quot;The Institute of Technology&quot; on the back. When heated, the mugs turn orange, display a palm tree, and read &quot;Caltech The Hotter Institute of Technology.&quot; Identical mugs continue to be sold at the Caltech campus store.

==== Honor code ====
Life in the Caltech community is governed by the honor code, which simply states: &quot;No member of the Caltech community shall take unfair advantage of any other member of the Caltech community.&quot; This is enforced by a Board of Control, which consists of undergraduate students, and by a similar body at the graduate level, called the Graduate Honor Council.

The honor code aims at promoting an atmosphere of respect and trust that allows Caltech students to enjoy privileges that make for a more relaxed atmosphere. For example, the honor code allows professors to make the majority of exams as take-home, allowing students to take them on their own schedule and in their preferred environment.

Through the late 1990s, the only exception to the honor code, implemented earlier in the decade in response to changes in federal regulations, concerned the sexual harassment policy. Today, there are myriad exceptions to the honor code in the form of new Institute policies such as the fire policy and alcohol policy. Although both policies are presented in the Honor System Handbook given to new members of the Caltech community, some undergraduates regard them as a slight against the honor code and the implicit trust and respect it represents within the community. In recent years, the Student Affairs Office has also taken up pursuing investigations independently of the Board of Control and Conduct Review Committee, an implicit violation of both the honor code and written disciplinary policy that has contributed to further erosion of trust between some parts of the undergraduate community and the administration.

== Notable people ==
As of October 2024, Caltech has 47 Nobel laureates to its name awarded to 26 alumni, 4 postdocs, and 17 non-alumni professors. The 26 alumni include five Caltech professors (Carl D. Anderson, Linus Pauling, William A. Fowler, Edward B. Lewis, and Kip Thorne). Among the 17 non-alumni professors, 14 were in residence at Caltech at the time of the award; David Baltimore, who shared the Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1975, became Caltech President in 1997; Renato Dulbecco, who shared the Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1975, credited his Prize to the time he had spent at Caltech; John Hopfield, who won the Prize in Physics in 2024, is the Dickinson Professor Emeritus at Caltech. The total number of Nobel Prizes is 48 because Pauling received prizes in both Chemistry and Peace. Eight faculty and alumni have received a Crafoord Prize from the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, while 58 have been awarded the U.S. National Medal of Science, and 11 have received the National Medal of Technology. One alumnus, Stanislav Smirnov, won the Fields Medal in 2010. Other distinguished researchers have been affiliated with Caltech as postdoctoral scholars (for example, Barbara McClintock, James D. Watson, Sheldon Glashow and John Gurdon) or visiting professors (for example, Albert Einstein, Stephen Hawking and Edward Witten).

=== Alumni ===
There are 22,930 total living alumni in the U.S. and around the world. As of October 2022, 30 alumni and 16 non-alumni faculty have won the Nobel Prize. The Turing Award, the &quot;Nobel Prize of Computer Science&quot;, has been awarded to six alumni, and one has won the Fields Medal.

Many alumni have participated in scientific research. Some have concentrated their studies on the very small universe of atoms and molecules. Nobel laureate Carl D. Anderson (BS 1927, PhD 1930) proved the existence of positrons and muons, Nobel laureate Edwin McMillan (BS 1928, MS 1929) synthesized the first transuranium element, Nobel laureate Leo James Rainwater (BS 1939) investigated the non-spherical shapes of atomic nuclei, and Nobel laureate Douglas D. Osheroff (BS 1967) studied the superfluid nature of helium-3. Donald Knuth (PhD 1963), the &quot;father&quot; of the analysis of algorithms, wrote &quot;The Art of Computer Programming&quot; and created the TeX computer typesetting system, which is commonly used in the scientific community. Bruce Reznick (BS 1973) is a mathematician noted for his contributions to number theory and the combinatorial-algebraic-analytic investigations of polynomials. Narendra Karmarkar (MS 1979) is known for the interior point method, a polynomial algorithm for linear programming known as Karmarkar&#x27;s algorithm.

Other alumni have turned their gaze to the universe. C. Gordon Fullerton (BS 1957, MS 1958) piloted the third Space Shuttle mission. Astronaut (and later, United States Senator) Harrison Schmitt (BS 1957) was the only geologist to have walked on the surface of the Moon. Astronomer Eugene Merle Shoemaker (BS 1947, MS 1948) co-discovered Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9 (a comet which crashed into the planet Jupiter) and was the first person buried on the Moon (by having his ashes crashed into the Moon). Astronomer George O. Abell (BS 1951, MS 1952, PhD 1957) while a grad student at Caltech participated in the National Geographic Society-Palomar Sky Survey. This ultimately resulted in the publication of the &quot;Abell Catalogue of Clusters of Galaxies,&quot; the definitive work in the field.

Undergraduate alumni founded, or co-founded, companies such as LCD manufacturer Varitronix, Hotmail, Compaq, MathWorks (which created Matlab), and database provider Imply, while graduate students founded, or co-founded, companies such as Intel, TRW, and the non-profit educational organization, the Exploratorium.

Arnold Beckman (PhD 1928) invented the pH meter and commercialized it with the founding of Beckman Instruments. His success with that company enabled him to provide seed funding for William Shockley (BS 1932), who had co-invented semiconductor transistors and wanted to commercialize them. Shockley became the founding Director of the Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory division of Beckman Instruments. Shockley had previously worked at Bell Labs, whose first president was another alumnus, Frank Jewett (BS 1898). Because his aging mother lived in Palo Alto, California, Shockley established his laboratory near her in Mountain View, California. Shockley was a co-recipient of the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1956, but his aggressive management style and odd personality at the Shockley Lab became unbearable. In late 1957, eight of his researchers resigned and with support from Sherman Fairchild formed Fairchild Semiconductor. Among the &quot;traitorous eight&quot; was Gordon E. Moore (PhD 1954), who later left Fairchild to co-found Intel. Other offspring companies of Fairchild Semiconductor include National Semiconductor and Advanced Micro Devices, which in turn spawned more technology companies in the area. Shockley&#x27;s decision to use silicon instead of germanium as the semiconductor material, coupled with the abundance of silicon semiconductor related companies in the area, gave rise to the term &quot;Silicon Valley&quot; to describe that geographic region surrounding Palo Alto.

Caltech alumni also held public offices, with Mustafa A.G. Abushagur (PhD 1984) the Deputy Prime Minister of Libya and Prime Minister-Elect of Libya, James Fletcher (PhD 1948) the 4th and 7th Administrator of NASA, Steven Koonin (PhD 1972) the Undersecretary of Energy for Science, and Regina Dugan (PhD 1993) the 19th director of DARPA. The 20th director for DARPA, Arati Prabhakar, is also a Caltech alumna (PhD 1984) as well as Charles Elachi (Phd 1971), former director of the Jet Propulsion Lab. Arvind Virmani is a former Chief Economic Adviser to the Government of India. In 2013, President Obama announced the nomination of France Cordova (PhD 1979) as the director of the National Science Foundation and Ellen Williams (PhD 1982) as the director for ARPA-E.

=== Faculty and staff ===
Richard Feynman was among the most well-known physicists associated with Caltech, having published the &quot;Feynman Lectures on Physics&quot;, an undergraduate physics text, and popular science texts such as &quot;Six Easy Pieces&quot; for the general audience. The promotion of physics made him a public figure of science, although his Nobel-winning work in quantum electrodynamics was already very established in the scientific community. Murray Gell-Mann, a Nobel-winning physicist, introduced a classification of hadrons and went on to postulate the existence of quarks, which is currently accepted as part of the Standard Model. Long-time Caltech President Robert Andrews Millikan was the first to calculate the charge of the electron with his well-known oil-drop experiment, while Richard Chace Tolman is remembered for his contributions to cosmology and statistical mechanics. 2004 Nobel Prize in Physics winner H. David Politzer is a current professor at Caltech, as is astrophysicist and author Kip Thorne and eminent mathematician Barry Simon. Linus Pauling pioneered quantum chemistry and molecular biology, and went on to discover the nature of the chemical bond in 1939. Seismologist Charles Richter, also an alumnus, developed the magnitude scale that bears his name, the Richter magnitude scale for measuring the power of earthquakes. One of the founders of the geochemistry department, Clair Patterson was the first to accurately determine the age of the Earth via lead:uranium ratio in meteorites. In engineering, Theodore von Kármán made many key advances in aerodynamics, notably his work on supersonic and hypersonic airflow characterization. A repeating pattern of swirling vortices is named after him, the von Kármán vortex street. Participants in von Kármán&#x27;s GALCIT project included Frank Malina, who helped develop the WAC Corporal, which was the first U.S. rocket to reach the edge of space, Jack Parsons, a pioneer in the development of liquid and solid rocket fuels who designed the first castable composite-based rocket motor, and Qian Xuesen, who was dubbed the &quot;Father of Chinese Rocketry&quot;. More recently, Michael Brown, a professor of planetary astronomy, discovered many trans-Neptunian objects, most notably the dwarf planet Eris, which prompted the International Astronomical Union to redefine the term &quot;planet&quot;.

David Baltimore, the Robert A. Millikan Professor of Biology, and Alice Huang, Senior Faculty Associate in Biology, served as the presidents of AAAS from 2007 to 2008 and 2010 to 2011, respectively.

33% of the faculty are members of the National Academy of Sciences or Engineering and/or fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. This is the highest percentage of any faculty in the country with the exception of the graduate institution Rockefeller University.

The average salary for assistant professors at Caltech is $111,300, associate professors $121,300, and full professors $172,800. Caltech faculty are active in applied physics, astronomy and astrophysics, biology, biochemistry, biological engineering, chemical engineering, computer science, geology, mechanical engineering, and physics.

==== Presidents ====
*James Augustin Brown Scherer (1908–1920) (president of Throop College of Technology before the name change)
*Robert A. Millikan (1921–1945), experimental physicist, Nobel laureate in physics for 1923 (his official title was &quot;Chairman of the Executive Council&quot;)
*Lee A. DuBridge (1946–1969), experimental physicist (first to officially hold the title of President)
*Harold Brown (1969–1977), physicist and public servant (left Caltech to serve as United States Secretary of Defense in the administration of Jimmy Carter)
*Robert F. Christy (1977–1978), astrophysicist (acting president)
*Marvin L. Goldberger (1978–1987), theoretical physicist (left to serve as Director of Institute for Advanced Study)
*Thomas E. Everhart (1987–1997), experimental physicist
*David Baltimore (1997–2006), molecular biologist, Nobel laureate in Physiology or Medicine for 1975
*Jean-Lou Chameau (2006–2013), civil engineer and educational administrator (left to serve as president of King Abdullah University of Science and Technology)
*Thomas F. Rosenbaum (2014–), condensed matter physicist and administrator

== Caltech startups ==
Over the years Caltech has actively promoted the commercialization of technologies developed within its walls. Through its Office of Technology Transfer &amp; Corporate Partnerships, scientific breakthroughs have led to the transfer of numerous technologies in a wide variety of scientific-related fields such as photovoltaic, radio-frequency identification (RFID), semiconductors, hyperspectral imaging, electronic devices, protein design, solid state amplifiers and many more. Companies such as Quora, Contour Energy Systems, Impinj, Fulcrum Microsystems, Nanosys, Inc., Photon etc., Xencor, and Wavestream Wireless have emerged from Caltech.

== In media and popular culture ==

Caltech has appeared in many works of popular culture, both as itself and in disguised form. On television, it played a prominent role and was the workplace of all four male lead characters and one female lead character in the sitcom &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot;. Caltech is also the inspiration, and frequent film location, for the California Institute of Science in &quot;Numb3rs&quot;. On film, the Pacific Tech of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; and &quot;Real Genius&quot; is based on Caltech.

In nonfiction, two 2007 documentaries examine aspects of Caltech: &quot;Curious&quot;, its researchers, and &quot;Quantum Hoops&quot;, its men&#x27;s basketball team.

Caltech is also prominently featured in many comics and television series by Marvel Entertainment. In Marvel Comics, the university serves as the alma mater of Hulk, Mister Fantastic, Bill Foster (Black Goliath), and Madman. In the Marvel Cinematic Universe, Bruno Carrelli (Kamala Khan&#x27;s best friend and love interest) attends Caltech in the miniseries &quot;Ms. Marvel&quot;.

Given its Los Angeles-area location, the grounds of the Institute are often host to short scenes in movies and television. The Athenaeum dining club appears in the &quot;Beverly Hills Cop&quot; series, &quot;The X-Files&quot;, &quot;True Romance&quot;, and &quot;The West Wing&quot;.
== See also ==

* Engineering education
* US-China University Presidents Roundtable

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="4" end="38" title="California Institute of Technology" label="California Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="50" end="57" title="California Institute of Technology" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q902104" start="64" end="71" title="private university" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q15936437" start="72" end="91" title="research university" label="research university"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="95" end="115" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040928" start="232" end="277" title="Institute of Technology (United States)" label="institutes of technology in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747874" start="416" end="430" title="Amos G. Throop" label="Amos G. Throop"/>
<link wikidata="Q312288" start="491" end="509" title="George Ellery Hale" label="George Ellery Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q561905" start="511" end="528" title="Arthur Amos Noyes" label="Arthur Amos Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975" start="534" end="557" title="Robert Andrews Millikan" label="Robert Andrews Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="747" end="783" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="808" end="812" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="820" end="845" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q164384" start="939" end="958" title="Theodore von Kármán" label="Theodore von Kármán"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="1155" end="1175" title="downtown Los Angeles" label="downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913801" start="1292" end="1317" title="House System at Caltech" label="housing system at Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1391" end="1413" title="Final examination#Take-home finals" label="take-home examinations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1419" end="1434" title="#Athletics" label="Caltech Beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="1479" end="1483" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="1484" end="1496" title="NCAA Division III" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="1504" end="1559" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q15706425" start="1730" end="1744" title="space research" label="space research"/>
<link wikidata="Q442321" start="1746" end="1768" title="sustainability science" label="sustainability science"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="1770" end="1785" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q83371" start="1791" end="1801" title="seismology" label="seismology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635881" start="1815" end="1871" title="List of Nobel laureates affiliated with California Institute of Technology" label="79 Nobel laureates who have been affiliated with Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="2028" end="2041" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="2124" end="2149" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="2165" end="2182" title="MacArthur Fellows Program" label="MacArthur Fellows"/>
<link wikidata="Q937629" start="2187" end="2230" title="National Medal of Technology and Innovation" label="National Medal of Technology and Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="2246" end="2256" title="Astronaut" label="astronauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19817711" start="2260" end="2293" title="Science Advisor to the President" label="Science Advisors to the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="2297" end="2309" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="2321" end="2333" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085297" start="2477" end="2489" title="Old Pasadena" label="Old Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429876" start="2493" end="2509" title="Fair Oaks Avenue (Pasadena, California)" label="Fair Oaks Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747874" start="2589" end="2603" title="Amos G. Throop" label="Amos G. Throop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227035" start="2897" end="2915" title="Polytechnic School" label="Polytechnic School"/>
<link wikidata="Q312288" start="3008" end="3026" title="George Ellery Hale" label="George Ellery Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="3036" end="3046" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="3056" end="3077" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="3091" end="3115" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128972" start="3328" end="3347" title="James Augustin Brown Scherer" label="James A. B. Scherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="3774" end="3792" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="4130" end="4142" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084210" start="4484" end="4506" title="California Legislature" label="California Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="4781" end="4800" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="4809" end="4843" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="5161" end="5177" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q561905" start="5178" end="5195" title="Arthur Amos Noyes" label="Arthur Amos Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="5201" end="5204" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5321" end="5332" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="5353" end="5378" title="United States National Research Council" label="National Research Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="5745" end="5763" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="6669" end="6678" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975" start="6679" end="6702" title="Robert Andrews Millikan" label="Robert Andrews Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="6712" end="6733" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q312288" start="6934" end="6938" title="George Ellery Hale" label="Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q561905" start="6940" end="6945" title="Arthur Amos Noyes" label="Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975" start="6951" end="6959" title="Robert Andrews Millikan" label="Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="6993" end="7012" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="7806" end="7828" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15504618" start="7896" end="7917" title="William Bennett Munro" label="William Bennett Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="7990" end="8008" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="8034" end="8044" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="8049" end="8063" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="8100" end="8107" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q177681" start="8148" end="8166" title="Thomas Hunt Morgan" label="Thomas Hunt Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="8279" end="8289" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393748" start="8312" end="8339" title="Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory" label="Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q101964314" start="8402" end="8419" title="George MacGinitie" label="George MacGinitie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="8451" end="8462" title="aeronautics" label="aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q164384" start="8503" end="8522" title="Theodore von Kármán" label="Theodore von Kármán"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="8673" end="8687" title="rocket" label="rocket science"/>
<link wikidata="Q191684" start="8718" end="8737" title="Palomar Observatory" label="Palomar Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="9113" end="9123" title="Paul Dirac" label="Paul Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q9130" start="9125" end="9142" title="Erwin Schrödinger" label="Erwin Schrödinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q40904" start="9144" end="9161" title="Werner Heisenberg" label="Werner Heisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q41688" start="9163" end="9178" title="Hendrik Lorentz" label="Hendrik Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="9183" end="9193" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="9195" end="9210" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q11452" start="9285" end="9313" title="Theory of General Relativity" label="Theory of General Relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905616" start="9501" end="9535" title="V-12 Navy College Training Program" label="V-12 Navy College Training Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="9592" end="9610" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="9655" end="9679" title="aeronautical engineering" label="aeronautical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q501421" start="9763" end="9798" title="National Defense Research Committee" label="National Defense Research Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q132537" start="9866" end="9887" title="J. Robert Oppenheimer" label="J. Robert Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q714440" start="9889" end="9903" title="Richard C. Tolman" label="Richard Tolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349434" start="9909" end="9922" title="Robert Bacher" label="Robert Bacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="9949" end="9966" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000934" start="10129" end="10146" title="Charles Lauritsen" label="Charles Lauritsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188163" start="10222" end="10229" title="Fat Man" label="Fat Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q207342" start="10261" end="10273" title="Trinity (nuclear test)" label="Trinity Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="10293" end="10312" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="bombing of Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014558" start="10465" end="10492" title="Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake" label="Naval Ordnance Test Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q256695" start="10503" end="10523" title="Inyokern, California" label="Inyokern, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="10534" end="10547" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381324" start="10674" end="10703" title="High Velocity Aircraft Rocket" label="High-Velocity Aircraft Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381324" start="10733" end="10743" title="Holy Moses (rocket)" label="Holy Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208295" start="11037" end="11050" title="Project Camel" label="Project Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="11200" end="11204" title="Boeing B-29 Superfortress" label="B-29"/>
<link wikidata="Q28104124" start="11345" end="11367" title="Salt Wells Pilot Plant" label="Salt Wells Pilot Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="11486" end="11496" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425748" start="11646" end="11662" title="Thomas Lauritsen" label="Thomas Lauritsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39470" start="11769" end="11777" title="Tiny Tim (rocket)" label="Tiny Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q44169" start="11798" end="11810" title="Folding-Fin Aerial Rocket" label="Mighty Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906424" start="11988" end="12006" title="Bureau of Ordnance" label="Bureau of Ordnance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30632392" start="12197" end="12210" title="Project Vista" label="Project Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q465298" start="12902" end="12917" title="Lee Alvin DuBridge" label="Lee A. DuBridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q46120" start="12919" end="12936" title="William Alfred Fowler" label="William A. Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q172840" start="13380" end="13396" title="Murray Gell-Mann" label="Murray Gell-Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="13401" end="13416" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="13469" end="13483" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q465298" start="13641" end="13656" title="Lee A. DuBridge" label="Lee A. DuBridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683443" start="13819" end="13834" title="federal funding" label="federal funding"/>
<link wikidata="Q731154" start="13889" end="13905" title="chemical biology" label="chemical biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q104499" start="13907" end="13924" title="planetary science" label="planetary science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579918" start="13926" end="13946" title="nuclear astrophysics" label="nuclear astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="13952" end="13964" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471197" start="13968" end="13986" title="Hale Telescope" label="200-inch telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q552916" start="14196" end="14208" title="Harold Brown (Secretary of Defense)" label="Harold Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="14415" end="14418" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14487" end="14496" title="Star Trek: The Original Series" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913801" start="14531" end="14543" title="Dabney House" label="Dabney House"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="14634" end="14647" title="Watergate scandal" label="Impeach Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349792" start="14994" end="15017" title="Einstein Papers Project" label="Einstein Papers Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133630" start="15590" end="15627" title="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969203" start="15652" end="15664" title="Nathan Lewis (chemist)" label="Nathan Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="15680" end="15683" title="United States Department of Energy" label="DOE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15684" end="15705" title="United States Department of Energy#Energy Innovation Hubs" label="Energy Innovation Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6269121" start="15804" end="15846" title="Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis" label="Joint Center for Artificial Photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q967853" start="15968" end="15994" title="massive open online course" label="massive open online course"/>
<link wikidata="Q499962" start="16010" end="16018" title="Coursera" label="Coursera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106448" start="16031" end="16034" title="edX" label="edX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463036" start="16183" end="16233" title="King Abdullah University of Science and Technology" label="King Abdullah University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789544" start="16235" end="16254" title="Thomas Felix Rosenbaum" label="Thomas F. Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360876" start="16468" end="16489" title="The Wonderful Company" label="The Wonderful Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q187955" start="16786" end="16813" title="Human Betterment Foundation" label="Human Betterment Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="17073" end="17093" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q995043" start="17122" end="17142" title="downtown Los Angeles" label="downtown Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085297" start="17177" end="17194" title="Old Town Pasadena" label="Old Town Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q124477039" start="17203" end="17230" title="Playhouse District, Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena Playhouse District"/>
<link wikidata="Q325325" start="17337" end="17352" title="Bertram Goodhue" label="Bertram Goodhue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895577" start="17727" end="17755" title="Architecture of the California Missions" label="Spanish mission architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q695886" start="17885" end="17902" title="Arnold O. Beckman" label="Arnold O. Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q234949" start="18065" end="18080" title="David Baltimore" label="David Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q912835" start="18183" end="18207" title="1971 San Fernando earthquake" label="magnitude-6.6 earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q846406" start="18211" end="18223" title="San Fernando, California" label="San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750541" start="18545" end="18551" title="Walter Annenberg" label="Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3830643" start="18556" end="18573" title="Leonore Annenberg" label="Leonore Annenberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18805" end="18817" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#South Houses" label="South Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="18868" end="18879" title="solar array" label="solar array"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="19074" end="19091" title="Board of directors" label="board of trustees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789544" start="19462" end="19481" title="Thomas Felix Rosenbaum" label="Thomas F. Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="21026" end="21051" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067877" start="21063" end="21111" title="federally funded research and development center" label="federally funded research and development center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="21129" end="21133" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814260" start="21681" end="21700" title="United Auto Workers" label="United Auto Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="21776" end="21806" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987478" start="22373" end="22416" title="Western Association of Schools and Colleges" label="Western Association of Schools and Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269240" start="22447" end="22461" title="academic term" label="quarter system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="22770" end="22818" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="22820" end="22848" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="22854" end="22892" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="22916" end="22944" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="23638" end="23641" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q288826" start="23758" end="23761" title="ACT (test)" label="ACT"/>
<link wikidata="Q936700" start="24253" end="24263" title="need-blind" label="need-blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q753877" start="27583" end="27591" title="homework" label="homework"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272069" start="27765" end="27793" title="Art Center College of Design" label="Art Center College of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346110" start="27798" end="27816" title="Occidental College" label="Occidental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156560" start="27834" end="27842" title="PayScale" label="PayScale"/>
<link wikidata="Q489983" start="28161" end="28165" title="ROTC" label="ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="28190" end="28223" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119822" start="30517" end="30581" title="Keck School of Medicine of USC" label="Keck School of Medicine of the University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q842165" start="30587" end="30623" title="UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine" label="UCLA David Geffen School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850872" start="30633" end="30686" title="Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine" label="Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="30784" end="30787" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="30789" end="30793" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850872" start="30798" end="30803" title="Kaiser Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine" label="KPSOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223026" start="31522" end="31532" title="Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education" label="classified"/>
<link wikidata="Q743812" start="31635" end="31671" title="Association of American Universities" label="Association of American Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881523" start="31773" end="31784" title="STEM fields" label="STEM fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="32018" end="32022" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="32024" end="32051" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="32053" end="32092" title="United States Department of Health and Human Services" label="Department of Health and Human Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="32094" end="32115" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="32121" end="32141" title="United States Department of Energy" label="Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="32520" end="32547" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191684" start="32953" end="32972" title="Palomar Observatory" label="Palomar Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q108143" start="32976" end="32992" title="San Diego County, California" label="San Diego County"/>
<link wikidata="Q174540" start="32998" end="33028" title="Owens Valley Radio Observatory" label="Owens Valley Radio Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q852658" start="33032" end="33050" title="Bishop, California" label="Bishop, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027482" start="33056" end="33081" title="Caltech Submillimeter Observatory" label="Submillimeter Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q210997" start="33086" end="33108" title="W. M. Keck Observatory" label="W. M. Keck Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q831790" start="33116" end="33137" title="Mauna Kea Observatory" label="Mauna Kea Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q255371" start="33143" end="33194" title="LIGO" label="Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177827" start="33198" end="33219" title="Livingston, Louisiana" label="Livingston, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q693638" start="33224" end="33244" title="Richland, Washington" label="Richland, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6393748" start="33250" end="33277" title="Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory" label="Kerckhoff Marine Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q947273" start="33281" end="33307" title="Corona del Mar, California" label="Corona del Mar, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382472" start="33388" end="33420" title="Keck Institute for Space Studies" label="Keck Institute for Space Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349792" start="33467" end="33490" title="Einstein Papers Project" label="Einstein Papers Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343709" start="33538" end="33577" title="Infrared Processing and Analysis Center" label="Infrared Processing and Analysis Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="33663" end="33667" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201953" start="33675" end="33698" title="Spitzer Space Telescope" label="Spitzer Space Telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="33724" end="33728" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827982" start="34031" end="34036" title="Total Carbon Column Observing Network" label="TCCON"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061910" start="34930" end="34949" title="Technology Transfer" label="Technology Transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881523" start="35756" end="35767" title="STEM fields" label="STEM fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="35999" end="36011" title="fraternities and sororities" label="fraternities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680291" start="36017" end="36029" title="residential college" label="house system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36120" end="36133" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#Blacker House" label="Blacker House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36135" end="36147" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#Dabney House" label="Dabney House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36149" end="36162" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#Fleming House" label="Fleming House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36167" end="36181" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#Ricketts House" label="Ricketts House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36228" end="36239" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#Lloyd House" label="Lloyd House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5913801" start="36241" end="36251" title="Page House (Caltech)" label="Page House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36257" end="36270" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#Ruddock House" label="Ruddock House"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36294" end="36305" title="House System at the California Institute of Technology#Avery House" label="Avery House"/>
<link wikidata="Q187955" start="36681" end="36708" title="Human Betterment Foundation" label="Human Betterment Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="37281" end="37285" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="37286" end="37298" title="NCAA Division III" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569720" start="37318" end="37373" title="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference" label="Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q49109" start="37549" end="37561" title="Bard College" label="Bard College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346110" start="37642" end="37660" title="Occidental College" label="Occidental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268986" start="37856" end="37869" title="Quantum Hoops" label="Quantum Hoops"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227384" start="38043" end="38049" title="Pomona College" label="Pomona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199570" start="38050" end="38056" title="Pitzer College" label="Pitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q56291680" start="38057" end="38065" title="Pomona-Pitzer Sagehens" label="Sagehens"/>
<link wikidata="Q202140" start="38220" end="38233" title="Robert Grubbs" label="Robert Grubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996868" start="38294" end="38310" title="Whittier College" label="Whittier College"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="38524" end="38532" title="Ultimate (sport)" label="Ultimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829298" start="38904" end="38919" title="Tournament Park" label="Tournament Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q543429" start="38949" end="38958" title="Rose Bowl Game" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="39012" end="39020" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q582280" start="39094" end="39103" title="Rose Bowl (stadium)" label="Rose Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346110" start="39153" end="39171" title="Occidental College" label="Occidental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616945" start="39538" end="39547" title="Glee Club" label="Glee Club"/>
<link wikidata="" start="39796" end="39805" title="PHD Comics#Piled Higher and Deeper: the Movie" label="PHD Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="39888" end="39897" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139370" start="40131" end="40146" title="liquid nitrogen" label="liquid nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q682321" start="40200" end="40216" title="triboluminescence" label="triboluminescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q649803" start="40369" end="40397" title="oil-drop experiment" label="Millikan oil-drop experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101" start="40432" end="40467" title="elementary charge" label="elemental unit of electrical charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464243" start="41138" end="41159" title="Ride of the Valkyries" label="Ride of the Valkyries"/>
<link wikidata="Q190237" start="41396" end="41410" title="The Ring Cycle" label="The Ring Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q931092" start="41574" end="41579" title="Student prank" label="prank"/>
<link wikidata="Q180376" start="41677" end="41691" title="Hollywood Sign" label="Hollywood Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581847" start="41850" end="41869" title="1984 Rose Bowl" label="1984 Rose Bowl Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570450" start="41918" end="41937" title="1961 Rose Bowl" label="1961 Rose Bowl Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599894" start="42147" end="42167" title="Great Rose Bowl Hoax" label="Great Rose Bowl Hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q205380" start="42559" end="42576" title="Greenwich Village" label="Greenwich Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705940" start="42604" end="42612" title="Alamo (sculpture)" label="The Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231475" start="42637" end="42653" title="Aperture Science" label="Aperture Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q274897" start="42704" end="42710" title="Portal (video game)" label="Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29566734" start="42864" end="42876" title="Mason Porter" label="Mason Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637391" start="43303" end="43314" title="Hacks at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="MIT hackers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12236173" start="43955" end="43974" title="Harvey Mudd College" label="Harvey Mudd College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029752" start="44486" end="44503" title="Infinite Corridor" label="Infinite Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35684" start="45042" end="45048" title="TARDIS" label="TARDIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="45093" end="45103" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="45315" end="45326" title="UC Berkeley" label="UC Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="45331" end="45339" title="Stanford" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300162" start="45808" end="45818" title="academic honor code" label="honor code"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="47443" end="47458" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q169366" start="47582" end="47598" title="Carl D. Anderson" label="Carl D. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="47600" end="47613" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q46120" start="47615" end="47632" title="William A. Fowler" label="William A. Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q274123" start="47634" end="47649" title="Edward B. Lewis" label="Edward B. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q323320" start="47655" end="47665" title="Kip Thorne" label="Kip Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q234949" start="47762" end="47777" title="David Baltimore" label="David Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q109553" start="47869" end="47884" title="Renato Dulbecco" label="Renato Dulbecco"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="48178" end="48187" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="48192" end="48197" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q583069" start="48240" end="48254" title="Crafoord Prize" label="Crafoord Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="48264" end="48297" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q737051" start="48335" end="48360" title="National Medal of Science" label="National Medal of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q937629" start="48387" end="48415" title="National Medal of Technology" label="National Medal of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q333948" start="48430" end="48447" title="Stanislav Smirnov" label="Stanislav Smirnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="48457" end="48469" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q199654" start="48584" end="48602" title="Barbara McClintock" label="Barbara McClintock"/>
<link wikidata="Q83333" start="48604" end="48619" title="James D. Watson" label="James D. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q107420" start="48621" end="48636" title="Sheldon Glashow" label="Sheldon Glashow"/>
<link wikidata="Q81218" start="48641" end="48652" title="John Gurdon" label="John Gurdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="48691" end="48706" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q17714" start="48708" end="48723" title="Stephen Hawking" label="Stephen Hawking"/>
<link wikidata="Q201513" start="48728" end="48741" title="Edward Witten" label="Edward Witten"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="48917" end="48929" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q28835" start="49032" end="49044" title="Fields Medal" label="Fields Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="49189" end="49203" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q169366" start="49204" end="49220" title="Carl D. Anderson" label="Carl D. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229" start="49265" end="49273" title="positron" label="positron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151" start="49279" end="49283" title="muon" label="muon"/>
<link wikidata="Q19009" start="49301" end="49315" title="Edwin McMillan" label="Edwin McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q106844" start="49357" end="49377" title="transuranium element" label="transuranium element"/>
<link wikidata="Q190745" start="49394" end="49413" title="Leo James Rainwater" label="Leo James Rainwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q206405" start="49499" end="49518" title="Douglas D. Osheroff" label="Douglas D. Osheroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q106667" start="49541" end="49551" title="superfluid" label="superfluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q533498" start="49562" end="49570" title="helium-3" label="helium-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q17457" start="49572" end="49584" title="Donald Knuth" label="Donald Knuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q333464" start="49627" end="49649" title="analysis of algorithms" label="analysis of algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q82438" start="49663" end="49694" title="The Art of Computer Programming" label="The Art of Computer Programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="49717" end="49720" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q65115183" start="49802" end="49815" title="Bruce Reznick" label="Bruce Reznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="49876" end="49889" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q29664" start="49962" end="49980" title="Narendra Karmarkar" label="Narendra Karmarkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246305" start="50086" end="50112" title="Karmarkar&amp;#x27;s algorithm" label="Karmarkar&amp;#x27;s algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q519268" start="50168" end="50187" title="C. Gordon Fullerton" label="C. Gordon Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q48806" start="50225" end="50238" title="Space Shuttle" label="Space Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="50270" end="50291" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q108886" start="50293" end="50309" title="Harrison Schmitt" label="Harrison Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q216874" start="50397" end="50419" title="Eugene Merle Shoemaker" label="Eugene Merle Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076" start="50453" end="50475" title="Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9" label="Comet Shoemaker-Levy 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="50515" end="50522" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="50971" end="50974" title="LCD" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q219136" start="51000" end="51007" title="Hotmail" label="Hotmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q324603" start="51009" end="51015" title="Compaq" label="Compaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518683" start="51017" end="51026" title="MathWorks" label="MathWorks"/>
<link wikidata="Q169478" start="51042" end="51048" title="Matlab" label="Matlab"/>
<link wikidata="Q25831373" start="51073" end="51078" title="Imply Data" label="Imply"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="51146" end="51151" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q967620" start="51153" end="51156" title="TRW Inc." label="TRW"/>
<link wikidata="Q206518" start="51207" end="51220" title="Exploratorium" label="Exploratorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q695886" start="51223" end="51237" title="Arnold Orville Beckman" label="Arnold Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q300965" start="51262" end="51270" title="pH meter" label="pH meter"/>
<link wikidata="Q479952" start="51314" end="51333" title="Beckman Instruments" label="Beckman Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q163415" start="51405" end="51421" title="William Shockley" label="William Shockley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="51453" end="51466" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339" start="51467" end="51477" title="transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138021" start="51558" end="51591" title="Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory" label="Shockley Semiconductor Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="51659" end="51668" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397394" start="51713" end="51725" title="Frank B. Jewett" label="Frank Jewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q47265" start="51771" end="51792" title="Palo Alto, California" label="Palo Alto, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q486860" start="51842" end="51867" title="Mountain View, California" label="Mountain View, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="51904" end="51926" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528185" start="52101" end="52118" title="Sherman Fairchild" label="Sherman Fairchild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="52126" end="52149" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883987" start="52167" end="52183" title="traitorous eight" label="traitorous eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q243969" start="52194" end="52209" title="Gordon E. Moore" label="Gordon E. Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="52259" end="52264" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q432492" start="52327" end="52349" title="National Semiconductor" label="National Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="52354" end="52376" title="Advanced Micro Devices" label="Advanced Micro Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="52471" end="52478" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="52490" end="52499" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="52507" end="52520" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="52642" end="52656" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q57904" start="52768" end="52790" title="Mustafa A.G. Abushagur" label="Mustafa A.G. Abushagur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="52831" end="52836" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="52865" end="52870" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q976129" start="52872" end="52886" title="James C. Fletcher" label="James Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q358841" start="52914" end="52935" title="Administrator of NASA" label="Administrator of NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456085" start="52937" end="52950" title="Steven E. Koonin" label="Steven Koonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883170" start="52966" end="53002" title="Under Secretary of Energy for Science" label="Undersecretary of Energy for Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709949" start="53008" end="53020" title="Regina E. Dugan" label="Regina Dugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="53053" end="53058" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784423" start="53089" end="53104" title="Arati Prabhakar" label="Arati Prabhakar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950678" start="53153" end="53167" title="Charles Elachi" label="Charles Elachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802510" start="53223" end="53237" title="Arvind Virmani" label="Arvind Virmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096720" start="53250" end="53299" title="Chief Economic Adviser to the Government of India" label="Chief Economic Adviser to the Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478265" start="53354" end="53368" title="France Cordova" label="France Cordova"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="53403" end="53430" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072757" start="53481" end="53487" title="ARPA-E" label="ARPA-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q39246" start="53516" end="53531" title="Richard Feynman" label="Richard Feynman"/>
<link wikidata="Q682339" start="53625" end="53652" title="Feynman Lectures on Physics" label="Feynman Lectures on Physics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53731" end="53746" title="Six Easy Pieces#Six Easy Pieces (1994)" label="Six Easy Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q234881" start="53876" end="53899" title="quantum electrodynamics" label="quantum electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172840" start="53958" end="53974" title="Murray Gell-Mann" label="Murray Gell-Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q101667" start="54034" end="54040" title="hadron" label="hadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718" start="54084" end="54089" title="quark" label="quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="54135" end="54149" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975" start="54179" end="54202" title="Robert Andrews Millikan" label="Robert Andrews Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="54248" end="54256" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q649803" start="54277" end="54296" title="oil-drop experiment" label="oil-drop experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q714440" start="54304" end="54324" title="Richard Chace Tolman" label="Richard Chace Tolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="54364" end="54373" title="cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="54378" end="54399" title="statistical mechanics" label="statistical mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38104" start="54406" end="54428" title="Nobel Prize in Physics" label="Nobel Prize in Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q107407" start="54436" end="54453" title="H. David Politzer" label="H. David Politzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q323320" start="54521" end="54531" title="Kip Thorne" label="Kip Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q370126" start="54558" end="54569" title="Barry Simon" label="Barry Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="54571" end="54584" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q188403" start="54595" end="54612" title="quantum chemistry" label="quantum chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="54617" end="54634" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q184014" start="54714" end="54729" title="Charles Richter" label="Charles Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q38768" start="54803" end="54826" title="Richter magnitude scale" label="Richter magnitude scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q289502" start="54919" end="54934" title="Clair Patterson" label="Clair Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q164384" start="55048" end="55067" title="Theodore von Kármán" label="Theodore von Kármán"/>
<link wikidata="Q221337" start="55128" end="55138" title="supersonic" label="supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q830787" start="55143" end="55153" title="hypersonic" label="hypersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q732722" start="55212" end="55220" title="vortices" label="vortices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044416" start="55245" end="55269" title="von Kármán vortex street" label="von Kármán vortex street"/>
<link wikidata="Q27507" start="55329" end="55341" title="Frank Malina" label="Frank Malina"/>
<link wikidata="Q27345" start="55366" end="55378" title="WAC Corporal" label="WAC Corporal"/>
<link wikidata="Q331497" start="55440" end="55452" title="Jack Parsons (rocket engineer)" label="Jack Parsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q333500" start="55582" end="55593" title="Qian Xuesen" label="Qian Xuesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q298913" start="55669" end="55682" title="Michael E. Brown" label="Michael Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="55736" end="55758" title="trans-Neptunian object" label="trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199" start="55778" end="55790" title="dwarf planet" label="dwarf planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q611" start="55791" end="55795" title="Eris (dwarf planet)" label="Eris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="55816" end="55848" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="55876" end="55882" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q234949" start="55891" end="55906" title="David Baltimore" label="David Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726076" start="55957" end="55968" title="Alice S. Huang" label="Alice Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="56035" end="56039" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="AAAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="56129" end="56157" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="56161" end="56172" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="56195" end="56232" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q270272" start="56342" end="56364" title="Rockefeller University" label="Rockefeller University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128972" start="56727" end="56755" title="James Augustin Brown Scherer" label="James Augustin Brown Scherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q130975" start="56836" end="56854" title="Robert A. Millikan" label="Robert A. Millikan"/>
<link wikidata="Q465298" start="56999" end="57014" title="Lee A. DuBridge" label="Lee A. DuBridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q552916" start="57102" end="57114" title="Harold Brown (Secretary of Defense)" label="Harold Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="57183" end="57217" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="United States Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="57243" end="57255" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788548" start="57258" end="57275" title="Robert F. Christy" label="Robert F. Christy"/>
<link wikidata="Q347236" start="57324" end="57344" title="Marvin L. Goldberger" label="Marvin L. Goldberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q635642" start="57410" end="57438" title="Institute for Advanced Study" label="Institute for Advanced Study"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525096" start="57441" end="57459" title="Thomas E. Everhart" label="Thomas E. Everhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q234949" start="57497" end="57512" title="David Baltimore" label="David Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3166586" start="57598" end="57614" title="Jean-Lou Chameau" label="Jean-Lou Chameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463036" start="57704" end="57754" title="King Abdullah University of Science and Technology" label="King Abdullah University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789544" start="57757" end="57776" title="Thomas Felix Rosenbaum" label="Thomas F. Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="58168" end="58180" title="photovoltaic" label="photovoltaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="58182" end="58212" title="radio-frequency identification" label="radio-frequency identification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="58221" end="58234" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q959005" start="58237" end="58258" title="hyperspectral imaging" label="hyperspectral imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="58260" end="58278" title="electronic devices" label="electronic devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="58280" end="58287" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q51711" start="58352" end="58357" title="Quora" label="Quora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041316" start="58383" end="58389" title="Impinj" label="Impinj"/>
<link wikidata="Q19903548" start="58428" end="58439" title="Photon etc." label="Photon etc."/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58441" end="58447" title="Xencor" label="Xencor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58706" end="58756" title="List of The Big Bang Theory and Young Sheldon characters#The Big Bang Theory main characters" label="male lead characters and one female lead character"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539" start="58777" end="58796" title="The Big Bang Theory" label="The Big Bang Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935" start="58914" end="58921" title="Numbers (TV series)" label="Numb3rs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113303" start="58964" end="58985" title="The War of the Worlds (1953 film)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730419" start="59002" end="59013" title="Real Genius" label="Real Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268986" start="59156" end="59169" title="Quantum Hoops" label="Quantum Hoops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200552" start="59287" end="59307" title="Marvel Entertainment" label="Marvel Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="59312" end="59325" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="59370" end="59374" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q865017" start="59376" end="59392" title="Mister Fantastic" label="Mister Fantastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633611" start="59394" end="59405" title="Bill Foster (character)" label="Bill Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781622" start="59427" end="59433" title="Madman (Marvel Comics)" label="Madman"/>
<link wikidata="Q642878" start="59442" end="59467" title="Marvel Cinematic Universe" label="Marvel Cinematic Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q112122179" start="59469" end="59483" title="Bruno Carrelli" label="Bruno Carrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15208946" start="59485" end="59496" title="Kamala Khan" label="Kamala Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q84712813" start="59575" end="59585" title="Ms. Marvel (miniseries)" label="Ms. Marvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154383" start="59721" end="59742" title="Athenaeum at Caltech" label="Athenaeum dining club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222883" start="59758" end="59794" title="Beverly Hills Cop (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Beverly Hills Cop&amp;quot; series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129381" start="59802" end="59813" title="The X-Files (film)" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127709" start="59827" end="59839" title="True Romance" label="True Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577037" start="59857" end="59870" title="The West Wing" label="The West Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q853745" start="59896" end="59917" title="Engineering education" label="Engineering education"/>
<link wikidata="Q22080687" start="59920" end="59961" title="US-China University Presidents Roundtable" label="US-China University Presidents Roundtable"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5790" wikidata="Q165534" url="?curid=5790" title="Carlo Goldoni">
<text>Carlo Osvaldo Goldoni (, , ; 25 February 1707 – 6 February 1793) was an Italian playwright and librettist from the Republic of Venice. His works include some of Italy&#x27;s most famous and best-loved plays. Audiences have admired the plays of Goldoni for their ingenious mix of wit and honesty. His plays offered his contemporaries images of themselves, often dramatizing the lives, values, and conflicts of the emerging middle classes. Though he wrote in French and Italian, his plays make rich use of the Venetian language, regional vernacular, and colloquialisms. Goldoni also wrote under the pen name and title &quot;Polisseno Fegeio, Pastor Arcade&quot;, which he claimed in his memoirs the &quot;Arcadians of Rome&quot; bestowed on him.

== Biography ==

=== Memoirs ===
There is an abundance of autobiographical information on Goldoni, most of which comes from the introductions to his plays and from his &quot;Memoirs&quot;. However, these memoirs are known to contain many errors of fact, especially about his earlier years.

In these memoirs, he paints himself as a born comedian, careless, light-hearted and with a happy temperament, proof against all strokes of fate, yet thoroughly respectable and honourable.

=== Early life and studies ===

Goldoni was born in Venice in 1707, the son of Margherita Salvioni (or Saioni) and Giulio Goldoni. In his memoirs, Goldoni describes his father as a physician, and claims that he was introduced to theatre by his grandfather Carlo Alessandro Goldoni. In reality, it seems that Giulio was an apothecary; as for the grandfather, he had died four years before Carlo&#x27;s birth. In any case, Goldoni was deeply interested in theatre from his earliest years, and all attempts to direct his activity into other channels were of no avail; his toys were puppets, and his books were plays.

His father placed him under the care of the philosopher Caldini at Rimini but the youth soon ran away with a company of strolling players and returned to Venice. In 1723 his father matriculated him into the stern Collegio Ghislieri in Pavia, which imposed the tonsure and monastic habits on its students. However, he relates in his &quot;Memoirs&quot; that a considerable part of his time was spent reading Greek and Latin comedies. He had already begun writing at this time and, in his third year, he composed a libellous poem (&quot;Il colosso&quot;) in which he ridiculed the daughters of certain Pavian families. As a result of that incident (and/or of a visit with some schoolmates to a local brothel), he was expelled from the school and had to leave the city (1725). He studied law at Udine, and eventually took his degree at University of Modena. He was employed as a law clerk at Chioggia and Feltre, after which he returned to his native city and began practising.

Educated as a lawyer, and holding lucrative positions as secretary and counsellor, he seemed, indeed, at one time to have settled down to the practice of law, but following an unexpected summons to Venice, after an absence of several years, he changed his career, and thenceforth he devoted himself to writing plays and managing theatres. His father died in 1731. In 1732, to avoid an unwanted marriage, he left the town for Milan and then for Verona where the theatre manager Giuseppe Imer helped him on his way to becoming a comical poet as well as introducing him to his future wife, Nicoletta Conio. Goldoni returned with her to Venice, where he stayed until 1743.

=== Theatrical career ===
Goldoni entered the Italian theatre scene with a tragedy, &quot;Amalasunta&quot;, produced in Milan. The play was a critical and financial failure.

Submitting it to Count Prata, director of the opera, he was told that his piece &quot;was composed with due regard for the rules of Aristotle and Horace, but not according to those laid down for the Italian drama.&quot; &quot;In France&quot;, continued the count, &quot;you can try to please the public, but here in Italy it is the actors and actresses whom you must consult, as well as the composer of the music and the stage decorators. Everything must be done according to a certain form which I will explain to you.&quot;

Goldoni thanked his critic, went back to his inn and ordered a fire, into which he threw the manuscript of his &quot;Amalasunta&quot;.

His next play, &quot;Belisario&quot;, written in 1734, was more successful, though of its success he afterwards professed himself ashamed.

During this period he also wrote librettos for opera seria and served for a time as literary director of the San Giovanni Grisostomo, Venice&#x27;s most distinguished opera house.

He wrote other tragedies for a time, but he was not long in discovering that his bent was for comedy. He had come to realize that the Italian stage needed reforming; adopting Molière as his model, he went to work in earnest and in 1738 produced his first real comedy, &quot;L&#x27;uomo di mondo&quot; (&quot;The Man of the World&quot;). During his many wanderings and adventures in Italy, he was constantly at work and when, at Livorno, he became acquainted with the manager Medebac, he determined to pursue the profession of playwriting in order to make a living. He was employed by Medebac to write plays for his theatre in Venice. He worked for other managers and produced during his stay in that city some of his most characteristic works. He also wrote &quot;Momolo Cortesan&quot; in 1738. By 1743, he had perfected his hybrid style of playwriting (combining the model of Molière with the strengths of &quot;Commedia dell&#x27;arte&quot; and his own wit and sincerity). This style was typified in &quot;La Donna di garbo&quot;, the first Italian comedy of its kind.

After 1748, Goldoni collaborated with the composer Baldassare Galuppi, making significant contributions to the new form of &#x27;opera buffa&#x27;. Galuppi composed the score for more than twenty of Goldoni&#x27;s librettos. As with his comedies, Goldoni&#x27;s &quot;opera buffa&quot; integrates elements of the Commedia dell&#x27;arte with recognisable local and middle-class realities. His operatic works include two of the most successful musical comedies of the eighteenth century, &quot;Il filosofo di campagna&quot; (&quot;The Country Philosopher&quot;), set by Galuppi (1752) and &quot;La buona figliuola&quot; (&quot;The Good Girl&quot;), set by Niccolò Piccinni (1760).

In 1753, following his return from Bologna, he defected to the Teatro San Luca of the Vendramin family, where he performed most of his plays to 1762.

=== Move to France and death ===
In 1757, he engaged in a bitter dispute with playwright Carlo Gozzi, which left him utterly disgusted with the tastes of his countrymen; so much so that in 1761 he moved to Paris, where he received a position at court and was put in charge of the Théâtre-Italien. He spent the rest of his life in France, composing most of his plays in French and writing his memoirs in that language.

Among the plays which he wrote in French, the most successful was &quot;Le bourru bienfaisant&quot;, dedicated to Marie Adélaïde, a daughter of Louis XV and aunt to the dauphin, the future Louis XVI of France. It premiered on 4 February 1771, almost nine months after the dauphin&#x27;s marriage to Marie Antoinette. Goldoni enjoyed considerable popularity in France; in 1769, when he retired to Versailles, the King gave him a pension. He lost this pension after the French Revolution. The Convention eventually voted to restore his pension the day after his death. It was restored to his widow, at the pleading of the poet André Chénier; &quot;She is old&quot;, he urged, &quot;she is seventy-six, and her husband has left her no heritage save his illustrious name, his virtues and his poverty.&quot;
== Goldoni&#x27;s impact on Italian theatre ==
In his &quot;Memoirs&quot; Goldoni amply discusses the state of Italian comedy when he began writing. At that time, Italian comedy revolved around the conventionality of the Commedia dell&#x27;arte, or improvised comedy. Goldoni took to himself the task of superseding the comedy of masks and the comedy of intrigue with representations of actual life and manners through the characters and their behaviours. He maintained that Italian life and manners were susceptible of artistic treatment such as had not been given them before.

His works are a lasting monument to the changes that he initiated: a dramatic revolution that had been attempted but not achieved before. Goldoni&#x27;s importance lies in providing good examples rather than precepts. Goldoni says that he took for his models the plays of Molière and that whenever a piece of his own succeeded he whispered to himself: &quot;Good, but not yet Molière&quot;. Goldoni&#x27;s plays are gentler and more optimistic in tone than Molière&#x27;s.

It was this very success that was the object of harsh critiques by Carlo Gozzi, who accused Goldoni of having deprived the Italian theatre of the charms of poetry and imagination. The great success of Gozzi&#x27;s fairy dramas so irritated Goldoni that it led to his self-exile to France.

Goldoni gave to his country a classical form, which, though it has since been cultivated, has yet to be cultivated by a master.

== Themes ==
Goldoni&#x27;s plays that were written while he was still in Italy ignore religious and ecclesiastical subjects. This may be surprising, considering his staunch Catholic upbringing. No thoughts are expressed about death or repentance in his memoirs or in his comedies. After his move to France, his position became clearer, as his plays took on a clear anti-clerical tone and often satirized the hypocrisy of monks and of the Church.

Goldoni was inspired by his love of humanity and the admiration he had for his fellow men. He wrote, and was obsessed with, the relationships that humans establish with one another, their cities and homes, and the study of philosophy. The moral and civil values that Goldoni promotes in his plays are those of rationality, civility, humanism, the importance of the rising middle class, a progressive stance on state affairs, honour and honesty. Goldoni had a dislike for arrogance, intolerance and the abuse of power.

Goldoni&#x27;s main characters are no abstract examples of human virtue, nor monstrous examples of human vice. They occupy the middle ground of human temperament. Goldoni maintains an acute sensibility for the differences in social classes between his characters as well as environmental and generational changes. Goldoni pokes fun at the arrogant nobility and the pauper who lacks dignity.

== Venetian and Tuscan ==
As in other theatrical works of the time and place, the characters in Goldoni&#x27;s Italian comedies spoke originally either the literary Tuscan variety (which became modern Italian) or the Venetian dialect, depending on their station in life. However, in some printed editions of his plays, he often turned the Venetian texts into Tuscan, too.

== Goldoni in popular culture ==

One of his best-known works is the comic play &quot;Servant of Two Masters&quot;, which has been translated and adapted internationally numerous times. In 1966 it was adapted into an opera buffa by the American composer Vittorio Giannini. In 2011, Richard Bean adapted the play for the National Theatre of Great Britain as &quot;One Man, Two Guvnors&quot;. Its popularity led to a transfer to the West End and in 2012 to Broadway.

The film &quot;Carlo Goldoni – Venice, Grand Theatre of the World&quot;, directed by Alessandro Bettero, was released in 2007 and is available in English, Italian, French, and Japanese.

== Selected works ==
The following is a small sampling of Goldoni&#x27;s enormous output.

=== Tragedies ===
* &quot;Rosmonda&quot; (1734)
* &quot;Griselda&quot; (1734)

=== Tragicomedies ===
*&quot;Belisario&quot; (1734)
*&quot;Don Giovanni Tenorio&quot; o sia &quot;Il dissoluto&quot;, &quot;The Dissolute&quot; (1735)
*&quot;Rinaldo di Montalbano&quot; (1736)

=== Comedies ===
*&quot;Il servitore di due padroni&quot;, (1745) &quot;The Servant of Two Masters&quot; (now often retitled &quot;Arlecchino servitore di due padroni&quot; &quot;Harlequin Servant of two Masters&quot;)
*&quot;I due gemelli veneziani&quot;, &quot;The Two Venetian Twins&quot; (1747)
*&quot;La vedova scaltra&quot;, &quot;The Shrewd Widow&quot; (1748)
*&quot;La putta onorata&quot;, &quot;The Honorable Maid&quot; (1749)
*&quot;Il cavaliere e la dama&quot;, &quot;The Gentleman and the Lady&quot; (1749)
*&quot;La famiglia dell&#x27;antiquario&quot;, &quot;The Antiquarian&#x27;s Family&quot; (1750)
*&quot;Il teatro comico&quot;, &quot;The Comical Theatre&quot; (1750–1751)
*&quot;Il bugiardo&quot;, &quot;The Liar&quot; (1750–1751)
*&quot;Il vero amico&quot;, &quot;The True Friend&quot; (1750) translated by Anna Cuffaro
*&quot;I pettegolezzi delle donne&quot;, &quot;Women&#x27;s Gossip&quot; (1750–1751)
*&quot;La locandiera&quot;, &quot;The Mistress of the Inn&quot; (1751)
*&quot;Il feudatario&quot; &quot;The Feudal Lord&quot; (1752)
*&quot;Gl&#x27;innamorati&quot;, &quot;The Lovers&quot; (1759)
*&quot;I rusteghi&quot;, &quot;The Boors&quot; (1760)
*&quot;Le baruffe chiozzotte&quot;, &quot;The Chioggia Scuffles&quot; (1762)
*&quot;Gli amori di Zelinda e Lindoro&quot;, &quot;The Love of Zelinda and Lindoro&quot; (1764)

=== Opera seria libretti ===
* &quot;Amalasunta&quot; (1732)
* &quot;Gustavo primo, re di Svezia&quot; (c. 1738)
* &quot;Oronte, re de&#x27; Sciti&quot; (1740)
* &quot;Statira&quot; (c. 1740)

===Opera buffa libretti===
* &quot;La contessina&quot; (&quot;The Young Countess&quot;) by Maccari (1743)
* &quot;L&#x27;Arcadia in Brenta&quot; (&quot;The Arcadia in Brenta&quot;) by Galuppi (1749)
* &quot;Il mondo della luna&quot; (&quot;The World on the Moon&quot;), set to music by Galuppi (1750), Haydn (1777), Paisiello (1782) and other composers.
* &quot;Il filosofo di campagna&quot; (&quot;The Country Philosopher&quot;) by Galuppi (1754)
* &quot;Il mercato di Malmantile&quot; (&quot;The Malmantile Market&quot;) by Fischietti (1757)
* &quot;Buovo d&#x27;Antona&quot;, set to music by Tommaso Traetta (1758, incorrectly recorded as 1750 in Zatta&#x27;s edition)
* &quot;La buona figliuola&quot; (&quot;The Good Girl&quot;) by Niccolò Piccinni (1760)
* &quot;Lo speziale&quot; (&quot;The Apothecary&quot;) by Joseph Haydn (1768)
* &quot;La finta semplice&quot; (&quot;The Fake Innocent&quot;) by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1769)
* &quot;Le pescatrici&quot; (&quot;The Fisherwomen&quot;) by Haydn (1770), Florian Leopold Gassmann (1771)

=== Intermezzo libretti ===
* &quot;Le donne vendicate&quot;, &quot;The Revenge of the Women&quot; (1751)

=== Cantatas and serenades ===
* &quot;La ninfa saggia&quot;, &quot;The Wise Nymph&quot; (17??)
* &quot;Gli amanti felici&quot;, &quot;The Happy Lovers&quot; (17??)

=== Poetry ===
* &quot;Il colosso&quot;, a satire against Pavia girls which led to Goldoni being expelled from Collegio Ghislieri (1725)
* &quot;Il quaresimale in epilogo&quot; (1725–1726)

=== Books ===
* &quot;Nuovo teatro comico&quot;, &quot;New Comic Theater&quot;, plays. Pitteri, Venice (1757)
* &quot;Mémoires&quot;, &quot;Memoirs&quot;. Paris (1787)
* Goldoni&#x27;s collected works. Zalta, Venice (1788–1795)

=== Selected translations of Goldoni&#x27;s works===
* &quot;Il vero amico&quot;, &quot;The True Friend&quot; translated by Anna Cuffaro. Publisher: Sparkling Books.
* &quot;Archifanfaro&quot;, translated by W. H. Auden with an introduction by Michael Andre in &quot;Unmuzzled OX&quot;.

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Sources==
* Bates, Alfred, editor (1903). &quot;Goldoni&quot;, vol. 5, , in &quot;The Drama: Its History, Literature and Influence on Civilization&quot;. London/New York: Smart and Stanley.
* Richards, Kenneth (1995). &quot;Goldoni, Carlo&quot;, pp. 432–434, in &quot;The Cambridge Guide to Theatre&quot;, second edition, edited by Martin Banham. Cambridge University Press. .

== External links ==

* www.carlogoldoni.net – the English website dedicated to Goldoni
* 
* 
* www.sparklingbooks.com for bilingual edition English/Italian of The True Friend/Il vero amico
* Webpage devoted to Carlo Goldoni (lletrA (UOC), Catalan Literature Online) 
* Detailed biography, prepared for the 200th anniversary of his death (1993) 
* Gli Innamorati 
* La Locandiera 
* La Avventura Della Villeggiatura 
* Works by Goldoni at Progetto Manuzio
* Works by Goldoni (text, concordances and frequency list)
* Venice Carnival 2007, Tricentenary of Carlo Goldoni
* A riotous delight of commedia dell&#x27;arte
* Carlo Goldoni – biography in the Catholic Encyclopedia
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q165534" start="0" end="21" title="Carlo Goldoni" label="Carlo Osvaldo Goldoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="72" end="79" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="95" end="105" title="librettist" label="librettist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="115" end="133" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="422" end="434" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="508" end="525" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="597" end="605" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q338478" start="703" end="712" title="Pontifical Academy of Arcadia" label="Arcadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="1277" end="1283" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="1406" end="1415" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131236" start="1547" end="1557" title="apothecary" label="apothecary"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="1907" end="1913" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q427141" start="2053" end="2071" title="Collegio Ghislieri" label="Collegio Ghislieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="2075" end="2080" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q273761" start="2100" end="2107" title="tonsure" label="tonsure"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="2112" end="2127" title="monk" label="monastic habits"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2257" end="2262" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="2353" end="2358" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790" start="2632" end="2637" title="Udine" label="Udine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243705" start="2673" end="2693" title="University of Modena" label="University of Modena"/>
<link wikidata="Q55416" start="2729" end="2737" title="Chioggia" label="Chioggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465" start="2742" end="2748" title="Feltre" label="Feltre"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="3241" end="3246" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="3260" end="3266" title="Verona" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q80930" start="3561" end="3568" title="tragedy" label="tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q371670" start="3576" end="3586" title="Amalasunta" label="Amalasunta"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3793" end="3802" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197" start="3807" end="3813" title="Horace" label="Horace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131084" start="4497" end="4506" title="librettos" label="librettos"/>
<link wikidata="Q210675" start="4511" end="4522" title="opera seria" label="opera seria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982047" start="4573" end="4596" title="Teatro San Giovanni Grisostomo" label="San Giovanni Grisostomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q153562" start="4631" end="4642" title="opera house" label="opera house"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="4739" end="4745" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="4820" end="4827" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761" start="5073" end="5080" title="Livorno" label="Livorno"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="5522" end="5529" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="5558" end="5581" title="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q208338" start="5768" end="5786" title="Baldassare Galuppi" label="Baldassare Galuppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q208080" start="5846" end="5857" title="opera buffa" label="opera buffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152704" start="6311" end="6329" title="La buona figliuola" label="La buona figliuola"/>
<link wikidata="Q310687" start="6372" end="6388" title="Niccolò Piccinni" label="Niccolò Piccinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982376" start="6461" end="6476" title="Teatro San Luca" label="Teatro San Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3555436" start="6484" end="6493" title="Vendramin" label="Vendramin"/>
<link wikidata="Q263270" start="6638" end="6649" title="Carlo Gozzi" label="Carlo Gozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581237" start="6829" end="6844" title="Théâtre-Italien" label="Théâtre-Italien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220600" start="7040" end="7061" title="Le bourru bienfaisant" label="Le bourru bienfaisant"/>
<link wikidata="Q237832" start="7082" end="7096" title="Adélaïde of France (1732–1800)" label="Marie Adélaïde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738" start="7112" end="7120" title="Louis XV" label="Louis XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="7137" end="7144" title="Dauphin of France" label="dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="7157" end="7166" title="Louis XVI" label="Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="7267" end="7283" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="7364" end="7374" title="Versailles (city)" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7436" end="7453" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q295548" start="7593" end="7606" title="André Chénier" label="André Chénier"/>
<link wikidata="Q191890" start="7992" end="8015" title="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte" label="Commedia dell&amp;#x27;arte"/>
<link wikidata="Q687" start="8623" end="8630" title="Molière" label="Molière"/>
<link wikidata="Q263270" start="8892" end="8903" title="Carlo Gozzi" label="Carlo Gozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="9331" end="9340" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9345" end="9359" title="ecclesiastical" label="ecclesiastical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9418" end="9426" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="9610" end="9623" title="anti-clerical" label="anti-clerical"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9683" end="9689" title="Catholic Church" label="Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="9915" end="9925" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="10820" end="10836" title="Venetian dialect" label="Venetian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q769831" start="11062" end="11084" title="Servant of Two Masters" label="Servant of Two Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q208080" start="11193" end="11204" title="opera buffa" label="opera buffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348509" start="11230" end="11247" title="Vittorio Giannini" label="Vittorio Giannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324038" start="11258" end="11270" title="Richard Bean" label="Richard Bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="11296" end="11329" title="National Theatre of Great Britain" label="National Theatre of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092864" start="11339" end="11359" title="One Man, Two Guvnors" label="One Man, Two Guvnors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="11407" end="11415" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="11431" end="11439" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028221" start="11776" end="11784" title="Griselda (Vivaldi)" label="Griselda"/>
<link wikidata="Q769831" start="12017" end="12044" title="Il servitore di due padroni" label="Il servitore di due padroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232021" start="12219" end="12242" title="I due gemelli veneziani" label="I due gemelli veneziani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823761" start="12367" end="12383" title="La putta onorata" label="La putta onorata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3793386" start="12436" end="12458" title="Il cavaliere e la dama" label="Il cavaliere e la dama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208618" start="12519" end="12551" title="La famiglia dell&amp;#x27;antiquario" label="La famiglia dell&amp;#x27;antiquario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795979" start="12615" end="12631" title="Il teatro comico" label="Il teatro comico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224496" start="12690" end="12701" title="Il bugiardo" label="Il bugiardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5996819" start="12749" end="12762" title="Il vero amico" label="Il vero amico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3791124" start="12839" end="12865" title="I pettegolezzi delle donne" label="I pettegolezzi delle donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232053" start="12924" end="12937" title="La locandiera" label="La locandiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222754" start="12995" end="13008" title="Il feudatario" label="Il feudatario"/>
<link wikidata="Q735078" start="13057" end="13075" title="Gl&amp;#x27;innamorati" label="Gl&amp;#x27;innamorati"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235201" start="13120" end="13130" title="I rusteghi" label="I rusteghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q549625" start="13174" end="13195" title="Le baruffe chiozzotte" label="Le baruffe chiozzotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772047" start="13251" end="13281" title="Gli amori di Zelinda e Lindoro" label="Gli amori di Zelinda e Lindoro"/>
<link wikidata="Q772264" start="13410" end="13437" title="Gustavo primo, re di Svezia" label="Gustavo primo, re di Svezia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3762158" start="13625" end="13632" title="Giacomo Maccari" label="Maccari"/>
<link wikidata="Q168786" start="13690" end="13697" title="Arcadia (utopia)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39766" start="13701" end="13707" title="Brenta, Lombardy" label="Brenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q208338" start="13718" end="13725" title="Galuppi" label="Galuppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11926492" start="13820" end="13827" title="Il mondo della luna (Galuppi)" label="Galuppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037479" start="13836" end="13841" title="Il mondo della luna" label="Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13850" end="13859" title="Il mondo della luna (Paisiello)" label="Paisiello"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780461" start="13896" end="13919" title="Il filosofo di campagna" label="Il filosofo di campagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237146" start="14060" end="14070" title="Domenico Fischietti" label="Fischietti"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611647" start="14086" end="14105" title="Buovo d&amp;#x27;Antona (Traetta)" label="Buovo d&amp;#x27;Antona"/>
<link wikidata="Q266084" start="14129" end="14144" title="Tommaso Traetta" label="Tommaso Traetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152704" start="14214" end="14232" title="La buona figliuola" label="La buona figliuola"/>
<link wikidata="Q310687" start="14270" end="14286" title="Niccolò Piccinni" label="Niccolò Piccinni"/>
<link wikidata="Q470695" start="14302" end="14313" title="Lo speziale" label="Lo speziale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="14352" end="14364" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q471821" start="14380" end="14397" title="La finta semplice" label="La finta semplice"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="14439" end="14462" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823610" start="14478" end="14491" title="Le pescatrici" label="Le pescatrici"/>
<link wikidata="Q700816" start="14545" end="14569" title="Florian Leopold Gassmann" label="Florian Leopold Gassmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3828695" start="14614" end="14632" title="Le donne vendicate" label="Le donne vendicate"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="15478" end="15489" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828204" start="15514" end="15527" title="Michael Andre" label="Michael Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897129" start="15537" end="15549" title="Unmuzzled OX" label="Unmuzzled OX"/>
<link wikidata="Q302556" start="16618" end="16639" title="Catholic Encyclopedia" label="Catholic Encyclopedia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5793" wikidata="Q386228" url="?curid=5793" title="Cumulative distribution function">
<text>In probability theory and statistics, the cumulative distribution function (CDF) of a real-valued random variable formula_1, or just distribution function of formula_1, evaluated at formula_3, is the probability that formula_1 will take a value less than or equal to formula_3.

Every probability distribution supported on the real numbers, discrete or &quot;mixed&quot; as well as continuous, is uniquely identified by a right-continuous monotone increasing function (a càdlàg function) formula_6 satisfying formula_7 and formula_8.

In the case of a scalar continuous distribution, it gives the area under the probability density function from negative infinity to formula_3. Cumulative distribution functions are also used to specify the distribution of multivariate random variables.

==Definition==
The cumulative distribution function of a real-valued random variable formula_1 is the function given by

where the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable formula_1 takes on a value less than or equal to formula_3.

The probability that formula_1 lies in the semi-closed interval formula_14, where formula_15, is therefore

In the definition above, the &quot;less than or equal to&quot; sign, &quot;≤&quot;, is a convention, not a universally used one (e.g. Hungarian literature uses &quot;&lt;&quot;), but the distinction is important for discrete distributions. The proper use of tables of the binomial and Poisson distributions depends upon this convention. Moreover, important formulas like Paul Lévy&#x27;s inversion formula for the characteristic function also rely on the &quot;less than or equal&quot; formulation.

If treating several random variables formula_16 etc. the corresponding letters are used as subscripts while, if treating only one, the subscript is usually omitted. It is conventional to use a capital formula_17 for a cumulative distribution function, in contrast to the lower-case formula_18 used for probability density functions and probability mass functions. This applies when discussing general distributions: some specific distributions have their own conventional notation, for example the normal distribution uses formula_19 and formula_20 instead of formula_17 and formula_18, respectively.

The probability density function of a continuous random variable can be determined from the cumulative distribution function by differentiating using the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus; i.e. given formula_23,
formula_24
as long as the derivative exists.

The CDF of a continuous random variable formula_1 can be expressed as the integral of its probability density function formula_26 as follows:
formula_27

In the case of a random variable formula_1 which has distribution having a discrete component at a value formula_29,
formula_30

If formula_31 is continuous at formula_29, this equals zero and there is no discrete component at formula_29.

== Properties ==

Every cumulative distribution function formula_31 is non-decreasing and right-continuous, which makes it a càdlàg function. Furthermore,
formula_35

Every function with these three properties is a CDF, i.e., for every such function, a random variable can be defined such that the function is the cumulative distribution function of that random variable.

If formula_1 is a purely discrete random variable, then it attains values formula_37 with probability formula_38, and the CDF of formula_1 will be discontinuous at the points formula_40:
formula_41

If the CDF formula_31 of a real valued random variable formula_1 is continuous, then formula_1 is a continuous random variable; if furthermore formula_31 is absolutely continuous, then there exists a Lebesgue-integrable function formula_46 such that
formula_47
for all real numbers formula_48 and formula_29. The function formula_26 is equal to the derivative of formula_31 almost everywhere, and it is called the probability density function of the distribution of formula_1.

If formula_1 has finite L1-norm, that is, the expectation of formula_54 is finite, then the expectation is given by the Riemann–Stieltjes integral 
formula_55

and for any formula_56,
formula_57
as well as
formula_58
as shown in the diagram (consider the areas of the two red rectangles and their extensions to the right or left up to the graph of formula_31). In particular, we have 
formula_60
In addition, the (finite) expected value of the real-valued random variable formula_1 can be defined on the graph of its cumulative distribution function as illustrated by the drawing in the definition of expected value for arbitrary real-valued random variables.

== Examples ==
As an example, suppose formula_1 is uniformly distributed on the unit interval formula_63.

Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by
formula_65

Suppose instead that formula_1 takes only the discrete values 0 and 1, with equal probability.

Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by
formula_68

Suppose formula_1 is exponential distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by
formula_71

Here &quot;λ&quot; &gt; 0 is the parameter of the distribution, often called the rate parameter.

Suppose formula_1 is normal distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by
formula_74

Here the parameter formula_75 is the mean or expectation of the distribution; and formula_76 is its standard deviation.

A table of the CDF of the standard normal distribution is often used in statistical applications, where it is named the standard normal table, the unit normal table, or the Z table.

Suppose formula_1 is binomial distributed. Then the CDF of formula_1 is given by
formula_79

Here formula_80 is the probability of success and the function denotes the discrete probability distribution of the number of successes in a sequence of formula_81 independent experiments, and formula_82 is the &quot;floor&quot; under formula_83, i.e. the greatest integer less than or equal to formula_83.

==Derived functions==
===Complementary cumulative distribution function (tail distribution)===

Sometimes, it is useful to study the opposite question and ask how often the random variable is &quot;above&quot; a particular level. This is called the &#x27; (&#x27;) or simply the &#x27; or &#x27;, and is defined as
formula_85

This has applications in statistical hypothesis testing, for example, because the one-sided p-value is the probability of observing a test statistic &quot;at least&quot; as extreme as the one observed. Thus, provided that the test statistic, &quot;T&quot;, has a continuous distribution, the one-sided p-value is simply given by the ccdf: for an observed value formula_86 of the test statistic
formula_87

In survival analysis, formula_88 is called the survival function and denoted formula_89, while the term &quot;reliability function&quot; is common in engineering.

;Properties
* For a non-negative continuous random variable having an expectation, Markov&#x27;s inequality states that formula_90
* As formula_91, and in fact formula_92 provided that formula_93 is finite. Proof: Assuming formula_1 has a density function formula_26, for any formula_96 formula_97 Then, on recognizing formula_98 and rearranging terms, formula_99 as claimed.
* For a random variable having an expectation, formula_100 and for a non-negative random variable the second term is 0. If the random variable can only take non-negative integer values, this is equivalent to formula_101

===Folded cumulative distribution===

While the plot of a cumulative distribution formula_17 often has an S-like shape, an alternative illustration is the folded cumulative distribution or mountain plot, which folds the top half of the graph over, that is
:formula_103
where formula_104 denotes the indicator function and the second summand is the survivor function, thus using two scales, one for the upslope and another for the downslope. This form of illustration emphasises the median, dispersion (specifically, the mean absolute deviation from the median) and skewness of the distribution or of the empirical results.

===Inverse distribution function (quantile function)===

If the CDF &quot;F&quot; is strictly increasing and continuous then formula_105 is the unique real number formula_106 such that formula_107. This defines the inverse distribution function or quantile function.

Some distributions do not have a unique inverse (for example if formula_108 for all &lt;math&gt;a&lt;x, causing formula_31 to be constant). In this case, one may use the generalized inverse distribution function, which is defined as
:formula_110
* Example 1: The median is formula_111.
* Example 2: Put formula_112. Then we call formula_113 the 95th percentile.

Some useful properties of the inverse cdf (which are also preserved in the definition of the generalized inverse distribution function) are:

# formula_114 is nondecreasing
# formula_115
# formula_116
# formula_117 if and only if formula_118
# If formula_119 has a formula_120 distribution then formula_121 is distributed as formula_17. This is used in random number generation using the inverse transform sampling-method.
# If formula_123 is a collection of independent formula_17-distributed random variables defined on the same sample space, then there exist random variables formula_125 such that formula_125 is distributed as formula_127 and formula_128 with probability 1 for all formula_129.

The inverse of the cdf can be used to translate results obtained for the uniform distribution to other distributions.

=== Empirical distribution function ===
The empirical distribution function is an estimate of the cumulative distribution function that generated the points in the sample. It converges with probability 1 to that underlying distribution. A number of results exist to quantify the rate of convergence of the empirical distribution function to the underlying cumulative distribution function.

==Multivariate case==
===Definition for two random variables===
When dealing simultaneously with more than one random variable the joint cumulative distribution function can also be defined. For example, for a pair of random variables formula_130, the joint CDF formula_131 is given by
where the right-hand side represents the probability that the random variable formula_1 takes on a value less than or equal to formula_3 and that formula_119 takes on a value less than or equal to formula_135.

Example of joint cumulative distribution function:

For two continuous variables &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;: formula_136

For two discrete random variables, it is beneficial to generate a table of probabilities and address the cumulative probability for each potential range of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;, and here is the example:

given the joint probability mass function in tabular form, determine the joint cumulative distribution function.

Solution: using the given table of probabilities for each potential range of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;, the joint cumulative distribution function may be constructed in tabular form:
===Definition for more than two random variables===
For formula_137 random variables formula_138, the joint CDF formula_139 is given by

Interpreting the formula_137 random variables as a random vector formula_141 yields a shorter notation:
formula_142

===Properties===
Every multivariate CDF is:
# Monotonically non-decreasing for each of its variables,
# Right-continuous in each of its variables,
# formula_143
# formula_144 and formula_145 for all .

Not every function satisfying the above four properties is a multivariate CDF, unlike in the single dimension case. For example, let formula_146 for formula_147 or formula_148 or formula_149 and let formula_150 otherwise. It is easy to see that the above conditions are met, and yet formula_17 is not a CDF since if it was, then formula_152 as explained below.

The probability that a point belongs to a hyperrectangle is analogous to the 1-dimensional case:
formula_153

==Complex case==
===Complex random variable===
The generalization of the cumulative distribution function from real to complex random variables is not obvious because expressions of the form formula_154 make no sense. However expressions of the form formula_155 make sense. Therefore, we define the cumulative distribution of a complex random variables via the joint distribution of their real and imaginary parts:
formula_156

===Complex random vector===
Generalization of yields
formula_157
as definition for the CDS of a complex random vector formula_158.

==Use in statistical analysis==
The concept of the cumulative distribution function makes an explicit appearance in statistical analysis in two (similar) ways. Cumulative frequency analysis is the analysis of the frequency of occurrence of values of a phenomenon less than a reference value. The empirical distribution function is a formal direct estimate of the cumulative distribution function for which simple statistical properties can be derived and which can form the basis of various statistical hypothesis tests. Such tests can assess whether there is evidence against a sample of data having arisen from a given distribution, or evidence against two samples of data having arisen from the same (unknown) population distribution.

===Kolmogorov–Smirnov and Kuiper&#x27;s tests===
The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test is based on cumulative distribution functions and can be used to test to see whether two empirical distributions are different or whether an empirical distribution is different from an ideal distribution. The closely related Kuiper&#x27;s test is useful if the domain of the distribution is cyclic as in day of the week. For instance Kuiper&#x27;s test might be used to see if the number of tornadoes varies during the year or if sales of a product vary by day of the week or day of the month.

==See also==
* Descriptive statistics
* Distribution fitting
* Ogive (statistics)

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="3" end="21" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="26" end="36" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="42" end="74" title="Cumulative distribution function" label="cumulative distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="76" end="79" title="Cumulative distribution function" label="CDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="98" end="113" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q386228" start="133" end="154" title="Cumulative distribution function" label="distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="200" end="211" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="285" end="309" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709287" start="310" end="319" title="Support (measure theory)" label="supported"/>
<link wikidata="Q19885330" start="382" end="392" title="Continuous variable" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="422" end="438" title="right-continuous" label="right-continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="439" end="458" title="Monotonic function" label="monotone increasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q900194" start="471" end="477" title="càdlàg" label="càdlàg"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="559" end="582" title="continuous distribution" label="continuous distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="612" end="640" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179949" start="757" end="785" title="multivariate random variable" label="multivariate random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="858" end="873" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="951" end="962" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="1104" end="1112" title="interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="1429" end="1437" title="Binomial distribution" label="binomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q205692" start="1442" end="1462" title="Poisson distribution" label="Poisson distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q441127" start="1528" end="1537" title="Paul Lévy (mathematician)" label="Paul Lévy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1571" end="1594" title="Characteristic function (probability theory)#Inversion formula" label="characteristic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="1959" end="1987" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q869887" start="1993" end="2018" title="probability mass function" label="probability mass function"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="2155" end="2174" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217677" start="2413" end="2444" title="Fundamental Theorem of Calculus" label="Fundamental Theorem of Calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="2528" end="2554" title="continuous random variable" label="continuous random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q194404" start="2980" end="2994" title="monotone increasing" label="non-decreasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="2999" end="3015" title="right-continuous" label="right-continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q900194" start="3034" end="3040" title="càdlàg" label="càdlàg"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="3162" end="3177" title="random variable" label="random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q176623" start="3307" end="3331" title="discrete random variable" label="discrete random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q541961" start="3429" end="3442" title="discontinuity (mathematics)" label="discontinuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="3549" end="3559" title="continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="3581" end="3607" title="continuous random variable" label="continuous random variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q332504" start="3638" end="3659" title="absolute continuity" label="absolutely continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q853831" start="3681" end="3700" title="Lebesgue integral" label="Lebesgue-integrable"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="3830" end="3840" title="derivative" label="derivative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139334" start="3855" end="3872" title="almost everywhere" label="almost everywhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q207522" start="3895" end="3923" title="probability density function" label="probability density function"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="3983" end="3990" title="L1-norm" label="L1-norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q285771" start="4079" end="4105" title="Riemann–Stieltjes integral" label="Riemann–Stieltjes integral"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4531" end="4538" title="Expected value#Uhl2023Bild1" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4546" end="4617" title="Expected value#Arbitrary real-valued random variables" label="definition of expected value for arbitrary real-valued random variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q274506" start="4671" end="4692" title="Uniform distribution (continuous)" label="uniformly distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q237193" start="4944" end="4967" title="Exponential distribution" label="exponential distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="5138" end="5156" title="Normal distribution" label="normal distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="5245" end="5249" title="mean" label="mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263029" start="5449" end="5470" title="standard normal table" label="standard normal table"/>
<link wikidata="Q185547" start="5533" end="5553" title="Binomial distribution" label="binomial distributed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5861" end="5877" title="greatest integer" label="greatest integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="6265" end="6276" title="statistics" label="statistical"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="6277" end="6292" title="hypothesis test" label="hypothesis test"/>
<link wikidata="Q253255" start="6332" end="6339" title="p-value" label="p-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461038" start="6466" end="6480" title="test statistic" label="test statistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q253255" start="6542" end="6549" title="p-value" label="p-value"/>
<link wikidata="Q543310" start="6649" end="6666" title="survival analysis" label="survival analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915096" start="6693" end="6710" title="survival function" label="survival function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="6796" end="6807" title="engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q842436" start="6893" end="6917" title="Markov&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Markov&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q371983" start="7706" end="7724" title="indicator function" label="indicator function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915096" start="7755" end="7772" title="survivor function" label="survivor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="7889" end="7895" title="median (statistics)" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="7897" end="7907" title="dispersion (statistics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067186" start="7927" end="7950" title="mean absolute deviation" label="mean absolute deviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q330828" start="7972" end="7980" title="skewness" label="skewness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489473" start="8279" end="8296" title="quantile function" label="quantile function"/>
<link wikidata="Q228206" start="9015" end="9039" title="random number generation" label="random number generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377019" start="9050" end="9076" title="inverse transform sampling" label="inverse transform sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="9525" end="9556" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="10199" end="10210" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179949" start="11202" end="11215" title="random vector" label="random vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3801534" start="11874" end="11888" title="hyperrectangle" label="hyperrectangle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12061" end="12085" title="complex random variable#Cumulative distribution function" label="complex random variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333358" start="12303" end="12321" title="Joint probability distribution" label="joint distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q73129" start="12662" end="12691" title="Cumulative frequency analysis" label="Cumulative frequency analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339385" start="12798" end="12829" title="empirical distribution function" label="empirical distribution function"/>
<link wikidata="Q210832" start="12993" end="13020" title="statistical hypothesis test" label="statistical hypothesis test"/>
<link wikidata="Q575766" start="13294" end="13317" title="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test" label="Kolmogorov–Smirnov test"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052704" start="13543" end="13561" title="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test" label="Kuiper&amp;#x27;s test"/>
<link wikidata="Q380344" start="13828" end="13850" title="Descriptive statistics" label="Descriptive statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083147" start="13853" end="13873" title="Distribution fitting" label="Distribution fitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997143" start="13876" end="13894" title="Ogive (statistics)" label="Ogive (statistics)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5794" wikidata="Q734219" url="?curid=5794" title="Central tendency">
<text>In statistics, a central tendency (or measure of central tendency) is a central or typical value for a probability distribution.

Colloquially, measures of central tendency are often called &quot;averages.&quot; The term &quot;central tendency&quot; dates from the late 1920s.

The most common measures of central tendency are the arithmetic mean, the median, and the mode. A middle tendency can be calculated for either a finite set of values or for a theoretical distribution, such as the normal distribution. Occasionally authors use central tendency to denote &quot;the tendency of quantitative data to cluster around some central value.&quot;

The central tendency of a distribution is typically contrasted with its &quot;dispersion&quot; or &quot;variability&quot;; dispersion and central tendency are the often characterized properties of distributions. Analysis may judge whether data has a strong or a weak central tendency based on its dispersion.

==Measures==

The following may be applied to one-dimensional data. Depending on the circumstances, it may be appropriate to transform the data before calculating a central tendency. Examples are squaring the values or taking logarithms. Whether a transformation is appropriate and what it should be, depend heavily on the data being analyzed.

; Arithmetic mean or simply, mean: the sum of all measurements divided by the number of observations in the data set.
; Median: the middle value that separates the higher half from the lower half of the data set. The median and the mode are the only measures of central tendency that can be used for ordinal data, in which values are ranked relative to each other but are not measured absolutely.
; Mode: the most frequent value in the data set. This is the only central tendency measure that can be used with nominal data, which have purely qualitative category assignments.
; Generalized mean: A generalization of the Pythagorean means, specified by an exponent.
; Geometric mean: the &quot;n&quot;th root of the product of the data values, where there are &quot;n&quot; of these. This measure is valid only for data that are measured on a strictly positive scale.
; Harmonic mean: the reciprocal of the arithmetic mean of the reciprocals of the data values. This measure is valid only for data that are measured either on a strictly positive or a strictly negative scale.
; Weighted arithmetic mean: an arithmetic mean that incorporates weighting to certain data elements.
; Truncated mean or trimmed mean: the arithmetic mean of data values after a certain number or proportion of the highest and lowest data values have been discarded.
; Interquartile mean: a truncated mean based on data within the interquartile range.
; Midrange: the arithmetic mean of the maximum and minimum values of a data set.
; Midhinge: the arithmetic mean of the first and third quartiles.
; Quasi-arithmetic mean: A generalization of the generalized mean, specified by a continuous injective function.
; Trimean: the weighted arithmetic mean of the median and two quartiles.
; Winsorized mean: an arithmetic mean in which extreme values are replaced by values closer to the median.

Any of the above may be applied to each dimension of multi-dimensional data, but the results may not be invariant to rotations of the multi-dimensional space.

; Geometric median: the point minimizing the sum of distances to a set of sample points. This is the same as the median when applied to one-dimensional data, but it is not the same as taking the median of each dimension independently. It is not invariant to different rescaling of the different dimensions.
; Quadratic mean (often known as the root mean square): useful in engineering, but not often used in statistics. This is because it is not a good indicator of the center of the distribution when the distribution includes negative values.
; Simplicial depth: the probability that a randomly chosen simplex with vertices from the given distribution will contain the given center
; Tukey median: a point with the property that every halfspace containing it also contains many sample points

==Solutions to variational problems==
Several measures of central tendency can be characterized as solving a variational problem, in the sense of the calculus of variations, namely minimizing variation from the center. That is, given a measure of statistical dispersion, one asks for a measure of central tendency that minimizes variation: such that variation from the center is minimal among all choices of center. In a quip, &quot;dispersion precedes location&quot;. These measures are initially defined in one dimension, but can be generalized to multiple dimensions. This center may or may not be unique. In the sense of spaces, the correspondence is:
The associated functions are called -norms: respectively 0-&quot;norm&quot;, 1-norm, 2-norm, and ∞-norm. The function corresponding to the 0 space is not a norm, and is thus often referred to in quotes: 0-&quot;norm&quot;.

In equations, for a given (finite) data set , thought of as a vector , the dispersion about a point is the &quot;distance&quot; from to the constant vector in the -norm (normalized by the number of points ):

:formula_1

For and these functions are defined by taking limits, respectively as and . For the limiting values are and for , so the difference becomes simply equality, so the 0-norm counts the number of &quot;unequal&quot; points. For the largest number dominates, and thus the ∞-norm is the maximum difference.

===Uniqueness===
The mean (&quot;L&quot;2 center) and midrange (&quot;L&quot;∞ center) are unique (when they exist), while the median (&quot;L&quot;1 center) and mode (&quot;L&quot;0 center) are not in general unique. This can be understood in terms of convexity of the associated functions (coercive functions).

The 2-norm and ∞-norm are strictly convex, and thus (by convex optimization) the minimizer is unique (if it exists), and exists for bounded distributions. Thus standard deviation about the mean is lower than standard deviation about any other point, and the maximum deviation about the midrange is lower than the maximum deviation about any other point.

The 1-norm is not &quot;strictly&quot; convex, whereas strict convexity is needed to ensure uniqueness of the minimizer. Correspondingly, the median (in this sense of minimizing) is not in general unique, and in fact any point between the two central points of a discrete distribution minimizes average absolute deviation.

The 0-&quot;norm&quot; is not convex (hence not a norm). Correspondingly, the mode is not unique – for example, in a uniform distribution &quot;any&quot; point is the mode.

===Clustering===
Instead of a single central point, one can ask for multiple points such that the variation from these points is minimized. This leads to cluster analysis, where each point in the data set is clustered with the nearest &quot;center&quot;. Most commonly, using the 2-norm generalizes the mean to &quot;k&quot;-means clustering, while using the 1-norm generalizes the (geometric) median to &quot;k&quot;-medians clustering. Using the 0-norm simply generalizes the mode (most common value) to using the &quot;k&quot; most common values as centers.

Unlike the single-center statistics, this multi-center clustering cannot in general be computed in a closed-form expression, and instead must be computed or approximated by an iterative method; one general approach is expectation–maximization algorithms.

===Information geometry===
The notion of a &quot;center&quot; as minimizing variation can be generalized in information geometry as a distribution that minimizes divergence (a generalized distance) from a data set. The most common case is maximum likelihood estimation, where the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) maximizes likelihood (minimizes expected surprisal), which can be interpreted geometrically by using entropy to measure variation: the MLE minimizes cross-entropy (equivalently, relative entropy, Kullback–Leibler divergence).

A simple example of this is for the center of nominal data: instead of using the mode (the only single-valued &quot;center&quot;), one often uses the empirical measure (the frequency distribution divided by the sample size) as a &quot;center&quot;. For example, given binary data, say heads or tails, if a data set consists of 2 heads and 1 tails, then the mode is &quot;heads&quot;, but the empirical measure is 2/3 heads, 1/3 tails, which minimizes the cross-entropy (total surprisal) from the data set. This perspective is also used in regression analysis, where least squares finds the solution that minimizes the distances from it, and analogously in logistic regression, a maximum likelihood estimate minimizes the surprisal (information distance).

==Relationships between the mean, median and mode==
For unimodal distributions the following bounds are known and are sharp:

: formula_2

: formula_3

: formula_2

where &quot;μ&quot; is the mean, &quot;ν&quot; is the median, &quot;θ&quot; is the mode, and &quot;σ&quot; is the standard deviation.

For every distribution,

: formula_5

==See also==
*Central moment
*Expected value
*Location parameter
*Mean
*Population mean
*Sample mean

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q734219" start="17" end="33" title="Central tendency" label="central tendency"/>
<link wikidata="Q734219" start="38" end="65" title="Central tendency" label="measure of central tendency"/>
<link wikidata="Q200726" start="103" end="127" title="probability distribution" label="probability distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q202785" start="196" end="204" title="averages" label="averages"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="331" end="346" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="352" end="358" title="median" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q188224" start="368" end="372" title="Mode (statistics)" label="mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="491" end="510" title="normal distribution" label="normal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="599" end="603" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="727" end="737" title="statistical dispersion" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="1306" end="1321" title="Arithmetic mean" label="Arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q226995" start="1424" end="1430" title="Median" label="Median"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1604" end="1616" title="Level of measurement#Ordinal scale" label="ordinal data"/>
<link wikidata="Q188224" start="1703" end="1707" title="Mode (statistics)" label="Mode"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1814" end="1826" title="Level of measurement#Nominal level" label="nominal data"/>
<link wikidata="Q855729" start="1882" end="1898" title="Generalized mean" label="Generalized mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281360" start="1924" end="1941" title="Pythagorean means" label="Pythagorean means"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="1971" end="1985" title="Geometric mean" label="Geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q601053" start="1991" end="2011" title="Nth root" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;th root"/>
<link wikidata="Q188347" start="2173" end="2186" title="Harmonic mean" label="Harmonic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="2192" end="2202" title="Multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q729113" start="2381" end="2405" title="Weighted arithmetic mean" label="Weighted arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q32278" start="2482" end="2496" title="Truncated mean" label="Truncated mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077647" start="2647" end="2665" title="Interquartile mean" label="Interquartile mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916617" start="2709" end="2728" title="interquartile range" label="interquartile range"/>
<link wikidata="Q3260254" start="2732" end="2740" title="Midrange" label="Midrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842242" start="2813" end="2821" title="Midhinge" label="Midhinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2786686" start="2866" end="2874" title="quartile" label="quartile"/>
<link wikidata="Q583095" start="2879" end="2900" title="Quasi-arithmetic mean" label="Quasi-arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q855729" start="2926" end="2942" title="generalized mean" label="generalized mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="2959" end="2969" title="continuous function" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="2970" end="2979" title="injective function" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="2980" end="2988" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842161" start="2992" end="2999" title="Trimean" label="Trimean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989389" start="3065" end="3080" title="Winsorized mean" label="Winsorized mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q779824" start="3110" end="3124" title="Outlier" label="extreme values"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535496" start="3333" end="3349" title="Geometric median" label="Geometric median"/>
<link wikidata="Q223323" start="3640" end="3654" title="Quadratic mean" label="Quadratic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q223323" start="3675" end="3691" title="root mean square" label="root mean square"/>
<link wikidata="Q41778759" start="3878" end="3894" title="Simplicial depth" label="Simplicial depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q331350" start="3935" end="3942" title="simplex" label="simplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060048" start="4017" end="4029" title="Tukey median" label="Tukey median"/>
<link wikidata="Q216861" start="4276" end="4298" title="calculus of variations" label="calculus of variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q845777" start="4373" end="4395" title="statistical dispersion" label="statistical dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="4751" end="4757" title="Lp space" label="spaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q305936" start="4818" end="4824" title="p-norm" label="-norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="5782" end="5791" title="convex function" label="convexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1597436" start="5821" end="5838" title="coercive function" label="coercive function"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="5869" end="5884" title="strictly convex function" label="strictly convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q622825" start="6850" end="6866" title="cluster analysis" label="cluster analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310401" start="7007" end="7037" title="k-means clustering" label="&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-means clustering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041956" start="7100" end="7132" title="k-medians clustering" label="&amp;quot;k&amp;quot;-medians clustering"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="7359" end="7381" title="closed-form expression" label="closed-form expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321565" start="7434" end="7450" title="iterative method" label="iterative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275153" start="7476" end="7510" title="expectation–maximization algorithm" label="expectation–maximization algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798604" start="7622" end="7642" title="information geometry" label="information geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283901" start="7676" end="7686" title="divergence (statistics)" label="divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045555" start="7753" end="7782" title="maximum likelihood estimation" label="maximum likelihood estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q735075" start="7869" end="7878" title="surprisal" label="surprisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q204570" start="7929" end="7936" title="Entropy (statistics)" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685498" start="7977" end="7990" title="cross-entropy" label="cross-entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q255166" start="8006" end="8022" title="relative entropy" label="relative entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374247" start="8205" end="8222" title="empirical measure" label="empirical measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q762856" start="8228" end="8250" title="frequency distribution" label="frequency distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564360" start="8266" end="8277" title="sample size" label="sample size"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913888" start="8323" end="8334" title="binary data" label="binary data"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="8594" end="8613" title="regression analysis" label="regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="8621" end="8634" title="least squares" label="least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132755" start="8711" end="8730" title="logistic regression" label="logistic regression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896771" start="8867" end="8888" title="unimodal distribution" label="unimodal distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088747" start="9163" end="9177" title="Central moment" label="Central moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q200125" start="9179" end="9193" title="Expected value" label="Expected value"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621185" start="9195" end="9213" title="Location parameter" label="Location parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796622" start="9215" end="9219" title="Mean" label="Mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q49918" start="9221" end="9236" title="Population mean" label="Population mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348165" start="9238" end="9249" title="Sample mean" label="Sample mean"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5796" wikidata="Q211236" url="?curid=5796" title="Celebrity">
<text>Celebrity is a condition of fame and broad public recognition of a person or group due to the attention given to them by mass media. The word is also used to refer to famous individuals. A person may attain celebrity status by having great wealth, participation in sports or the entertainment industry, their position as a political figure, or even their connection to another celebrity. &#x27;Celebrity&#x27; usually implies a favorable public image, as opposed to the neutrals &#x27;famous&#x27; or &#x27;notable&#x27;, or the negatives &#x27;infamous&#x27; and &#x27;notorious&#x27;.

==History==
In his 2020 book &quot;Dead Famous: An Unexpected History Of Celebrity&quot;, British historian Greg Jenner uses the definition:
Although his book is subtitled &quot;from Bronze Age to Silver Screen&quot;, and despite the fact that &quot;Until very recently, sociologists argued that &quot;celebrity&quot; was invented just over 100 years ago, in the flickering glimmer of early Hollywood&quot; and the suggestion that some medieval saints might qualify, Jenner asserts that the earliest celebrities lived in the early 1700s, his first example being Henry Sacheverell.
Athletes in Ancient Greece were welcomed home as heroes, had songs and poems written in their honor, and received free food and gifts from those seeking celebrity endorsement. Ancient Rome similarly lauded actors and notorious gladiators, and Julius Caesar appeared on a coin in his own lifetime (a departure from the usual depiction of battles and divine lineage).

In the early 12th century, Thomas Becket became famous following his murder, the first possible case of posthumous popularity. The Christian Church promoted him as a martyr, and images of him and scenes from his life became widespread in just a few years. In a pattern often repeated, what started as an explosion of popularity (often referred to with the suffix &#x27;mania&#x27;) turned into long-lasting fame: pilgrimages to Canterbury Cathedral, where he was killed, became instantly fashionable, and the fascination with his life and death inspired plays and films.
The cult of personality (particularly in the west) can be traced back to the Romantics in the 18th century, whose livelihood as artists and poets depended on the currency of their reputation. Lord Byron became a celebrity in 1812 after the publication of the first two cantos of &quot;Childe Harold&#x27;s Pilgrimage&quot;. &quot;I awoke one morning and found myself famous,&quot; he said. According to McGann: &quot;He rapidly became the most brilliant star in the dazzling world of Regency London.&quot;

Establishing cultural hot spots became important in generating fame, such as in London and Paris in the 18th and 19th centuries. Newspapers started including &quot;gossip&quot; columns, and certain clubs and events became places to be seen to receive publicity. David Lodge called Charles Dickens the &quot;first writer to feel the intense pressure of being simultaneously an artist and an object of unrelenting public interest and adulation&quot;, and Juliet John backed up the claim for Dickens &quot;to be called the first self-made global media star of the age of mass culture.&quot;

Theatrical actors were often considered celebrities. Restaurants near theaters, where actors would congregate, began putting up caricatures or photographs of actors on celebrity walls in the late 19th century. The subject of widespread public and media interest, Lillie Langtry, made her West End theatre debut in 1881 causing a sensation in London by becoming the first socialite to appear on stage. The following year she became the poster-girl for Pears Soap, becoming the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product. In 1895, poet and playwright Oscar Wilde became the subject of &quot;one of the first celebrity trials&quot;.

Another example of celebrities in the entertainment industry was in music, beginning in the mid-19th century. Never seen before in music, many people engaged in an immense fan frenzy called Lisztomania that began in 1841. This created the basis for the behavior fans have around their favorite musicians in modern society.
The movie industry spread around the globe in the first half of the 20th century, creating the first film celebrities. The term celebrity was not always tied to actors in films however, especially when cinema was starting as a medium. As Paul McDonald states in &quot;The Star System: Hollywood&#x27;s Production of Popular Identities&quot;, &quot;In the first decade of the twentieth century, American film production companies withheld the names of film performers, despite requests from audiences, fearing that public recognition would drive performers to demand higher salaries.&quot; Public fascination went well beyond the on-screen exploits of movie stars, and their private lives became headline news: for example, in Hollywood the marriages of Elizabeth Taylor and in Bollywood the affairs of Raj Kapoor in the 1950s. Like theatrical actors before them, movie actors were the subjects of celebrity walls in restaurants they frequented, near movie studios, most notably at Sardi&#x27;s in Hollywood.

The second half of the century saw television and popular music bring new forms of celebrity, such as the rock star and the pop group, epitomised by Elvis Presley and the Beatles, respectively. John Lennon&#x27;s highly controversial 1966 quote: &quot;We&#x27;re more popular than Jesus now&quot;, which he later insisted was not a boast, and that he was not in any way comparing himself with Christ, gives an insight into both the adulation and notoriety that fame can bring. Unlike movies, television created celebrities who were not primarily actors; for example, presenters, talk show hosts, and newsreaders. However, most of these are only famous within the regions reached by their particular broadcaster, and only a few such as Oprah Winfrey, Jerry Springer, or David Frost could be said to have broken through into wider stardom. Television also gave exposure to sportspeople, notably Pelé after his emergence at the 1958 FIFA World Cup, with Barney Ronay in &quot;The Guardian&quot; stating, &quot;What is certain is that Pelé invented this game, the idea of individual global sporting superstardom, and in a way that is unrepeatable now.&quot;

In the &#x27;60s and early &#x27;70s, the book publishing industry began to persuade major celebrities to put their names on autobiographies and other titles in a genre called celebrity publishing. In most cases, the book was not written by the celebrity but by a ghostwriter, but the celebrity would then be available for a book tour and appearances on talk shows.

==Wealth==
===&quot;Forbes&quot; Celebrity 100===

&quot;Forbes&quot; magazine releases an annual &quot;Forbes&quot; Celebrity 100 list of the highest-paid celebrities in the world. The total earnings for all top celebrity 100 earners totaled $4.5 billion in 2010 alone.

For instance, &quot;Forbes&quot; ranked media mogul and talk show host, Oprah Winfrey as the top earner &quot;Forbes magazine&#x27;s annual ranking of the most powerful celebrities&quot;, with earnings of $290 million in the past year. Forbes cites that Lady Gaga reportedly earned over $90 million in 2010. In 2011, golfer Tiger Woods was one of highest-earning celebrity athletes, with an income of $74 million and is consistently ranked one of the highest-paid athletes in the world. In 2013, Madonna was ranked as the fifth most powerful and the highest-earning celebrity of the year with earnings of $125 million. She has consistently been among the most powerful and highest-earning celebrities in the world, occupying the third place in Forbes Celebrity 100 2009 with $110 million of earnings, and getting the tenth place in the 2011 edition of the list with annual earnings equal to $58 million. Beyoncé has also appeared in the top ten in 2008, 2009, 2010, 2013, 2017, and topped the list in 2014 with earnings of $115 million. Cristiano Ronaldo followed by Lionel Messi in 2020 became the first two athletes in a team sport to surpass $1 billion in earnings during their careers.

&quot;Forbes&quot; also lists the top-earning deceased celebrities, with singer Michael Jackson, fantasy author J. R. R. Tolkien and children&#x27;s author Roald Dahl each topping the annual list with earnings of $500 million over the course of a year.

===Entrepreneurship and endorsements===

Celebrity endorsements have proven very successful around the world where, due to increasing consumerism, a person owns a &quot;status symbol&quot; by purchasing a celebrity-endorsed product. Although it has become commonplace for celebrities to place their name with endorsements onto products just for quick money, some celebrities have gone beyond merely using their names and have put their entrepreneurial spirit to work by becoming entrepreneurs by attaching themselves in the business aspects of entertainment and building their own business brand beyond their traditional salaried activities. Along with investing their salaried wages into growing business endeavors, several celebrities have become innovative business leaders in their respective industries.

Numerous celebrities have ventured into becoming business moguls and established themselves as entrepreneurs, idolizing many well known business leaders such as Bill Gates, Richard Branson and Warren Buffett. For instance, former basketball player Michael Jordan became an entrepreneur involved with many sports-related ventures including investing a minority stake in the Charlotte Bobcats, Paul Newman started his own salad dressing business after leaving behind a distinguished acting career, and rap musician Birdman started his own record label, clothing line, and an oil business while maintaining a career as a rap artist. In 2014, David Beckham became co-owner of new Major League Soccer team Inter Miami, which began playing in 2020. Former Brazil striker and World Cup winner Ronaldo became the majority owner of La Liga club Real Valladolid in 2018. Other celebrities such as Tyler Perry, George Lucas, and Steven Spielberg have become successful entrepreneurs through starting their own film production companies and running their own movie studios beyond their traditional activities.

Tabloid magazines and talk TV shows bestow a great deal of attention to celebrities. To stay in the public eye and build wealth in addition to their salaried labor, numerous celebrities have begun participating and branching into various business ventures and endorsements, which include: animation, publishing, fashion designing, cosmetics, consumer electronics, household items and appliances, cigarettes, soft drinks and alcoholic beverages, hair care, hairdressing, jewelry design, fast food, credit cards, video games, writing, and toys.

In addition to these, some celebrities have been involved with some business and investment-related ventures also include: sports team ownership, fashion retailing, establishments such as restaurants, cafes, hotels, and casinos, movie theaters, advertising and event planning, management-related ventures such as sports management, financial services, model management, and talent management, record labels, film production, television production, publishing books and music, massage therapy, salons, health and fitness, and real estate.

Although some celebrities have achieved additional financial success from various business ventures, the vast majority of celebrities are not successful businesspeople and still rely on salaried labored wages to earn a living. Not all celebrities eventually succeed with their businesses and other related side ventures. Some celebrities either went or filed for bankruptcy as a result of dabbling with such side businesses or endorsements.

==Famous for being famous==

&quot;Famous for being famous&quot;, in popular culture terminology, refers to someone who attains celebrity status for no particular identifiable reason, or who achieves fame through association with a celebrity. The term is a pejorative, suggesting the target has no particular talents or abilities. British journalist Malcolm Muggeridge made the first known usage of the phrase in the introduction to his book &quot;Muggeridge Through The Microphone: BBC Radio and Television&quot; (1967) in which he wrote:In the past if someone was famous or notorious, it was for something—as a writer or an actor or a criminal; for some talent or distinction or abomination. Today one is famous for being famous. People who come up to one in the street or in public places to claim recognition nearly always say: &quot;I&#x27;ve seen you on the telly!&quot;

The coinages &quot;famesque&quot; and &quot;celebutante&quot; are of similar pejorative gist.

This shift has sparked criticism for promoting superficial recognition over substantive achievements and reflects broader changes in how fame and success are perceived in modern culture.

==Mass media phenomena==
Mass media has dramatically reshaped the concept of celebrity by amplifying visibility and extending fame globally. With the rise of television, social media, and reality TV, individuals can achieve stardom not just through traditional talents but also through their personal lives and online presence. This heightened visibility brings intense public scrutiny, where every detail of a celebrity&#x27;s life is subject to constant media coverage. Celebrities often become brands themselves, influencing trends and consumer behavior while navigating the pressures of privacy erosion and mental health challenges.

Celebrities may be resented for their accolades, and the public may have a love/hate relationship with celebrities. Due to the high visibility of celebrities&#x27; private lives, their successes and shortcomings are often made very public. Celebrities are alternately portrayed as glowing examples of perfection, when they garner awards, or as decadent or immoral if they become associated with a scandal. When seen in a positive light, celebrities are frequently portrayed as possessing skills and abilities beyond average people; for example, celebrity actors are routinely celebrated for acquiring new skills necessary for filming a role within a very brief time, and to a level that amazes the professionals who train them. Similarly, some celebrities with very little formal education can sometimes be portrayed as experts on complicated issues. Some celebrities have been very vocal about their political views. For example, Matt Damon expressed his displeasure with 2008 US vice presidential nominee Sarah Palin, as well as with the 2011 United States debt-ceiling crisis.

==Internet==
Also known as being &quot;internet famous&quot;.

===Social networking and video hosting===
Most high-profile celebrities participate in social networking services and photo or video hosting platforms such as YouTube, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and Snapchat. Social networking services allow celebrities to communicate directly with their fans, removing the &quot;traditional&quot; media. Through social media, many people outside of the entertainment and sports sphere become a celebrity in their own sphere. Social media humanizes celebrities in a way that arouses public fascination as evident by the success of magazines such as &quot;Us Weekly&quot; and &quot;People Weekly&quot;. Celebrity blogging has also spawned stars such as Perez Hilton who is known for not only blogging but also outing celebrities.

Social media and the rise of the smartphone has changed how celebrities are treated and how people gain the platform of fame. Websites like Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube allow people to become a celebrity in a different manner. For example, Justin Bieber got his start on YouTube by posting videos of him singing. His fans were able to directly contact him through his content and were able to interact with him on several social media platforms. The internet, as said before, also allows fans to connect with their favorite celebrity without ever meeting them in person.

Social media sites have also contributed to the fame of certain celebrities, such as Tila Tequila who became known through MySpace.

===Asia===

A report by the BBC highlighted a longtime trend of Asian internet celebrities called Wanghong in Chinese. According to the BBC, there are two kinds of online celebrities in China—those who create original content, such as Papi Jiang, who is regularly censored by Chinese authorities for cursing in her videos, and Wanghongs fall under the second category, as they have clothing and cosmetics businesses on Taobao, China&#x27;s equivalent of Amazon.

==Access restriction==
Access to celebrities is strictly controlled by the celebrities entourage of staff which includes managers, publicists, agents, personal assistants, and bodyguards. Journalists may even have difficulty accessing celebrities for interviews. Writer and actor Michael Musto said, &quot;You have to go through many hoops just to talk to a major celebrity. You have to get past three different sets of publicists: the publicist for the event, the publicist for the movie, and then the celebrity&#x27;s personal publicist. They all have to approve you.&quot;

Celebrities also typically have security staff at their home or properties, to protect them and their belongs from similar threats.

==&quot;Fifteen minutes of fame&quot;==
&quot;15 minutes of fame&quot; is a phrase often used as slang to short-lived publicity. Certain &quot;15 minutes of fame&quot; celebrities can be average people seen with an A-list celebrity, who are sometimes noticed on entertainment news channels such as E! News. These are ordinary people becoming celebrities, often based on the ridiculous things they do.

&quot;In fact, many reality show contestants fall into this category: the only thing that qualifies them to be on TV is that they&#x27;re real.&quot;

==Health implications==
Common threats such as stalking have spawned celebrity worship syndrome where a person becomes overly involved with the details of a celebrity&#x27;s personal life. Psychologists have indicated that though many people obsess over glamorous film, television, sport and music stars, the disparity in salaries in society seems to value professional athletes and entertainment industry-based professionals. One study found that singers, musicians, actors and athletes die younger on average than writers, composers, academics, politicians and businesspeople, with a greater incidence of cancer and especially lung cancer. However, it was remarked that the reasons for this remained unclear, with theories including innate tendencies towards risk-taking as well as the pressure or opportunities of particular types of fame.

Fame might have negative psychological effects. An academic study on the subject said that fame has an addictive quality to it. When a celebrity&#x27;s fame recedes over time, the celebrity may find it difficult to adjust psychologically.

Recently, there has been more attention toward the impact celebrities have on health decisions of the population at large. It is believed that the public will follow celebrities&#x27; health advice to some extent. This can have positive impacts when the celebrities give solid, evidence-informed health advice, however, it can also have detrimental effects if the health advice is not accurate enough.

==See also==
== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* Goldman, Jonathan (2011) &quot;Modernism Is the Literature of Celebrity&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2011. .
* Grinin, Leonid (2009) &quot;&#x27;People of Celebrity&#x27; as a New Social Stratum and Elite&quot;. In &quot;Hierarchy and Power in the History of Civilizations: Cultural Dimensions&quot; (pp. 183–206). Ed. by Leonid E. Grinin and Andrey V. Korotayev. Moscow: KRASAND/Editorial URSS, 2009.
* Schikel, Richard. &quot;Intimate Strangers: The Culture of Celebrity&quot;. New York: Doubleday, 1985. .

== Further reading ==

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211236" start="0" end="9" title="Celebrity" label="Celebrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="121" end="131" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="240" end="246" title="wealth" label="wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q56812010" start="696" end="707" title="Greg Jenner" label="Greg Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625371" start="1150" end="1167" title="Henry Sacheverell" label="Henry Sacheverell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066131" start="1169" end="1176" title="Athlete" label="Athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1181" end="1195" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057785" start="1322" end="1343" title="celebrity endorsement" label="celebrity endorsement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1345" end="1357" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="1412" end="1425" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="1563" end="1576" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="2299" end="2309" title="Lord Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072741" start="2392" end="2423" title="Childe Harold&amp;#x27;s Pilgrimage" label="Childe Harold&amp;#x27;s Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25861" start="2591" end="2598" title="Regency era" label="Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q313001" start="2876" end="2887" title="David Lodge (author)" label="David Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686" start="2895" end="2910" title="Charles Dickens" label="Charles Dickens"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649548" start="3371" end="3385" title="celebrity wall" label="celebrity wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q297743" start="3466" end="3480" title="Lillie Langtry" label="Lillie Langtry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="3491" end="3507" title="West End theatre" label="West End theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="3574" end="3583" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046564" start="3654" end="3664" title="Pears (soap)" label="Pears Soap"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="3757" end="3768" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427927" start="4029" end="4040" title="Lisztomania" label="Lisztomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="4166" end="4180" title="Film industry" label="movie industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337738" start="4813" end="4823" title="movie star" label="movie star"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="4915" end="4931" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="4939" end="4948" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q55407" start="4964" end="4974" title="Raj Kapoor" label="Raj Kapoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q108649548" start="5059" end="5073" title="celebrity wall" label="celebrity wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7423790" start="5143" end="5155" title="Sardi&amp;#x27;s" label="Sardi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="5206" end="5216" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="5320" end="5333" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="5338" end="5349" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="5365" end="5376" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266028" start="5434" end="5457" title="more popular than Jesus" label="more popular than Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="5906" end="5919" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27214" start="5921" end="5935" title="Jerry Springer" label="Jerry Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q380865" start="5940" end="5951" title="David Frost" label="David Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q12897" start="6064" end="6068" title="Pelé" label="Pelé"/>
<link wikidata="Q132533" start="6096" end="6115" title="1958 FIFA World Cup" label="1958 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099337" start="6122" end="6134" title="Barney Ronay" label="Barney Ronay"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6144" end="6156" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="6590" end="6601" title="ghostwriter" label="ghostwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="6750" end="6756" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467229" start="6791" end="6823" title="Forbes Celebrity 100" label="&amp;quot;Forbes&amp;quot; Celebrity 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420621" start="7005" end="7016" title="media mogul" label="media mogul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642125" start="7021" end="7035" title="talk show host" label="talk show host"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="7037" end="7050" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="7219" end="7228" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10993" start="7289" end="7300" title="Tiger Woods" label="Tiger Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066131" start="7429" end="7436" title="sportsperson" label="athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="7461" end="7468" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="7869" end="7876" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q11571" start="8002" end="8019" title="Cristiano Ronaldo" label="Cristiano Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q615" start="8032" end="8044" title="Lionel Messi" label="Lionel Messi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119351" start="8190" end="8222" title="Forbes list of the world&amp;#x27;s highest-paid dead celebrities" label="top-earning deceased celebrities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="8236" end="8251" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="8268" end="8284" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="8312" end="8322" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="8544" end="8555" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="9269" end="9283" title="business mogul" label="business mogul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="9381" end="9391" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="9393" end="9408" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q47213" start="9413" end="9427" title="Warren Buffett" label="Warren Buffett"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="9468" end="9482" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q163480" start="9593" end="9610" title="Charlotte Bobcats" label="Charlotte Bobcats"/>
<link wikidata="Q41871" start="9612" end="9623" title="Paul Newman" label="Paul Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572278" start="9640" end="9654" title="salad dressing" label="salad dressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q361661" start="9733" end="9740" title="Birdman (rapper)" label="Birdman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="9757" end="9769" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q587682" start="9793" end="9805" title="oil well" label="oil business"/>
<link wikidata="Q10520" start="9859" end="9872" title="David Beckham" label="David Beckham"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="9896" end="9915" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16844931" start="9921" end="9932" title="Inter Miami CF" label="Inter Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q529207" start="10006" end="10013" title="Ronaldo (Brazilian footballer)" label="Ronaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q10319" start="10056" end="10071" title="Real Valladolid" label="Real Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q686301" start="10107" end="10118" title="Tyler Perry" label="Tyler Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="10120" end="10132" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="10138" end="10154" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q375336" start="10267" end="10279" title="movie studio" label="movie studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416251" start="10319" end="10336" title="Gossip magazine" label="Tabloid magazines"/>
<link wikidata="Q581105" start="10661" end="10681" title="consumer electronics" label="consumer electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q212920" start="10703" end="10712" title="home appliance" label="appliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q147538" start="10727" end="10737" title="soft drink" label="soft drink"/>
<link wikidata="Q6189617" start="10789" end="10803" title="jewelry design" label="jewelry design"/>
<link wikidata="Q29583" start="11009" end="11026" title="fashion design" label="fashion retailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q48519" start="11176" end="11193" title="sports management" label="sports management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144447" start="11215" end="11231" title="modeling agency" label="model management"/>
<link wikidata="Q281940" start="11237" end="11254" title="talent management" label="talent management"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="11256" end="11268" title="record label" label="record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="11271" end="11286" title="film production" label="film production"/>
<link wikidata="Q578109" start="11288" end="11309" title="television producer" label="television production"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972943" start="11322" end="11327" title="book publisher" label="books"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917775" start="11332" end="11337" title="Music publisher (popular music)" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195245" start="11356" end="11361" title="Beauty salon" label="salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="11913" end="11928" title="popular culture" label="popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="12101" end="12111" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q720681" start="12194" end="12212" title="Malcolm Muggeridge" label="Malcolm Muggeridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q587231" start="12741" end="12749" title="famesque" label="famesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q587231" start="12766" end="12777" title="celebutante" label="celebutante"/>
<link wikidata="Q175535" start="14574" end="14584" title="Matt Damon" label="Matt Damon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43144" start="14650" end="14661" title="Sarah Palin" label="Sarah Palin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591212" start="14688" end="14721" title="United States debt-ceiling crisis of 2011" label="United States debt-ceiling crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045208" start="14763" end="14778" title="Internet celebrity" label="internet famous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="14874" end="14899" title="social networking service" label="social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604586" start="14946" end="14953" title="List of YouTubers" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220391" start="14999" end="15024" title="Social networking service" label="Social networking service"/>
<link wikidata="Q549578" start="15379" end="15388" title="Us Weekly" label="Us Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="15405" end="15418" title="People (magazine)" label="People Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q318108" start="15476" end="15488" title="Perez Hilton" label="Perez Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054678" start="15533" end="15539" title="outing" label="outing"/>
<link wikidata="Q34086" start="15807" end="15820" title="Justin Bieber" label="Justin Bieber"/>
<link wikidata="Q233295" start="16224" end="16236" title="Tila Tequila" label="Tila Tequila"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="16300" end="16303" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324311" start="16370" end="16378" title="Wanghong economy" label="Wanghong"/>
<link wikidata="Q23771996" start="16507" end="16517" title="Papi Jiang" label="Papi Jiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884" start="16726" end="16732" title="Amazon.com" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320883" start="16856" end="16863" title="Talent manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q4178004" start="16866" end="16875" title="publicist" label="publicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344174" start="16878" end="16883" title="Talent agent" label="agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096316" start="16886" end="16904" title="personal assistant" label="personal assistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="16911" end="16920" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405921" start="17015" end="17028" title="Michael Musto" label="Michael Musto"/>
<link wikidata="Q194354" start="17491" end="17509" title="15 minutes of fame" label="15 minutes of fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321351" start="17743" end="17750" title="E! News" label="E! News"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="18045" end="18053" title="stalking" label="stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q15121394" start="18067" end="18093" title="celebrity worship syndrome" label="celebrity worship syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369650" start="18355" end="18375" title="professional athlete" label="professional athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112620" start="18381" end="18422" title="list of entertainment industry topics" label="entertainment industry-based professional"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18733" end="18739" title="innate" label="innate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="18867" end="18880" title="psychological" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="18945" end="18954" title="addiction" label="addictive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273218" start="19551" end="19558" title="Jonathan Goldman" label="Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149652" start="19675" end="19681" title="Leonid Grinin" label="Grinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q189172" start="19907" end="19926" title="Andrey Korotayev" label="Andrey V. Korotayev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529892" start="19944" end="19958" title="Editorial URSS" label="Editorial URSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454098" start="19968" end="19984" title="Richard Schickel" label="Schikel, Richard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5797" wikidata="Q1776598" url="?curid=5797" title="Cluster sampling">
<text>In statistics, cluster sampling is a sampling plan used when mutually homogeneous yet internally heterogeneous groupings are evident in a statistical population. It is often used in marketing research. 

In this sampling plan, the total population is divided into these groups (known as clusters) and a simple random sample of the groups is selected. The elements in each cluster are then sampled. If all elements in each sampled cluster are sampled, then this is referred to as a &quot;one-stage&quot; cluster sampling plan. If a simple random subsample of elements is selected within each of these groups, this is referred to as a &quot;two-stage&quot; cluster sampling plan. A common motivation for cluster sampling is to reduce the total number of interviews and costs given the desired accuracy. For a fixed sample size, the expected random error is smaller when most of the variation in the population is present internally within the groups, and not between the groups.

==Cluster elemental==
The population within a cluster should ideally be as heterogeneous as possible, but there should be homogeneity between clusters. Each cluster should be a small-scale representation of the total population. The clusters should be mutually exclusive and collectively exhaustive. A random sampling technique is then used on any relevant clusters to choose which clusters to include in the study. In single-stage cluster sampling, all the elements from each of the selected clusters are sampled. In two-stage cluster sampling, a random sampling technique is applied to the elements from each of the selected clusters.

The main difference between cluster sampling and stratified sampling is that in cluster sampling the cluster is treated as the sampling unit so sampling is done on a population of clusters (at least in the first stage). In stratified sampling, the sampling is done on elements within each stratum. In stratified sampling, a random sample is drawn from each of the strata, whereas in cluster sampling only the selected clusters are sampled. A common motivation for cluster sampling is to reduce costs by increasing sampling efficiency. This contrasts with stratified sampling where the motivation is to increase precision.

There is also multistage cluster sampling, where at least two stages are taken in selecting elements from clusters.

==When clusters are of different sizes==

Without modifying the estimated parameter, cluster sampling is unbiased when the clusters are approximately the same size. In this case, the parameter is computed by combining all the selected clusters. When the clusters are of different sizes there are several options:

One method is to sample clusters and then survey all elements in that cluster. Another method is a two-stage method of sampling a fixed proportion of units (be it 5% or 50%, or another number, depending on cost considerations) from within each of the selected clusters. Relying on the sample drawn from these options will yield an unbiased estimator. However, the sample size is no longer fixed upfront. This leads to a more complicated formula for the standard error of the estimator, as well as issues with the optics of the study plan (since the power analysis and the cost estimations often relate to a specific sample size).

A third possible solution is to use probability proportionate to size sampling. In this sampling plan, the probability of selecting a cluster is proportional to its size, so a large cluster has a greater probability of selection than a small cluster. The advantage here is that when clusters are selected with probability proportionate to size, the same number of interviews should be carried out in each sampled cluster so that each unit sampled has the same probability of selection.

==Applications of cluster sampling==
An example of cluster sampling is area sampling or geographical cluster sampling. Each cluster is a geographical area in an area sampling frame. Because a geographically dispersed population can be expensive to survey, greater economy than simple random sampling can be achieved by grouping several respondents within a local area into a cluster. It is usually necessary to increase the total sample size to achieve equivalent precision in the estimators, but cost savings may make such an increase in sample size feasible.

For the organization of a population census, the first step is usually dividing the overall geographic area into enumeration areas or census tracts for the field work organization. Enumeration areas may be also useful as first-stage units for cluster sampling in many types of surveys. When a population census is outdated, the list of individuals should not be directly used as sampling frame for a socio-economic survey. Updating the whole census is economically unfeasible. A good alternative may be keeping the old enumeration areas, with some update in highly dynamic areas, such as urban suburbs, selecting a sample of enumeration areas and updating the list of individuals or households only in the selected enumeration areas. 

Cluster sampling is used to estimate low mortalities in cases such as wars, famines and natural disasters.

=== Fisheries science ===
It is almost impossible to take a simple random sample of fish from a population, which would require that individuals are captured individually and at random. This is because fishing gears capture fish in groups (or clusters). 

In commercial fisheries sampling, the costs of operating at sea are often too large to select hauls individually and at random. Therefore, observations are further clustered by either vessel or fishing trip.

=== Economics ===
The World Bank has applied adaptive cluster sampling to study informal businesses in developing countries in a cost efficient manner, as the informal sector is not captured by official records and too expensive to be studied through simple random sampling. The approach follows a two-stage sampling whereby adaptive cluster sampling is used to generate an estimate of the universe of informal businesses in operations, while the second stage to obtain a random sample about the characteristics of those businesses.

==Advantages==

* Can be cheaper than other sampling plans – e.g. fewer travel expenses, and administration cost.
*Feasibility: This sampling plan takes large populations into account. Since these groups are so small, deploying any other sampling plan would be very costly.
*Economy: The regular two major concerns of expenditure, i.e., traveling and listing, are greatly reduced in this method. For example: Compiling research information about every household in a city would be very costly, whereas compiling information about various blocks of the city will be more economical. Here, traveling as well as listing efforts will be greatly reduced.
*Reduced variability: in the rare case of a negative intraclass correlation between subjects within a cluster, the estimators produced by cluster sampling will yield more accurate estimates than data obtained from a simple random sample (i.e. the design effect will be larger than 1). This is not a commonplace scenario. 
Major use: when the sampling frame of all elements is not available we can resort only to cluster sampling.

==Disadvantages==

* Higher sampling error, which can be expressed by the design effect: the ratio between the variance of an estimator made from the samples of the cluster study and the variance of an estimator obtained from a sample of subjects in an equally reliable, randomly sampled unclustered study. The larger the intraclass correlation is between subjects within a cluster the worse the design effect becomes (i.e. the larger it gets from 1. Indicating a larger expected increase in the variance of the estimator). In other words, the more there is heterogeneity between clusters and more homogeneity between subjects within a cluster, the less accurate our estimators become. This is because in such cases we are better on sampling as many clusters as we can and making do with a small sample of subjects from within each cluster (i.e. two-stage cluster sampling).
*Complexity. Cluster sampling is more sophisticated and requires more attention with how to plan and how to analyze (i.e.: to take into account the weights of subjects during the estimation of parameters, confidence intervals, etc.) 

==More on cluster sampling==

===Two-stage cluster sampling===
Two-stage cluster sampling, a simple case of multistage sampling, is obtained by selecting cluster samples in the first stage and then selecting a sample of elements from every sampled cluster. Consider a population of &quot;N&quot; clusters in total. In the first stage, &quot;n&quot; clusters are selected using the ordinary cluster sampling method. In the second stage, simple random sampling is usually used. It is used separately in every cluster and the numbers of elements selected from different clusters are not necessarily equal. The total number of clusters &quot;N&quot;, the number of clusters selected &quot;n&quot;, and the numbers of elements from selected clusters need to be pre-determined by the survey designer. Two-stage cluster sampling aims at minimizing survey costs and at the same time controlling the uncertainty related to estimates of interest. This method can be used in health and social sciences. For instance, researchers used two-stage cluster sampling to generate a representative sample of the Iraqi population to conduct mortality surveys. Sampling in this method can be quicker and more reliable than other methods, which is why this method is now used frequently.

===Inference when the number of clusters is small===
Cluster sampling methods can lead to significant bias when working with a small number of clusters. For instance, it can be necessary to cluster at the state or city-level, units that may be small and fixed in number. Microeconometrics methods for panel data often use short panels, which is analogous to having few observations per clusters and many clusters. The small cluster problem can be viewed as an incidental parameter problem. While the point estimates can be reasonably precisely estimated, if the number of observations per cluster is sufficiently high, we need the number of clusters formula_1 for the asymptotics to kick in. If the number of clusters is low the estimated covariance matrix can be downward biased.

Small numbers of clusters are a risk when there is serial correlation or when there is intraclass correlation as in the Moulton context. When having few clusters, we tend to underestimate serial correlation across observations when a random shock occurs, or the intraclass correlation in a Moulton setting. Several studies have highlighted the consequences of serial correlation and highlighted the small-cluster problem.

In the framework of the Moulton factor, an intuitive explanation of the small cluster problem can be derived from the formula for the Moulton factor. Assume for simplicity that the number of observations per cluster is fixed at &quot;n&quot;. Below, formula_2 stands for the covariance matrix adjusted for clustering, formula_3 stands for the covariance matrix not adjusted for clustering, and ρ stands for the intraclass correlation:

: formula_4

The ratio on the left-hand side indicates how much the unadjusted scenario overestimates the precision. Therefore, a high number means a strong downward bias of the estimated covariance matrix. A small cluster problem can be interpreted as a large n: when the data is fixed and the number of clusters is low, the number of data within a cluster can be high. It follows that inference, when the number of clusters is small, will not have the correct coverage.

Several solutions for the small cluster problem have been proposed. One can use a bias-corrected cluster-robust variance matrix, make T-distribution adjustments, or use bootstrap methods with asymptotic refinements, such as the percentile-t or wild bootstrap, that can lead to improved finite sample inference. Cameron, Gelbach and Miller (2008) provide microsimulations for different methods and find that the wild bootstrap performs well in the face of a small number of clusters.

==See also==

* Multistage sampling
* Sampling (statistics)
* Simple random sampling
* Stratified sampling

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776598" start="15" end="31" title="Cluster sampling" label="cluster sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="37" end="45" title="sampling (statistics)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49918" start="138" end="160" title="statistical population" label="statistical population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141436" start="182" end="200" title="marketing research" label="marketing research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056998" start="303" end="323" title="simple random sample" label="simple random sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q196372" start="839" end="851" title="Observational error" label="random error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517706" start="1665" end="1684" title="stratified sampling" label="stratified sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652044" start="2253" end="2280" title="multistage sampling" label="multistage cluster sampling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3337" end="3379" title="sampling (statistics)#Probability-proportional-to-size sampling" label="probability proportionate to size sampling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3859" end="3872" title="area sampling" label="area sampling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3876" end="3905" title="geographical cluster sampling" label="geographical cluster sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q124040280" start="3949" end="3968" title="area sampling frame" label="area sampling frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130160" start="4269" end="4278" title="estimator" label="estimator"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="4387" end="4393" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q107738887" start="4484" end="4497" title="Census tract" label="census tracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410163" start="4729" end="4743" title="sampling frame" label="sampling frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q198" start="5156" end="5159" title="war" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="5162" end="5168" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="5174" end="5190" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056998" start="5254" end="5274" title="simple random sample" label="simple random sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604618" start="5396" end="5409" title="fishing gear" label="fishing gears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="5681" end="5691" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671540" start="6896" end="6918" title="intraclass correlation" label="intraclass correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056998" start="7059" end="7079" title="simple random sample" label="simple random sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264333" start="7090" end="7103" title="design effect" label="design effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306280" start="7302" end="7316" title="sampling error" label="sampling error"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264333" start="7348" end="7361" title="design effect" label="design effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056998" start="7545" end="7561" title="Simple random sample" label="randomly sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671540" start="7596" end="7618" title="intraclass correlation" label="intraclass correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652044" start="8492" end="8511" title="multistage sampling" label="multistage sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056998" start="8820" end="8842" title="simple random sampling" label="simple random sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3652044" start="12265" end="12284" title="Multistage sampling" label="Multistage sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="12287" end="12308" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="Sampling (statistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056998" start="12311" end="12333" title="Simple random sampling" label="Simple random sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517706" start="12336" end="12355" title="Stratified sampling" label="Stratified sampling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5804" wikidata="Q501" url="?curid=5804" title="Charles Baudelaire">
<text>Charles Pierre Baudelaire (, ; ; 9 April 1821 – 31 August 1867) was a French poet, essayist, translator and art critic. His poems are described as exhibiting mastery of rhyme and rhythm, containing an exoticism inherited from the Romantics, and are based on observations of real life.

His most famous work, a book of lyric poetry titled &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot; (&quot;The Flowers of Evil&quot;), expresses the changing nature of beauty in the rapidly industrialising Paris caused by Haussmann&#x27;s renovation of Paris during the mid-19th century. Baudelaire&#x27;s original style of prose-poetry influenced a generation of poets including Paul Verlaine, Arthur Rimbaud and Stéphane Mallarmé. He coined the term modernity (&quot;modernité&quot;) to designate the fleeting experience of life in an urban metropolis, and the responsibility of artistic expression to capture that experience. Marshall Berman has credited Baudelaire as being the first Modernist.

==Early life==
Baudelaire was born in Paris, France, on 9 April 1821, and baptized two months later at Saint-Sulpice Roman Catholic Church. His father, Joseph-François Baudelaire (1759–1827), a senior civil servant and amateur artist, who at 60, was 34 years older than Baudelaire&#x27;s 26-year-old mother, Caroline (née Dufaÿs) (1794–1871); she was his second wife. 

Joseph-François died during Baudelaire&#x27;s childhood, at rue Hautefeuille, Paris, on 10 February 1827. The following year, Caroline married Lieutenant Colonel , who later became a French ambassador to various noble courts. 

Baudelaire&#x27;s biographers have often seen this as a crucial moment, considering that finding himself no longer the sole focus of his mother&#x27;s affection left him with a trauma, which goes some way to explaining the excesses later apparent in his life. He stated in a letter to her that, &quot;There was in my childhood a period of passionate love for you.&quot; Baudelaire regularly begged his mother for money throughout his career, often promising that a lucrative publishing contract or journalistic commission was just around the corner.

Baudelaire was educated in Lyon, where he boarded. At 14, he was described by a classmate as &quot;much more refined and distinguished than any of our fellow pupils ... we are bound to one another ... by shared tastes and sympathies, the precocious love of fine works of literature.&quot; 

Baudelaire was erratic in his studies, at times diligent, at other times prone to &quot;idleness&quot;. Later, he attended the Lycée Louis-le-Grand in Paris, studying law, a popular course for those not yet decided on any particular career. He began to frequent prostitutes and may have contracted gonorrhea and syphilis during this period. He also began to run up debts, mostly for clothes. 

Upon gaining his degree in 1839, he told his brother &quot;I don&#x27;t feel I have a vocation for anything.&quot; His stepfather had in mind a career in law or diplomacy, but instead Baudelaire decided to embark upon a literary career. His mother later recalled: &quot;Oh, what grief! If Charles had let himself be guided by his stepfather, his career would have been very different ... He would not have left a name in literature, it is true, but we should have been happier, all three of us.&quot;
His stepfather sent him on a voyage to Calcutta, India in 1841 in the hope of ending his dissolute habits. The trip provided strong impressions of the sea, sailing, and exotic ports, that he later employed in his poetry. Baudelaire later exaggerated his aborted trip to create a legend about his youthful travels and experiences, including &quot;riding on elephants&quot;. 

On returning to the taverns of Paris, he began to compose some of the poems of &quot;Les Fleurs du Mal&quot;. At 21, he received a sizable inheritance but squandered much of it within a few years. His family obtained a decree to place his property in trust, which he resented bitterly, at one point arguing that allowing him to fail financially would have been the one sure way of teaching him to keep his finances in order.

Baudelaire became known in artistic circles as a dandy and free-spender, going through much of his inheritance and allowance in a short period of time. During this time, Jeanne Duval, a Haitian born actress became his mistress. She was rejected by his family. His mother thought Duval a &quot;Black Venus&quot; who &quot;tortured him in every way&quot; and drained him of money at every opportunity. Baudelaire made a suicide attempt during this period.

He took part in the Revolutions of 1848 and wrote for a revolutionary newspaper. However, his interest in politics was passing, as he was later to note in his journals.

In the early 1850s, Baudelaire struggled with poor health, pressing debts, and irregular literary output. He often moved from one lodging to another to escape creditors. He undertook many projects that he was unable to complete, though he did finish translations of stories by Edgar Allan Poe.

Upon the death of his stepfather in 1857, Baudelaire received no mention in the will but he was heartened nonetheless that the division with his mother might now be mended. At 36, he wrote to her: &quot;believe that I belong to you absolutely, and that I belong only to you.&quot; His mother died on 16 August 1871, outliving her son by almost four years.

==Publishing career==
His first published work, under the pseudonym Baudelaire Dufaÿs, was his art review &quot;Salon of 1845&quot;, which attracted immediate attention for its boldness. Many of his critical opinions were novel in their time, including his championing of Delacroix, and some of his views seem remarkably in tune with the future theories of the Impressionist painters.

In 1846, Baudelaire wrote his second Salon review, gaining additional credibility as an advocate and critic of Romanticism. His continued support of Delacroix as the foremost Romantic artist gained widespread notice. The following year Baudelaire&#x27;s novella &quot;La Fanfarlo&quot; was published.

===&quot;The Flowers of Evil&quot;===

Baudelaire was a slow and very attentive worker. However, he often was sidetracked by indolence, emotional distress and illness, and it was not until 1857 that he published &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot; (&quot;The Flowers of Evil&quot;), his first and most famous volume of poems. Some of these poems had already appeared in the &quot;Revue des deux mondes&quot; (&quot;Review of Two Worlds&quot;) in 1855, when they were published by Baudelaire&#x27;s friend Auguste Poulet-Malassis. Some of the poems had appeared as &quot;fugitive verse&quot; in various French magazines during the previous decade.

The poems found a small, yet appreciative audience. However, greater public attention was given to their subject matter. The effect on fellow artists was, as Théodore de Banville stated, &quot;immense, prodigious, unexpected, mingled with admiration and with some indefinable anxious fear&quot;. Gustave Flaubert, recently attacked in a similar fashion for &quot;Madame Bovary&quot; (and acquitted), was impressed and wrote to Baudelaire: &quot;You have found a way to rejuvenate Romanticism...You are as unyielding as marble, and as penetrating as an English mist.&quot;

The principal themes of sex and death were considered scandalous for the period. He also touched on lesbianism, sacred and profane love, metamorphosis, melancholy, the corruption of the city, lost innocence, the oppressiveness of living, and wine. Notable in some poems is Baudelaire&#x27;s use of imagery of the sense of smell and of fragrances, which is used to evoke feelings of nostalgia and past intimacy.

The book, however, quickly became a byword for unwholesomeness among mainstream critics of the day. Some critics called a few of the poems &quot;masterpieces of passion, art and poetry,&quot; but other poems were deemed to merit no less than legal action to suppress them. J. Habas led the charge against Baudelaire, writing in : &quot;Everything in it which is not hideous is incomprehensible, everything one understands is putrid.&quot; Baudelaire responded to the outcry in a prophetic letter to his mother:

&quot;You know that I have always considered that literature and the arts pursue an aim independent of morality. Beauty of conception and style is enough for me. But this book, whose title (&quot;Fleurs du mal&quot;) says everything, is clad, as you will see, in a cold and sinister beauty. It was created with rage and patience. Besides, the proof of its positive worth is in all the ill that they speak of it. The book enrages people. Moreover, since I was terrified myself of the horror that I should inspire, I cut out a third from the proofs. They deny me everything, the spirit of invention and even the knowledge of the French language. I don&#x27;t care a rap about all these imbeciles, and I know that this book, with its virtues and its faults, will make its way in the memory of the lettered public, beside the best poems of V. Hugo, Th. Gautier and even Byron.&quot;

Baudelaire, his publisher and the printer were successfully prosecuted for creating an offense against public morals. They were fined, but Baudelaire was not imprisoned. Six of the poems were suppressed, but printed later as &quot;Les Épaves&quot; (&quot;The Wrecks&quot;) (Brussels, 1866). Another edition of &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot;, without these poems, but with considerable additions, appeared in 1861. Many notables rallied behind Baudelaire and condemned the sentence. Victor Hugo wrote to him: &quot;Your &quot;fleurs du mal&quot; shine and dazzle like stars...I applaud your vigorous spirit with all my might.&quot; Baudelaire did not appeal the judgment, but his fine was reduced. Nearly 100 years later, on 11 May 1949, Baudelaire was vindicated, the judgment officially reversed, and the six banned poems reinstated in France.

In the poem &quot;Au lecteur&quot; (&quot;To the Reader&quot;) that prefaces &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot;, Baudelaire accuses his readers of hypocrisy and of being as guilty of sins and lies as the poet:

:... If rape or arson, poison or the knife
:Has wove no pleasing patterns in the stuff
:Of this drab canvas we accept as life—
:It is because we are not bold enough!
::(Roy Campbell&#x27;s translation)

==Final years==

Baudelaire next worked on a translation and adaptation of Thomas De Quincey&#x27;s &quot;Confessions of an English Opium-Eater&quot;. Other works in the years that followed included &quot;Petits Poèmes en prose&quot; (&quot;Small Prose poems&quot;); a series of art reviews published in the &quot;Pays, Exposition universelle&quot; (&quot;Country, World Fair&quot;); studies on Gustave Flaubert (in &quot;L&#x27;Artiste&quot;, 18 October 1857); on Théophile Gautier (&quot;Revue contemporaine&quot;, September 1858); various articles contributed to Eugène Crépet&#x27;s &quot;Poètes français&quot;; &quot;Les Paradis artificiels: opium et haschisch&quot; (&quot;French poets; Artificial Paradises: opium and hashish&quot;) (1860); and &quot;Un Dernier Chapitre de l&#x27;histoire des oeuvres de Balzac&quot; (&quot;A Final Chapter of the history of works of Balzac&quot;) (1880), originally an article &quot;Comment on paye ses dettes quand on a du génie&quot; (&quot;How one pays one&#x27;s debts when one has genius&quot;), in which his criticism turns against his friends Honoré de Balzac, Théophile Gautier, and Gérard de Nerval.

By 1859, his illnesses, his long-term use of laudanum, his life of stress, and his poverty had taken a toll and Baudelaire had aged noticeably. But at last, his mother relented and agreed to let him live with her for a while at Honfleur. Baudelaire was productive and at peace in the seaside town, his poem &quot;Le Voyage&quot; being one example of his efforts during that time. In 1860, he became an ardent supporter of Richard Wagner.

His financial difficulties increased again, however, particularly after his publisher Poulet Malassis went bankrupt in 1861. In 1864, he left Paris for Belgium, partly in the hope of selling the rights to his works and to give lectures. His long-standing relationship with Jeanne Duval continued on-and-off, and he helped her to the end of his life. Baudelaire&#x27;s relationships with actress Marie Daubrun and with courtesan Apollonie Sabatier, though the source of much inspiration, never produced any lasting satisfaction. He smoked opium, and in Brussels he began to drink to excess. Baudelaire suffered a massive stroke in 1866 and paralysis followed. After more than a year of aphasia, he received the last rites of the Catholic Church. The last year of his life was spent in a semi-paralyzed state in various &quot;maisons de santé&quot; in Brussels and in Paris, where he died on 31 August 1867. His funeral was held at the Saint-Honoré d&#x27;Eylau church, with a few dozen persons in attendance. Baudelaire is buried in the Cimetière du Montparnasse, Paris.

Many of Baudelaire&#x27;s works were published posthumously. After his death, his mother paid off his substantial debts, and she found some comfort in Baudelaire&#x27;s emerging fame. &quot;I see that my son, for all his faults, has his place in literature.&quot; She lived another four years.

==Poetry==
Baudelaire is one of the major innovators in French literature. His poetry is influenced by the French romantic poets of the earlier 19th century, although its attention to the formal features of verse connects it more closely to the work of the contemporary &quot;Parnassians&quot;. As for theme and tone, in his works we see the rejection of the belief in the supremacy of nature and the fundamental goodness of man as typically espoused by the romantics and expressed by them in rhetorical, effusive and public voice in favor of a new urban sensibility, an awareness of individual moral complexity, an interest in vice (linked with decadence) and refined sensual and aesthetic pleasures, and the use of urban subject matter, such as the city, the crowd, individual passers-by, all expressed in highly ordered verse, sometimes through a cynical and ironic voice. Formally, the use of sound to create atmosphere, and of &quot;symbols&quot; (images that take on an expanded function within the poem), betray a move towards considering the poem as a self-referential object, an idea further developed by the Symbolists Verlaine and Mallarmé, who acknowledge Baudelaire as a pioneer in this regard.

Beyond his innovations in versification and the theories of symbolism and &quot;correspondences&quot;, an awareness of which is essential to any appreciation of the literary value of his work, aspects of his work that regularly receive much critical discussion include the role of women, the theological direction of his work and his alleged advocacy of &quot;satanism&quot;, his experience of drug-induced states of mind, the figure of the dandy, his stance regarding democracy and its implications for the individual, his response to the spiritual uncertainties of the time, his criticisms of the bourgeois, and his advocacy of modern music and painting (e.g., Wagner, Delacroix). He made Paris the subject of modern poetry. He brought the city&#x27;s details to life in the eyes and hearts of his readers.

==Critiques==

Baudelaire was an active participant in the artistic life of his times. As critic and essayist, he wrote extensively and perceptively about the luminaries and themes of French culture. He was frank with friends and enemies, rarely took the diplomatic approach and sometimes responded violently verbally, which often undermined his cause. His associations were numerous, including Gustave Courbet, Honoré Daumier, Félicien Rops, Franz Liszt, Champfleury, Victor Hugo, Gustave Flaubert, and Balzac.

===Edgar Allan Poe===
In 1847, Baudelaire became acquainted with the works of Poe, in which he found tales and poems that had, he claimed, long existed in his own brain but never taken shape. Baudelaire saw in Poe a precursor and tried to be his French contemporary counterpart. From this time until 1865, he was largely occupied with translating Poe&#x27;s works; his translations were widely praised. Baudelaire was not the first French translator of Poe, but his &quot;scrupulous translations&quot; were considered among the best. These were published as &quot;Histoires extraordinaires&quot; (&quot;Extraordinary stories&quot;) (1856), &quot;Nouvelles histoires extraordinaires&quot; (&quot;New extraordinary stories&quot;) (1857), &quot;Aventures d&#x27;Arthur Gordon Pym&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Histoires grotesques et sérieuses&quot; (&quot;Grotesque and serious stories&quot;) (1865). Two essays on Poe are to be found in his &quot;Œuvres complètes&quot; (&quot;Complete works&quot;) (vols. v. and vi.).

===Eugène Delacroix===
A strong supporter of the Romantic painter Delacroix, Baudelaire called him &quot;a poet in painting&quot;. Baudelaire also absorbed much of Delacroix&#x27;s aesthetic ideas as expressed in his journals. As Baudelaire elaborated in his &quot;Salon of 1846&quot;, &quot;As one contemplates his series of pictures, one seems to be attending the celebration of some grievous mystery...This grave and lofty melancholy shines with a dull light.. plaintive and profound like a melody by Weber.&quot; Delacroix, though appreciative, kept his distance from Baudelaire, particularly after the scandal of &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot;. In private correspondence, Delacroix stated that Baudelaire &quot;really gets on my nerves&quot; and he expressed his unhappiness with Baudelaire&#x27;s persistent comments about &quot;melancholy&quot; and &quot;feverishness&quot;.

===Richard Wagner===
Baudelaire had no formal musical training, and knew little of composers beyond Beethoven and Weber. Weber was in some ways Wagner&#x27;s precursor, using the leitmotif and conceiving the idea of the &quot;total art work&quot; (&quot;Gesamtkunstwerk&quot;), both of which gained Baudelaire&#x27;s admiration. Before even hearing Wagner&#x27;s music, Baudelaire studied reviews and essays about him, and formulated his impressions. Later, Baudelaire put them into his non-technical analysis of Wagner, which was highly regarded, particularly his essay &quot;Richard Wagner et Tannhäuser à Paris&quot;. Baudelaire&#x27;s reaction to music was passionate and psychological. &quot;Music engulfs (possesses) me like the sea.&quot; After attending three Wagner concerts in Paris in 1860, Baudelaire wrote to the composer: &quot;I had a feeling of pride and joy in understanding, in being possessed, in being overwhelmed, a truly sensual pleasure like that of rising in the air.&quot; Baudelaire&#x27;s writings contributed to the elevation of Wagner and to the cult of Wagnerism that swept Europe in the following decades.

===Théophile Gautier===
Gautier, writer and poet, earned Baudelaire&#x27;s respect for his perfection of form and his mastery of language, though Baudelaire thought he lacked deeper emotion and spirituality. Both strove to express the artist&#x27;s inner vision, which Heinrich Heine earlier stated: &quot;In artistic matters, I am a supernaturalist. I believe that the artist can not find all his forms in nature, but that the most remarkable are revealed to him in his soul.&quot; Gautier&#x27;s frequent meditations on death and the horror of life are themes which influenced Baudelaire&#x27;s writings. In gratitude for their friendship and commonality of vision, Baudelaire dedicated &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot; to Gautier.

===Édouard Manet===

Manet and Baudelaire became constant companions from around 1855. In the early 1860s, Baudelaire accompanied Manet on daily sketching trips and often met him socially. Manet also lent Baudelaire money and looked after his affairs, particularly when Baudelaire went to Belgium. Baudelaire encouraged Manet to strike out on his own path and not succumb to criticism. &quot;Manet has great talent, a talent which will stand the test of time. But he has a weak character. He seems to me crushed and stunned by shock.&quot; In his painting &quot;Music in the Tuileries&quot;, Manet includes portraits of his friends Théophile Gautier, Jacques Offenbach, and Baudelaire. While it&#x27;s difficult to differentiate who influenced whom, both Manet and Baudelaire discussed and expressed some common themes through their respective arts. Baudelaire praised the modernity of Manet&#x27;s subject matter: &quot;almost all our originality comes from the stamp that &#x27;time&#x27; imprints upon our feelings.&quot; When Manet&#x27;s famous &quot;Olympia&quot; (1865), a portrait of a nude prostitute, provoked a scandal for its blatant realism mixed with an imitation of Renaissance motifs, Baudelaire worked privately to support his friend, though he offered no public defense (he was, however, ill at the time). When Baudelaire returned from Belgium after his stroke, Manet and his wife were frequent visitors at the nursing home and she played passages from Wagner for Baudelaire on the piano.

===Nadar===
Nadar (Félix Tournachon) was a noted caricaturist, scientist and important early photographer. Baudelaire admired Nadar, one of his close friends, and wrote: &quot;Nadar is the most amazing manifestation of vitality.&quot; They moved in similar circles and Baudelaire made many social connections through him. Nadar&#x27;s ex-mistress Jeanne Duval became Baudelaire&#x27;s mistress around 1842. Baudelaire became interested in photography in the 1850s, and denouncing it as an art form, advocated its return to &quot;its real purpose, which is that of being the servant to the sciences and arts&quot;. Photography should not, according to Baudelaire, encroach upon &quot;the domain of the impalpable and the imaginary&quot;. Nadar remained a stalwart friend right to Baudelaire&#x27;s last days and wrote his obituary notice in .

==Philosophy==
Many of Baudelaire&#x27;s philosophical proclamations were considered scandalous and intentionally provocative in his time. He wrote on a wide range of subjects, drawing criticism and outrage from many quarters. Along with Poe, Baudelaire named the arch-reactionary Joseph de Maistre as his &quot;maître à penser&quot; and adopted increasingly aristocratic views. In his journals, he wrote:
==Influence and legacy==
Baudelaire&#x27;s influence on the direction of modern French (and English) language literature was considerable. The most significant French writers to come after him were generous with tributes; four years after his death, Arthur Rimbaud praised him in a letter as &quot;the king of poets, a true God&quot;. In 1895, Stéphane Mallarmé published &quot;Le Tombeau de Charles Baudelaire&quot;, a sonnet in Baudelaire&#x27;s memory. Marcel Proust, in an essay published in 1922, stated that, along with Alfred de Vigny, Baudelaire was &quot;the greatest poet of the nineteenth century&quot;.

In the English-speaking world, Edmund Wilson credited Baudelaire as providing an initial impetus for the Symbolist movement by virtue of his translations of Poe. In 1930, T. S. Eliot, while asserting that Baudelaire had not yet received a &quot;just appreciation&quot; even in France, claimed that the poet had &quot;great genius&quot; and asserted that his &quot;technical mastery which can hardly be overpraised ... has made his verse an inexhaustible study for later poets, not only in his own language&quot;. In a lecture delivered in French on &quot;Edgar Allan Poe and France&quot; (Edgar Poe et la France) in Aix-en-Provence in April 1948, Eliot stated that &quot;I am an English poet of American origin who learnt his art under the aegis of Baudelaire and the Baudelairian lineage of poets.&quot; Eliot also alluded to Baudelaire&#x27;s poetry directly in his own poetry. For example, he quoted the last line of Baudelaire&#x27;s &quot;Au Lecteur&quot; in the last line of Section I of &quot;The Waste Land&quot;.

At the same time that Eliot was affirming Baudelaire&#x27;s importance from a broadly conservative and explicitly Christian viewpoint, left-wing critics such as Wilson and Walter Benjamin were able to do so from a dramatically different perspective. Benjamin translated Baudelaire&#x27;s &quot;Tableaux Parisiens&quot; into German and published a major essay on translation as the foreword.

In the late 1930s, Benjamin used Baudelaire as a starting point and focus for &quot;Das Passagenwerk&quot;, his monumental attempt at a materialist assessment of 19th-century culture. For Benjamin, Baudelaire&#x27;s importance lay in his anatomies of the crowd, of the city and of modernity. He says that, in &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot;, &quot;the specific devaluation of the world of things, as manifested in the commodity, is the foundation of Baudelaire&#x27;s allegorical intention.&quot;

François Porché published a poetry collection called &quot;Charles Baudelaire: Poetry Collection&quot; in memory of Baudelaire.

The novel &quot;A Singular Conspiracy&quot; (1974) by Barry Perowne is a fictional treatment of the unaccounted period in Edgar Allan Poe&#x27;s life from January to May 1844, in which (among other things) Poe becomes involved with a young Baudelaire in a plot to expose Baudelaires&#x27; stepfather to blackmail, to free up Baudelaires&#x27; patrimony.

Vanderbilt University has &quot;assembled one of the world&#x27;s most comprehensive research collections on ... Baudelaire&quot;.

==Works==

* &quot;Salon de 1845&quot;, 1845
* &quot;Salon de 1846&quot;, 1846
* &quot;La Fanfarlo&quot;, 1847
* &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot;, 1857
* &quot;Les paradis artificiels&quot;, 1860
* &quot;Réflexions sur Quelques-uns de mes Contemporains&quot;, 1861
* &quot;Le Peintre de la Vie Moderne&quot;, 1863
* &quot;Curiosités Esthétiques&quot;, 1868
* &quot;L&#x27;art romantique&quot;, 1868
* &quot;Le Spleen de Paris&quot;, 1869. &quot;Paris Spleen&quot; (Contra Mundum Press: 2021)
* &quot;Translations from Charles Baudelaire&quot;, 1869 (Early English translation of several of Baudelaire&#x27;s poems, by Richard Herne Shepherd)
* &quot;Œuvres Posthumes et Correspondance Générale&quot;, 1887–1907
* &quot;Fusées&quot;, 1897
* &quot;Mon Cœur Mis à Nu&quot;, 1897. &quot;My Heart Laid Bare &amp; Other Texts&quot; (Contra Mundum Press: 2017; 2020)
* &quot;Œuvres Complètes&quot;, 1922–53 (19 vols.)
* &quot;Mirror of Art&quot;, 1955
* &quot;The Essence of Laughter&quot;, 1956
* &quot;Curiosités Esthétiques&quot;, 1962
* &quot;The Painter of Modern Life and Other Essays&quot;, 1964
* &quot;Baudelaire as a Literary Critic&quot;, 1964
* &quot;Arts in Paris 1845–1862&quot;, 1965
* &quot;Selected Writings on Art and Artists&quot;, 1972
* &quot;Selected Letters of Charles Baudelaire&quot;, 1986
* &quot;Twenty Prose Poems&quot;, 1988
* &quot;Critique d&#x27;art; Critique musicale&quot;, 1992
* &quot;Belgium Stripped Bare&quot; (Contra Mundum Press: 2019)

===Musical adaptations===

* Henri Duparc: &quot;L&#x27;Invitation au voyage&quot; (1870) and &quot;La vie antérieure&quot; (1884)
* Claude Debussy: &quot;Cinq poèmes de Charles Baudelaire&quot; (1890)
* Léo Ferré: &quot;Les Fleurs du mal&quot; (1957), &quot;Léo Ferré chante Baudelaire&quot; (1967), and the posthumous &quot;Les Fleurs du mal (suite et fin)&quot; (2008)
* Serge Gainsbourg: &quot;Baudelaire&quot; (1962)
* Ruth White: &quot;Flowers of Evil&quot; (1969)
* Diamanda Galás: &quot;The Litanies of Satan&quot; (1982)
* Gérard Pape: &quot;La Tristesse de la lune&quot; (1986)
* The Cure: &quot;How Beautiful You Are&quot; (1987, on &quot;Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me&quot;)
* Marc Almond: &quot;Abel And Cain (Abel et Cain)&quot; and &quot;Remorse of the Dead (Remords posthume)&quot; (1993, on &quot;Absinthe&quot;)
* Mark-Anthony Turnage: &quot;Two Baudelaire Songs&quot; (2003–04)
* Alcest: &quot;Élévation&quot; (2005, on &quot;Le Secret&quot;)
*Amesoeurs: &quot;Recueillement&quot; (2009, on &quot;Amesoeurs&quot;)
*Rotting Christ: &quot;Les litanies de Satan&quot; (2016, on &quot;Rituals&quot;)
*Pierre Lapointe: &quot;Le serpent qui danse&quot; (2022, on &quot;L&#x27;heure mauve&quot;)
*Mandy, Indiana: &quot;Mosaick&quot; and &quot;The Driving Rain (18)&quot; (2023, on &quot;I&#x27;ve Seen a Way&quot;)

==See also==

* &quot;Épater la bourgeoisie&quot;

==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===
* Pichois, Claude, &quot;Baudelaire&quot; (Hamish Hamilton, 1989) translated by Graham Robb, with research by Jean Ziegler.

==External links==

* Charles Baudelaire&#x27;s Cats
* The Baudelaire Song Project – site of The Baudelaire Song Project, a UK-based AHRC-funded academic project examining song settings of Baudelaire&#x27;s poetry
* Twilight to Dawn: Charles Baudelaire – Cordite Poetry Review
* www.baudelaire.cz – largest Internet site dedicated to Charles Baudelaire. Poems and prose are available in English, French and Czech.
* Charles Baudelaire – site dedicated to Baudelaire&#x27;s poems and prose, containing &quot;Fleurs du mal&quot;, &quot;Petit poemes et prose&quot;, &quot;Fanfarlo&quot; and more in French
* Charles Baudelaire International Association
* Nikolas Kompridis on Baudelaire&#x27;s poetry, art, and the &quot;memory of loss&quot; (Flash/HTML5)
* baudelaireetbengale.blogspot.com – the influence of Baudelaire on Bengali poetry
* Harmonie du soir – Tina Noiret

===Online texts===
* 
* 
* Charles Baudelaire – largest site dedicated to Baudelaire&#x27;s poems and prose, containing &quot;Fleurs du mal&quot;, &quot;Petit poemes et prose&quot;, &quot;Fanfarlo&quot; and more in French
* Poems by Charles Baudelaire – selected works at Poetry Archive
* Baudelaire&#x27;s poems at Poems Found in Translation
* Baudelaire – Eighteen Poems
* &quot;baudelaire in english&quot;, Onedit.net – Sean Bonney&#x27;s experimental translations of Baudelaire (humor)
* Works by Charles Baudelaire 
* Baudelaire par ses Amis

====Single works====
* FleursDuMal.org – Definitive online presentation of &quot;Fleurs du mal&quot;, featuring the original French alongside multiple English translations
* An illustrated version (8 Mb) of &quot;Les Fleurs du Mal&quot;, 1861 edition (Charles Baudelaire / une édition illustrée par inkwatercolor.com)
* &quot;The Rebel&quot; – poem by Baudelaire
* Les Foules (The Crowds) – English translation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="0" end="25" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Pierre Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943110" start="70" end="81" title="French poetry" label="French poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35760" start="83" end="88" title="essay" label="essay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553" start="93" end="103" title="translator" label="translator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164507" start="108" end="118" title="art critic" label="art critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="230" end="239" title="Romanticism" label="Romantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q182357" start="318" end="330" title="lyric poetry" label="lyric poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q216578" start="344" end="361" title="Les Fleurs du mal" label="Les Fleurs du mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117470" start="490" end="526" title="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris" label="Haussmann&amp;#x27;s renovation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="648" end="661" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Paul Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="663" end="677" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="682" end="699" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Stéphane Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q11084414" start="720" end="729" title="modernity" label="modernity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312100" start="897" end="912" title="Marshall Berman" label="Marshall Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="956" end="965" title="Modernism" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q295844" start="1071" end="1084" title="Saint-Sulpice, Paris" label="Saint-Sulpice"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1085" end="1106" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="2144" end="2148" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059546" start="2535" end="2555" title="Lycée Louis-le-Grand" label="Lycée Louis-le-Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q876391" start="4153" end="4158" title="dandy" label="dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982279" start="4274" end="4286" title="Jeanne Duval" label="Jeanne Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q622774" start="4579" end="4598" title="Revolutions of 1848 in France" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="5006" end="5021" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="5653" end="5662" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="5878" end="5889" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="5916" end="5925" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462404" start="6035" end="6046" title="La Fanfarlo" label="La Fanfarlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216578" start="6287" end="6304" title="Les Fleurs du mal" label="Les Fleurs du mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569226" start="6443" end="6464" title="Revue des deux mondes" label="Revue des deux mondes"/>
<link wikidata="Q328607" start="6568" end="6591" title="Auguste Poulet-Malassis" label="Auguste Poulet-Malassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q312630" start="6869" end="6889" title="Théodore de Banville" label="Théodore de Banville"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="7007" end="7023" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q193417" start="7074" end="7087" title="Madame Bovary" label="Madame Bovary"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="9569" end="9580" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987397" start="10308" end="10320" title="Roy Campbell (poet)" label="Roy Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q317160" start="10417" end="10434" title="Thomas De Quincey" label="Thomas De Quincey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610128" start="10448" end="10485" title="Confessions of an English Opium-Eater" label="Confessions of an English Opium-Eater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250614" start="10547" end="10569" title="Le Spleen de Paris" label="Petits Poèmes en prose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161145" start="10589" end="10600" title="prose poetry" label="Prose poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="10737" end="10753" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202411" start="10764" end="10778" title="L&amp;#x27;Artiste" label="L&amp;#x27;Artiste"/>
<link wikidata="Q183713" start="10807" end="10824" title="Théophile Gautier" label="Théophile Gautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249082" start="10964" end="10987" title="Les Paradis artificiels" label="Les Paradis artificiels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9711" start="11434" end="11450" title="Honoré de Balzac" label="Honoré de Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q183713" start="11452" end="11469" title="Théophile Gautier" label="Théophile Gautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q191305" start="11475" end="11491" title="Gérard de Nerval" label="Gérard de Nerval"/>
<link wikidata="Q898739" start="11539" end="11547" title="laudanum" label="laudanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q231720" start="11722" end="11730" title="Honfleur" label="Honfleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="11916" end="11930" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982279" start="12206" end="12218" title="Jeanne Duval" label="Jeanne Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922334" start="12361" end="12379" title="Apollonie Sabatier" label="Apollonie Sabatier"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="12471" end="12476" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836" start="12618" end="12625" title="aphasia" label="aphasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869217" start="12643" end="12653" title="last rites" label="last rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="12751" end="12779" title="Sanatorium" label="&amp;quot;maisons de santé&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q272208" start="12969" end="12994" title="Cimetière du Montparnasse" label="Cimetière du Montparnasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q846094" start="13945" end="13954" title="Decadent movement" label="decadence"/>
<link wikidata="Q755" start="14428" end="14436" title="Paul Verlaine" label="Verlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="14441" end="14449" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="15171" end="15177" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="15179" end="15188" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q34618" start="15713" end="15728" title="Gustave Courbet" label="Gustave Courbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q187506" start="15730" end="15744" title="Honoré Daumier" label="Honoré Daumier"/>
<link wikidata="Q378129" start="15746" end="15759" title="Félicien Rops" label="Félicien Rops"/>
<link wikidata="Q41309" start="15761" end="15772" title="Franz Liszt" label="Franz Liszt"/>
<link wikidata="Q744488" start="15774" end="15785" title="Champfleury" label="Champfleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="15787" end="15798" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43444" start="15800" end="15816" title="Gustave Flaubert" label="Gustave Flaubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9711" start="15822" end="15828" title="Balzac" label="Balzac"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="15909" end="15912" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q615383" start="16573" end="16607" title="The Narrative of Arthur Gordon Pym of Nantucket" label="Aventures d&amp;#x27;Arthur Gordon Pym"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="16917" end="16926" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="17833" end="17842" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q154812" start="17847" end="17852" title="Carl Maria von Weber" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="17877" end="17883" title="Richard Wagner" label="Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q221117" start="17912" end="17921" title="leitmotif" label="leitmotif"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959626" start="18816" end="18825" title="Wagner controversies" label="Wagnerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183713" start="18895" end="18902" title="Théophile Gautier" label="Gautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q44403" start="19140" end="19154" title="Heinrich Heine" label="Heinrich Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40599" start="19624" end="19629" title="Édouard Manet" label="Manet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210277" start="20165" end="20187" title="Music in the Tuileries" label="Music in the Tuileries"/>
<link wikidata="Q183713" start="20235" end="20252" title="Théophile Gautier" label="Théophile Gautier"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="20254" end="20271" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q737062" start="20659" end="20666" title="Olympia (painting)" label="Olympia"/>
<link wikidata="Q500812" start="20784" end="20802" title="Sleeping Venus (Giorgione)" label="Renaissance motifs"/>
<link wikidata="Q40116" start="21123" end="21128" title="Nadar (photographer)" label="Nadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982279" start="21458" end="21470" title="Jeanne Duval" label="Jeanne Duval"/>
<link wikidata="Q309854" start="22235" end="22252" title="Joseph de Maistre" label="Joseph de Maistre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6799148" start="22266" end="22281" title="maître à penser" label="maître à penser"/>
<link wikidata="Q493" start="22610" end="22624" title="Arthur Rimbaud" label="Arthur Rimbaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q767" start="22704" end="22721" title="Stéphane Mallarmé" label="Stéphane Mallarmé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199" start="22816" end="22829" title="Marcel Proust" label="Marcel Proust"/>
<link wikidata="Q309702" start="22886" end="22901" title="Alfred de Vigny" label="Alfred de Vigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q704931" start="23007" end="23020" title="Edmund Wilson" label="Edmund Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="23081" end="23090" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="23147" end="23158" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q581458" start="23976" end="23990" title="The Waste Land" label="The Waste Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="24134" end="24143" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61078" start="24171" end="24186" title="Walter Benjamin" label="Walter Benjamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785097" start="24475" end="24491" title="Arcades Project" label="Das Passagenwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q190004" start="24527" end="24538" title="Historical materialism" label="materialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q216578" start="24706" end="24723" title="Les Fleurs du mal" label="Les Fleurs du mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085604" start="24887" end="24902" title="François Porché" label="François Porché"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864606" start="25070" end="25083" title="Barry Perowne" label="Barry Perowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="25138" end="25153" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29052" start="25371" end="25392" title="Vanderbilt University" label="Vanderbilt University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462404" start="25590" end="25601" title="La Fanfarlo" label="La Fanfarlo"/>
<link wikidata="Q216578" start="25622" end="25639" title="Les Fleurs du mal" label="Les Fleurs du mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249082" start="25660" end="25683" title="Les paradis artificiels" label="Les paradis artificiels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250614" start="25907" end="25925" title="Le Spleen de Paris" label="Le Spleen de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3225375" start="26540" end="26566" title="The Painter of Modern Life" label="The Painter of Modern Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q364983" start="27000" end="27012" title="Henri Duparc (composer)" label="Henri Duparc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700" start="27104" end="27118" title="Claude Debussy" label="Claude Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23021858" start="27126" end="27159" title="Cinq poèmes de Charles Baudelaire" label="Cinq poèmes de Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q320146" start="27175" end="27184" title="Léo Ferré" label="Léo Ferré"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232697" start="27192" end="27209" title="Les Fleurs du mal (Léo Ferré album)" label="Les Fleurs du mal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270467" start="27230" end="27257" title="Léo Ferré chante Baudelaire" label="Léo Ferré chante Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3232698" start="27297" end="27329" title="Les Fleurs du mal (suite et fin)" label="Les Fleurs du mal (suite et fin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1698" start="27345" end="27361" title="Serge Gainsbourg" label="Serge Gainsbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383264" start="27395" end="27405" title="Ruth White (composer)" label="Ruth White"/>
<link wikidata="Q233483" start="27444" end="27458" title="Diamanda Galás" label="Diamanda Galás"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988027" start="27466" end="27487" title="The Litanies of Satan" label="The Litanies of Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5626014" start="27503" end="27514" title="Gérard Pape" label="Gérard Pape"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="27561" end="27569" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931096" start="27621" end="27646" title="Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me" label="Kiss Me, Kiss Me, Kiss Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q452166" start="27656" end="27667" title="Marc Almond" label="Marc Almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870561" start="27775" end="27795" title="Absinthe (Marc Almond album)" label="&amp;quot;Absinthe&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q528639" start="27799" end="27819" title="Mark-Anthony Turnage" label="Mark-Anthony Turnage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517060" start="27866" end="27872" title="Alcest" label="Alcest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507665" start="27912" end="27921" title="Le Secret (EP)" label="Le Secret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991928" start="27930" end="27939" title="Amesoeurs" label="Amesoeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614178" start="27983" end="27992" title="Amesoeurs (album)" label="Amesoeurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q938889" start="28001" end="28015" title="Rotting Christ" label="Rotting Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q25096857" start="28067" end="28074" title="Rituals (Rotting Christ album)" label="Rituals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3385778" start="28083" end="28098" title="Pierre Lapointe" label="Pierre Lapointe"/>
<link wikidata="Q111094422" start="28149" end="28167" title="L&amp;#x27;heure mauve" label="L&amp;#x27;heure mauve"/>
<link wikidata="Q119036137" start="28176" end="28190" title="Mandy, Indiana" label="Mandy, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q119036586" start="28266" end="28286" title="I&amp;#x27;ve Seen a Way" label="I&amp;#x27;ve Seen a Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972982" start="28317" end="28338" title="Épater la bourgeoisie" label="Épater la bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097046" start="28389" end="28404" title="Claude Pichois" label="Pichois, Claude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113279" start="28467" end="28478" title="Graham Robb" label="Graham Robb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5808" wikidata="Q2735619" url="?curid=5808" title="Casey at the Bat">
<text>&quot;Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic, Sung in the Year 1888&quot; is a mock-heroic poem written in 1888 by Ernest Thayer. It was first published anonymously in &quot;The San Francisco Examiner&quot; (then called &quot;The Daily Examiner&quot;) on June 3, 1888, under the pen name &quot;Phin&quot;, based on Thayer&#x27;s college nickname, &quot;Phinney&quot;. Featuring a dramatic narrative about a baseball game, the poem was later popularized by DeWolf Hopper in many vaudeville performances. It has become one of the best-known poems in American literature.

==Synopsis==
A baseball team from the fictional town of &quot;Mudville&quot; (the home team) is losing by two runs in its last inning. Both the team and its fans, a crowd of 5,000, believe that they can win if Casey, Mudville&#x27;s star player, gets to bat. However, Casey is scheduled to be the fifth batter of the inning, and the first two batters (Cooney and Barrows) fail to get on base. The next two batters (Flynn and Jimmy Blake) are perceived to be weak hitters with little chance of reaching base to allow Casey a chance to bat.

Surprisingly, Flynn hits a single, and Blake follows with a double that allows Flynn to reach third base. Both runners are now in scoring position and Casey represents the potential winning run. Casey is so sure of his abilities that he does not swing at the first two pitches, both called strikes. On the last pitch, the overconfident Casey strikes out swinging, ending the game and sending the crowd home unhappy.

==Text==

The text is filled with references to baseball as it was in 1888, which in many ways is not far removed from today&#x27;s version. As a work, the poem encapsulates much of the appeal of baseball, including the involvement of the crowd. It also has a fair amount of baseball jargon that can pose challenges for the uninitiated.

This is the complete poem as it originally appeared in &quot;The Daily Examiner&quot;. After publication, various versions with minor changes were produced.

==Inspiration==
Thayer said he chose the name &quot;Casey&quot; after a non-player of Irish ancestry he once knew named Daniel H. Casey; it is open to debate whom, if anyone, he modeled the character after. It has been reported that Thayer&#x27;s best friend Samuel Winslow, who played baseball at Harvard, was the inspiration for Casey.

Another classmate of Thayer at Harvard—Edward Terry Sanford—also has been put forward as a possible model for Casey, in part on the ground that Thayer and Sanford were both members of a student group at Harvard (the OK Society) that played some baseball in the mid-1880s. Sanford would go on to a distinguished career in the law, culminating in his appointment to the Supreme Court of the United States in 1923.

Another candidate is National League player Mike &quot;King&quot; Kelly, who became famous when Boston paid Chicago a record $10,000 for him. He had a personality that fans liked to cheer or jeer. After the 1887 season, Kelly went on a playing tour to San Francisco. Thayer, who wrote &quot;Casey&quot; in 1888, covered the San Francisco leg for the &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot;.

Thayer, in a letter he wrote in 1905, mentions Kelly as showing &quot;impudence&quot; in claiming to have written the poem. The author of the 2004 definitive biography of Kelly—which included a close tracking of his vaudeville career—did not find Kelly claiming to have been the author.

==Composition and publication history==
&quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; was first published in &quot;The Daily Examiner&quot; on June 3, 1888.

A month after the poem was published, it was reprinted as &quot;Kelly at the Bat&quot; in the &quot;New York Sporting Times&quot;.
Aside from omitting the first five verses, the only changes from the original are substitutions of Kelly for Casey, and Boston for Mudville. King Kelly, then of the Boston Beaneaters, was one of baseball&#x27;s two biggest stars at the time (along with Cap Anson).

In 1897, the magazine &quot;Current Literature&quot; noted the two versions and said, &quot;The locality, as originally given, is Mudville, not Boston; the latter was substituted to give the poem local color.&quot;

==Live performances==

DeWolf Hopper gave the poem&#x27;s first stage recitation on August 14, 1888, at New York&#x27;s Wallack Theatre as part of the comic opera &quot;Prinz Methusalem&quot; in the presence of the Chicago White Stockings and New York Giants baseball teams; August 14, 1888 was also Thayer&#x27;s 25th birthday. Hopper became known as an orator of the poem, and recited it more than 10,000 times (by his count—some tabulations are as much as four times higher) before his death.

On stage in the early 1890s, baseball star Kelly recited the original &quot;Casey&quot; a few dozen times and not the parody. For example, in a review in 1893 of a variety show he was in, the &quot;Indianapolis News&quot; said, &quot;Many who attended the performance had heard of Kelly&#x27;s singing and his reciting, and many had heard De Wolf Hopper recite &#x27;Casey at the Bat&#x27; in his inimitable way. Kelly recited this in a sing-song, school-boy fashion.&quot; Upon Kelly&#x27;s death, a writer would say he gained &quot;considerable notoriety by his ludicrous rendition of &#x27;Casey at the Bat,&#x27; with which he concluded his &#x27;turn&#x27; [act] at each performance.&quot;

During the 1980s, the magic/comedy team Penn &amp; Teller performed a version of &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; with Teller (the &quot;silent&quot; partner) struggling to escape a straitjacket while suspended upside-down over a platform of sharp steel spikes. The set-up was that Penn Jillette would leap off his chair upon finishing the poem, releasing the rope which supported Teller, and send Teller to a gruesome death if Teller had failed to free himself by that time. Jillette enhanced the drama of the performance by drastically accelerating the pace of his recital after the first few stanzas, greatly reducing the time that Teller had left to work free from his bonds.

==Recordings==

The first recorded version of &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; was made by Russell Hunting, speaking in a broad Irish accent, in 1893; an 1898 cylinder recording of the text made for the Columbia Graphophone label by Hunting can be accessed from the Cylinder Preservation and Digitization Project at the University of California, Santa Barbara Library.

DeWolf Hopper&#x27;s more famous recorded recitation was released in October 1906.

In 1946, Walt Disney released a recording of the narration of the poem by Jerry Colonna, which accompanied the studio&#x27;s animated cartoon adaptation of the poem (see below).

In 1973, the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra commissioned its former Composer-in-Residence, Frank Proto, to create a work to feature Baseball Hall-of-Famer Johnny Bench with the orchestra. The result &quot;Casey At The Bat – an American Folk Tale for Narrator and Orchestra&quot; was an immediate hit and recorded by Bench and the orchestra. It has since been performed more than 800 times by nearly every major and Metropolitan orchestra in the U.S. and Canada.

In 1980, baseball pitcher Tug McGraw recorded &quot;Casey at The Bat—an American Folk Tale for Narrator and Orchestra&quot; by Frank Proto with Peter Nero and the Philly Pops.

In 1996, actor James Earl Jones recorded the poem with arranger/composer Steven Reineke and the Cincinnati Pops Orchestra.

On a 1997 CD set with memorable moments and stories from the game of baseball titled &quot;Take Me Out to the Ball Game&quot; produced by Jerry Hoffman and Douglas Duer, a Vincent Price oration of the poem is a slightly altered version of the original.

In 1998, actor Sir Derek Jacobi recorded the poem with composer/arranger Randol Alan Bass and the National Symphony of London, with the composer conducting. This work, titled &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot;, has been recorded by the Boston Pops Orchestra, Keith Lockhart conducting.
In 2013, Dave Jageler and Charlie Slowes, both radio announcers for the Washington Nationals, each made recordings of the poem for the Library of Congress to mark the 125th anniversary of its first publication.

==Mudville==
A rivalry of sorts has developed between two cities claiming to be the Mudville described in the poem.
Residents of Holliston, Massachusetts, where there is a neighborhood called Mudville, claim it as the Mudville described in the poem. Thayer grew up in nearby Worcester, Massachusetts, where he wrote the poem in 1888; his family owned a wool mill less than from Mudville&#x27;s baseball field.

However, residents of Stockton, California—which was known for a time as Mudville prior to incorporation in 1850—also lay claim to being the inspiration for the poem. In 1887, Thayer covered baseball for &quot;The Daily Examiner&quot;—owned by his Harvard classmate William Randolph Hearst—and is said to have covered the local California League team, the Stockton Ports. For the 1902 season, after the poem became popular, Stockton&#x27;s team was renamed the Mudville Nine. The team reverted to the Mudville Nine moniker for the 2000 and 2001 seasons. The Visalia Rawhide, another California League team, currently keeps Mudville alive playing in Mudville jerseys on June 3 each year.

Despite the towns&#x27; rival claims, Thayer himself told the &quot;Syracuse Post-Standard&quot; that &quot;the poem has no basis in fact.&quot;

==Adaptations==
The poem has been adapted to diverse types of media:

===Books===
*Ralph Andreano&#x27;s 1965 book, &quot;No Joy in Mudville&quot;, laments the death of heroes in modern baseball.
*In the book &quot;Faithful&quot; by Steward O&#x27;Nan and Stephen King, describing the 2004 season of the Boston Red Sox, a chapter contributed by King is named &quot;The Gloom is gone from Mudville&quot;.
*Wallace Tripp illustrated a popular 1978 book of the poem.
*Kurtis Scaletta&#x27;s 2009 children&#x27;s novel, &quot;Mudville&quot;, is about a town where it has been raining for 22 years, delaying a baseball game between two rival towns.

===Comics===
*Marvel Comics published a spoof in August 1969, in the 9th issue of &quot;Not Brand Echh&quot;, featuring parodies of their popular heroes and villains, and the Bulk (parody of the Hulk) as Casey.
*DC Comics&#x27; series &quot;Fables&quot; from the Vertigo Comics imprint featured an adaptation titled &quot;Out to the Ball Game&quot;, which features a similar baseball match, with Weyland Smith playing the part of Casey against a team of goblins.

===Film===
*In 1922, Lee De Forest recorded DeWolf Hopper reciting the poem in DeForest&#x27;s Phonofilm sound-on-film process.
*In 1927, a feature-length silent film &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; was released, starring Wallace Beery, Ford Sterling, and ZaSu Pitts. At least three other films based on Thayer&#x27;s poem preceded this 1927 release: an Edison short in 1899, another short starring Harry T. Morey in 1913, and a five-reel feature starring DeWolf Hopper in 1916.
*Walt Disney Productions produced an Animated Segment adaptation of the poem for the film &quot;Make Mine Music&quot; (1946) and uses the original text, but is set in 1902 according to the opening song&#x27;s lyrics, instead of 1888. This version is recited by Jerry Colonna. It was later released as an individual short on July 16, 1954. A sequel short was also produced &quot;Casey Bats Again&quot; and released on June 18, 1954.
*A 1976 animated short adaptation, featuring narration by Paul Frees, was released in 1976 by Fine Arts Films.
*In 1986, Elliott Gould starred as &quot;Casey&quot; in the &quot;Shelley Duvall&#x27;s Tall Tales and Legends&quot; adaptation of the story, which also starred Carol Kane, Howard Cosell, Bob Uecker, Bill Macy and Rae Dawn Chong. The screenplay, adapted from the poem, was written by Andy Borowitz and the production was directed by David Steinberg.
*In &quot;The Dream Team&quot; (1989), Michael Keaton&#x27;s character announces that &quot;there is no joy in Mudville&quot; after giving a fellow mental patient three &quot;strikes&quot; for psychotic behavior.
*In 1993 the last paragraph is quoted in the film &quot;Short Cuts&quot; (by Robert Altman), when Lyle Lovett as Andy Bitkower is calling anonymously Andie MacDowell as Ann Finnigan in minute 01:34:58.

=== Radio ===
*The poem was adapted for an episode of &quot;On Stage&quot; that aired on CBS on April 16, 1953. It was written by E. Jack Neuman and starred Elliott Lewis, Cathy Lewis, Hy Averback, Herb Butterfield, Byron Kane, Peter Leeds, Hal March, Howard McNear, and Sidney Miller.
*Radio personality Casey Kasem self-identified on-air as &quot;Casey at the mic.&quot;

===Television===
*Jackie Gleason in his &quot;Reginald Van Gleason III&quot; persona (in full Mudville baseball uniform) performed a recitation of the poem on his &quot;And Awaaaay We Go!&quot; album.
*Season 1, episode 35 of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot;, &quot;The Mighty Casey&quot;, concerns a baseball player who is actually a robot (June 17, 1960).
*In the &quot;Northern Exposure&quot; episode &quot;The Graduate&quot;, Chris Stevens gains his Master&#x27;s degree in Comparative literature by subjecting his assessors to a spirited re-enactment of the poem.
*In &quot;General Hospital&quot;, Steve Hardy performs the poem during the 1994 Nurses&#x27; Ball while dressed in a Mudville baseball uniform. He concludes by telling the audience not to worry because Casey is married to the Mudville owner&#x27;s daughter.
*In &quot;How I Met Your Mother&quot;, the episode &quot;Bedtime Stories&quot; (which is done entirely in rhymes) features a subplot called &quot;Mosby At The Bat&quot;. The start of that section of the episode begins with &quot;The outlook wasn&#x27;t brilliant for poor Ted&#x27;s romantic life&quot;, a line based on the opening of the original poem.
*In &quot;One Tree Hill&quot;, season 8 episode &quot;The Man Who Sailed Around His Soul&quot; was a flashback-heavy episode revolving around a baseball game with Jamie Scott narrating the poem throughout.

===Music===
*Art-song composer Sidney Homer turned the poem into a song. Sheet music was published by G. Schirmer in 1920 as part of &quot;Six Cheerful Songs to Poems of American Humor.&quot;
*William Schuman composed an opera, &quot;The Mighty Casey&quot; (1953), based on the poem.
*The song &quot;No Joy in Mudville&quot; from Death Cab for Cutie&#x27;s album &quot;We Have the Facts and We&#x27;re Voting Yes&quot; directly references the poem.
*The song &quot;Centerfield&quot; by John Fogerty includes the line &quot;Well, I spent some time in the Mudville Nine, watchin&#x27; it from the bench. You know I took some lumps when the Mighty Casey struck out.&quot;
*The song &quot;No Joy In Pudville&quot; by Steroid Maximus is a reference to this poem.
*Joe Walsh&#x27;s 1973 song &quot;Rocky Mountain Way&quot; features the lyrics &quot;Bases are loaded/ And Casey&#x27;s at bat/ Playin&#x27; it play-by-play/ Time to change the batter.&quot;
*In 2008 American composer Randol Alan Bass used the song &quot;Take Me Out to the Ball Game&quot; by Alfred Von Tilzer and Jack Norworth in &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot;, a setting of the poem for concert band and narrator.

===Theatre===
*&quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; was adapted into a 1953 opera by American composer William Schuman. 
*An orchestral adaptation by composer Frank Proto has been recorded by the Cincinnati Pops orchestra conducted by Erich Kunzel with baseball star Johnny Bench narrating. 
*The Dallas Symphony commissioned an arrangement of &quot;Casey&quot; by Randol Alan Bass in 2001, which he later arranged for concert band.

==Derivations==

For a relatively short poem apparently dashed off quickly (and denied by its author for years), &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; had a profound effect on American popular culture. It has been recited, re-enacted, adapted, dissected, parodied, and subjected to just about every other treatment one could imagine.

===Sequels===
*&quot;Casey&#x27;s Revenge&quot;, by Grantland Rice (1907), gives Casey another chance against the pitcher who had struck him out in the original story. It was written in 1906, and its first known publication was in the quarterly magazine &quot;The Speaker&quot; in June 1907, under the pseudonym of James Wilson. In this version, Rice cites the nickname &quot;Strike-Out Casey&quot;, hence the influence on Casey Stengel&#x27;s name. Casey&#x27;s team is down &quot;three&quot; runs by the last of the ninth, and once again Casey is down to two strikes—with the bases full this time. However, he connects, and hits the ball so far that it is never found.
*&quot;Casey - Twenty Years Later&quot;, by Clarence P. McDonald (1908), imagines a different redemption for Casey, long after his retirement. The poem, which was indeed published twenty years after the original, in the San Francisco Examiner, sees Casey attending a championship game between the fictional team of &quot;Bugville&quot; and an unspecified opponent. In a losing effort, Bugville&#x27;s players are benched and injured throughout the game, until the captain is forced to call for a volunteer from the attendees. An aged Casey answers the call and fills the role surprisingly well, culminating with him hitting the game-winning home run, in his first swing at bat. He then reveals his identity to the joyous fans and players.
*In response to the popularity of the 1946 Walt Disney animated adaptation, Disney made a sequel, &quot;Casey Bats Again&quot; (1954), in which Casey&#x27;s nine daughters redeem his reputation.
*In 1988, on the 100th anniversary of the poem, &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; writer Frank Deford constructed a fanciful story (later expanded to book form) for what happened before and after the famous ball game.

===Parodies===
Of the many parodies made of the poem, some of the notable ones include:
*&quot;Mad&quot; magazine republished the original version of the poem in the 1950s with artwork by Jack Davis and no alterations to the text. Later lampoons in &quot;Mad&quot; included &quot;&#x27;Cool&#x27; Casey at the Bat&quot; (1960), an interpretation of the poem in beatnik style, with artwork by Don Martin although the ending still has Casey striking out; &quot;Casey at the Dice&quot; in 1969, about a professional gambler; &quot;Casey at the Contract Talks&quot; in 1974 (which ends with the owner telling Casey to &quot;practice hard at home this year &#x27;cause now you&#x27;ve struck out twice&quot;); Casey at the Talks&quot; in 1977, a &quot;modern&quot; version of the famed poem in which Mudville tries unsuccessfully to sign free agent Casey [the last line of which is &quot;Mighty Casey has held out&quot;]; &quot;Baseball at the Bat&quot;, a satire on baseball itself, &quot;Howard at the Mike&quot;, about Howard Cosell; &quot;Casey at the Byte&quot; (1985), a tale of a cocky young computer expert who accidentally erases the White House Budget Plan; &quot;Clooney as the Bat&quot;, a mockery of George Clooney&#x27;s role as Batman in &quot;Batman and Robin&quot;; and in 2006 as &quot;Barry at the Bat&quot;, poking fun at Barry Bonds&#x27; alleged involvement in the BALCO scandal; in 2001, &quot;Jordan at the Hoop&quot;, satirizing Michael Jordan&#x27;s return to the NBA and his time with the Washington Wizards; and in 2012, &quot;Casey at the Trial&quot;, satirizing Casey Anthony&#x27;s acquittal in the case of the death of her daughter Caylee. It also includes a &quot;Poetry Round Robin&quot; where famous poems are rewritten in the style of the next poet in line, featured Casey at the Bat as written by Edgar Allan Poe.
*Sportswriter Leonard Koppett claimed in a 1979 tongue-in-cheek article that the published poem omits 18 lines penned by Thayer, which changed the overall theme of the poem. Koppett added lines, claiming to have transcribed them off an old phonograph recording, that take the pitch count on Casey to full. Meanwhile, his uncle Arnold stirs up wagering action in the stands, before a wink passes between them. Casey throws the game.
*Foster Brooks (&quot;the Lovable Lush&quot; from the &quot;Dean Martin Show&quot;) wrote &quot;Riley on the Mound&quot;, which recounts the story from the pitcher&#x27;s perspective. 
*In his 1987 Baseball Abstract, Bill James published &quot;Casey Chases A Knuckler&quot;, which employed a five-line stanza and AAAAB structure, about former MLB knuckleball pitcher Charlie Hough
*Author Phil Bolsta penned a parody entitled &quot;Hrbek at the Bat&quot; about Twins slugger Kent Hrbek which was published in 1987 in the Minneapolis Review of Baseball.
*Radio performer Garrison Keillor&#x27;s parodic version of the poem reimagines the game as a road game, instead of a home game, for the Mudville team. The same events occur with Casey striking out in the ninth inning as in the original poem, but with everything told from the perspective of other team.
*An episode of &quot;Tiny Toon Adventures&quot; featured a short titled &quot;Buster at the Bat&quot;, where Sylvester provides narration as Buster goes up to bat. The poem was parodied again for an episode of &quot;Animaniacs&quot;, this time with Wakko as the title character and Yakko narrating. Both versions end on a happier note with the main character hitting a home run.
*In the fourth season of &quot;Garfield and Friends&quot; the episode entitled &quot;Mind Over Matter/Orson at the Bat/Multiple Choice Cartoon&quot; features Wade Duck narrating a parody of the poem as Orson Pig experiences it in a dream sequence.
*In &quot;The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius&quot; episode &quot;Return of the Nanobots&quot;, Cindy&#x27;s poem is identical to the ending of &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; but replaces Mudville with Retroville and the last famed line with &quot;cause Jimmy is an idiot!&quot;
*The New York Times published a parody by Hart Seely and Frank Cammuso in which the poem was narrated by Phil Rizzuto, a New York Yankees announcer who was known to veer off on tangents while calling the game. The poem was later published in Seely and Cammuso&#x27;s book, &quot;2007 Eleven And Other American Comedies&quot;.
*David Pogue penned a parody version titled &#x27;A Desktop Critic: Steven Saves the Mac&#x27; for Macworld magazine that ran in their October 1999 issue. It tells the story of Steve Jobs&#x27; triumphant return to a struggling Apple Inc and his early efforts to reverse the company&#x27;s fortunes.
*Dick Flavin wrote a version titled Teddy at the Bat, after Boston Red Sox legend Ted Williams died in July 2002. Flavin performed the poem at Fenway Park during the night-long tribute to Williams done at the park later that month. The poem replaced Flynn and Blake with Bobby Doerr and Johnny Pesky, the batters who preceded Williams in the 1946 Red Sox lineup.
*In 2000, Michael J. Farrand adapted the rhyming scheme, tone, and theme of the poem—while reversing the outcome—to create his poem &quot;The Man Who Gave All the Dreamers in Baseball Land Bigger Dreams to Dream&quot; about Kirk Gibson&#x27;s home run off Dennis Eckersley in Game 1 of the 1988 World Series. The poem appears at the Baseball Almanac.
*Norman Jackman wrote a reversed-outcome version in 1951 called &quot;Bobby Thomson at the Bat,&quot; which went unknown for over 60 years until the San Francisco Giants published it in 2012. It&#x27;s about Thomson&#x27;s famous home run in a 1951 Giant-Dodger playoff game. In 2016, the poem was accepted into the poetry files of the National Baseball Library and Archive of the Hall of Fame.
*The New York Times best-selling author and poet laureate of The Ringer, Shea Serrano, penned a loving tribute to NBA player Gordon Hayward in the vein of &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; in 2017.
*Canadian comedy duo Wayne and Shuster created &quot;Shakespearean Baseball&quot;, featuring William Shakespeare-esque characters and dialogue in a skit based upon the poem. They performed the play on &quot;The Ed Sullivan Show&quot; and on Canadian TV numerous times between the 1950s and 1980s.
*Baseball writer and Villanova professor Mitchell Nathanson updated the poem for contemporary times in 2019, publishing &quot;Casey @ the Bat&quot; in &quot;The Washington Post&quot;.

===Translations===
There are three known translations of the poem into a foreign language, one in French, written in 2007 by French Canadian linguist Paul Laurendeau, with the title &quot;Casey au bâton&quot;, and two in Hebrew. One by the sports journalist Menachem Less titled &quot;התור של קייסי לחבוט&quot; [Hator Shel Casey Lachbot], and the other more recent and more true to the original cadence and style by Jason H. Elbaum called קֵיסִי בַּמַּחְבֵּט [Casey BaMachbayt].

===Names===
Casey Stengel describes in his autobiography how his original nickname &quot;K.C.&quot; (for his hometown, Kansas City, Missouri) evolved into &quot;Casey&quot;. It was influenced not just by the name of the poem, which was widely popular in the 1910s, but also because he tended to strike out frequently in his early career so fans and writers started calling him &quot;strikeout Casey&quot;.

==Contemporary culture==
===Video games===
*The poem is referenced in the Super Nintendo Entertainment System game &quot;EarthBound&quot;, where a weapon is named the Casey Bat, which is the strongest weapon in the game, but will only hit 25% of the time.

===Television===
*A recurring character in the &quot;Pokémon&quot; anime, a girl who is a very enthusiastic fan of baseball, is named &quot;Casey&quot; in the English version in reference to the poem.
*Season 1, episode 35 of &quot;The Twilight Zone&quot; was named &quot;The Mighty Casey&quot; in reference to the poem&#x27;s lead character, though the plot is unrelated.
*The title of Season 3, episode 17 of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;, &quot;Homer at the Bat&quot;, is a reference to the poem.
*A third-season episode of &quot;Storm Chasers&quot; was titled &quot;Sean Casey At Bat&quot;. The episode featured Casey (a chaser) intercepting a tornado for the first time in TIV 2.
*In the show &quot;Friends&quot;, Ross clarifies how to spell &quot;Casey&quot; as in &quot;at the bat&quot; in the Season 2, episode 14 titled &quot;The One with the Prom Video.&quot;
*In the show &quot;Containment&quot;, Season 1, episode 6 takes its name, &quot;He Stilled the Rising Tumult&quot;, from the poem.
*In the show &quot;Black Mirror&quot;, Season 6, episode 3, &quot;Beyond the Sea&quot; quotes the poem.

===Theme parks===
*Casey&#x27;s Corner is a baseball-themed restaurant in Walt Disney World&#x27;s Magic Kingdom, which serves primarily hotdogs. Pictures of Casey and the pitcher from the Disney animated adaptation are hanging on the walls, and a life-size statue of a baseball player identified as &quot;Casey&quot; stands just outside the restaurant. Additionally, the scoreboard in the restaurant shows that Mudville lost to the visitors by two runs.
*A hot dog restaurant featuring the Disney character can be found at Disneyland Paris&#x27; Disneyland Park since its opening in 1992, under the name Casey&#x27;s Corner.
*A game called Casey at the Bat is in the Games of the Boardwalk at the Disneyland Resort&#x27;s Disney California Adventure.

===Theatre===
*In &quot;Cabaret&quot; (1993) Clifford Bradshaw recites the end of &quot;Mighty Casey&quot; to Sally Bowles.

===Postage stamp===

On July 11, 1996, the United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp depicting &quot;Mighty Casey.&quot; The stamp was part of a set commemorating American folk heroes. Other stamps in the set depicted Paul Bunyan, John Henry, and Pecos Bill.

==References==
==External links==

*&quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; on MLB.com.
*Library of Congress essay on its inclusion into the National Recording Registry.
*&quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; cylinder recording by Russell Hunting, from the Cylinder Audio Archive at the University of California, Santa Barbara Library.
*&quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; Web site with biographical details on Thayer, Hopper, Mike &quot;King&quot; Kelly and chronology of the poem&#x27;s publication.
*&quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; as told in baseball cards
*&quot;Casey at the Bat” and its Long Post-Game Show&quot; an essay on its composition and legacy by Michael J. Astrue
*Poems about Casey&#x27;s later life, including another by Grantland Rice, and one by Garrison Keillor
* Caseyatthe.blog is a site dedicated to preserving and promoting the literary legacy of &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot; and the biography of &quot;Casey&#x27;s&quot; author, Ernest Lawrence Thayer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2735619" start="6" end="71" title="Casey at the Bat" label="Casey at the Bat: A Ballad of the Republic, Sung in the Year 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660540" start="83" end="94" title="mock-heroic" label="mock-heroic"/>
<link wikidata="Q288369" start="119" end="132" title="Ernest Thayer" label="Ernest Thayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="178" end="204" title="The San Francisco Examiner" label="The San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="283" end="291" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="411" end="419" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020065" start="460" end="473" title="DeWolf Hopper" label="DeWolf Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="482" end="492" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="552" end="571" title="American literature" label="American literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="684" end="688" title="Run (baseball)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q860105" start="1244" end="1260" title="scoring position" label="scoring position"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="1456" end="1476" title="Strikeout" label="strikes out swinging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="1930" end="1948" title="The San Francisco Examiner" label="The Daily Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656667" start="2286" end="2300" title="Samuel Winslow" label="Samuel Winslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2325" end="2332" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293854" start="2405" end="2425" title="Edward Terry Sanford" label="Edward Terry Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2734" end="2768" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527827" start="2823" end="2850" title="King Kelly" label="Mike &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="2875" end="2881" title="History of the Boston Braves" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869217" start="2887" end="2894" title="History of the Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="3135" end="3157" title="San Francisco Examiner" label="San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="3552" end="3570" title="The San Francisco Examiner" label="The Daily Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3846" end="3852" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527827" start="3867" end="3877" title="King Kelly" label="King Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869139" start="3891" end="3908" title="History of the Boston Braves" label="Boston Beaneaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028466" start="3979" end="3988" title="Cap Anson" label="Cap Anson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195060" start="4020" end="4038" title="Current Literature" label="Current Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020065" start="4231" end="4244" title="DeWolf Hopper" label="DeWolf Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680700" start="4278" end="4288" title="recitation" label="recitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4312" end="4327" title="New York City" label="New York&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4328" end="4343" title="Wallack Theatre" label="Wallack Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="4359" end="4370" title="comic opera" label="comic opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469499" start="4377" end="4393" title="Prinz Methusalem" label="Prinz Methusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869217" start="4431" end="4446" title="Chicago White Stockings (1870–1889)" label="White Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="4460" end="4466" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q130317" start="5441" end="5458" title="Penn &amp;amp; Teller" label="Penn &amp;amp; Teller"/>
<link wikidata="Q231647" start="5579" end="5591" title="straitjacket" label="straitjacket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4129653" start="5679" end="5692" title="Penn Jillette" label="Penn Jillette"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381581" start="6165" end="6180" title="Russell Hunting" label="Russell Hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199264" start="6340" end="6386" title="Cylinder Preservation and Digitization Project" label="Cylinder Preservation and Digitization Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="6394" end="6433" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020065" start="6444" end="6457" title="DeWolf Hopper" label="DeWolf Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="6537" end="6548" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q923250" start="6602" end="6615" title="Jerry Colonna (entertainer)" label="Jerry Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="6653" end="6669" title="animated cartoon" label="animated cartoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287274" start="6720" end="6749" title="Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra" label="Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453141" start="6797" end="6808" title="Frank Proto" label="Frank Proto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155003" start="6861" end="6873" title="Johnny Bench" label="Johnny Bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459273" start="7195" end="7205" title="Tug McGraw" label="Tug McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453141" start="7296" end="7307" title="Frank Proto" label="Frank Proto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176071" start="7313" end="7323" title="Peter Nero" label="Peter Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185989" start="7332" end="7343" title="Philly Pops" label="Philly Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q203960" start="7361" end="7377" title="James Earl Jones" label="James Earl Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282503" start="7419" end="7433" title="Steven Reineke" label="Steven Reineke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120290" start="7442" end="7467" title="Cincinnati Pops Orchestra" label="Cincinnati Pops Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="7642" end="7655" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="7739" end="7755" title="Sir Derek Jacobi" label="Sir Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7797" end="7813" title="Randol Alan Bass" label="Randol Alan Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229035" start="8013" end="8025" title="Dave Jageler" label="Dave Jageler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085523" start="8030" end="8044" title="Charlie Slowes" label="Charlie Slowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="8076" end="8096" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="8139" end="8158" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q596394" start="8345" end="8369" title="Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Holliston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="8491" end="8515" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="8649" end="8669" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="8837" end="8855" title="The San Francisco Examiner" label="The Daily Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="8893" end="8916" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186782" start="8955" end="8972" title="California League" label="California League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618246" start="8983" end="8997" title="Stockton Ports" label="Stockton Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558041" start="9007" end="9018" title="1902 in baseball" label="1902 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935602" start="9185" end="9200" title="Visalia Rawhide" label="Visalia Rawhide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757854" start="9383" end="9405" title="Syracuse Post-Standard" label="Syracuse Post-Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q352425" start="9495" end="9502" title="Literary adaptation" label="adapted"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="9717" end="9729" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962912" start="9866" end="9879" title="Wallace Tripp" label="Wallace Tripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6447205" start="9926" end="9941" title="Kurtis Scaletta" label="Kurtis Scaletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q173496" start="10120" end="10133" title="Marvel Comics" label="Marvel Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7062057" start="10194" end="10208" title="Not Brand Echh" label="Not Brand Echh"/>
<link wikidata="Q188760" start="10301" end="10305" title="Hulk" label="Hulk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="10318" end="10327" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q784649" start="10347" end="10353" title="Fables (comics)" label="Fables"/>
<link wikidata="Q122669" start="10369" end="10383" title="Vertigo Comics" label="Vertigo Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q354863" start="10591" end="10604" title="Lee De Forest" label="Lee De Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020065" start="10614" end="10627" title="DeWolf Hopper" label="DeWolf Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381432" start="10665" end="10674" title="Phonofilm" label="Phonofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="10725" end="10736" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048614" start="10743" end="10759" title="Casey at the Bat (1927 film)" label="Casey at the Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q322179" start="10789" end="10802" title="Wallace Beery" label="Wallace Beery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399937" start="10804" end="10817" title="Ford Sterling" label="Ford Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q136646" start="10823" end="10833" title="ZaSu Pitts" label="ZaSu Pitts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="10921" end="10927" title="Thomas Edison" label="Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127929" start="10966" end="10980" title="Harry T. Morey" label="Harry T. Morey"/>
<link wikidata="Q90257405" start="10996" end="11013" title="Casey at the Bat (1916 film)" label="five-reel feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="11047" end="11070" title="Walt Disney Productions" label="Walt Disney Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="11083" end="11099" title="animated short" label="Animated Segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q754736" start="11142" end="11157" title="Make Mine Music" label="Make Mine Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q923250" start="11307" end="11320" title="Jerry Colonna (entertainer)" label="Jerry Colonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650416" start="11424" end="11440" title="Casey Bats Again" label="Casey Bats Again"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090544" start="11536" end="11546" title="Paul Frees" label="Paul Frees"/>
<link wikidata="Q314805" start="11599" end="11612" title="Elliott Gould" label="Elliott Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q235478" start="11655" end="11669" title="Shelley Duvall" label="Shelley Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q235302" start="11750" end="11760" title="Carol Kane" label="Carol Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472983" start="11762" end="11775" title="Howard Cosell" label="Howard Cosell"/>
<link wikidata="Q888295" start="11777" end="11787" title="Bob Uecker" label="Bob Uecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q247064" start="11789" end="11798" title="Bill Macy" label="Bill Macy"/>
<link wikidata="Q261547" start="11803" end="11817" title="Rae Dawn Chong" label="Rae Dawn Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q520072" start="11873" end="11886" title="Andy Borowitz" label="Andy Borowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018825" start="11922" end="11937" title="David Steinberg" label="David Steinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q718823" start="11949" end="11963" title="The Dream Team (1989 film)" label="The Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="11978" end="11992" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q605226" start="12208" end="12218" title="Short Cuts" label="Short Cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="12229" end="12242" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q543637" start="12250" end="12261" title="Lyle Lovett" label="Lyle Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q208558" start="12302" end="12317" title="Andie MacDowell" label="Andie MacDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q65120948" start="12415" end="12423" title="On Stage (radio show)" label="On Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022995" start="12444" end="12447" title="CBS Radio" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q61749615" start="12485" end="12499" title="E. Jack Neuman" label="E. Jack Neuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365687" start="12512" end="12525" title="Elliott Lewis (actor)" label="Elliott Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354271" start="12527" end="12538" title="Cathy Lewis" label="Cathy Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143556" start="12540" end="12551" title="Hy Averback" label="Hy Averback"/>
<link wikidata="Q117862536" start="12571" end="12581" title="Byron Kane" label="Byron Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175406" start="12583" end="12594" title="Peter Leeds" label="Peter Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125892" start="12596" end="12605" title="Hal March" label="Hal March"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509236" start="12626" end="12639" title="Sidney Miller (actor)" label="Sidney Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047230" start="12660" end="12671" title="Casey Kasem" label="Casey Kasem"/>
<link wikidata="Q454200" start="12747" end="12761" title="Jackie Gleason" label="Jackie Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q742103" start="12961" end="12978" title="The Twilight Zone (1959 TV series)" label="The Twilight Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q301345" start="13098" end="13115" title="Northern Exposure" label="Northern Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="13180" end="13200" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Master&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q834903" start="13204" end="13226" title="Comparative literature" label="Comparative literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136370" start="13305" end="13321" title="General Hospital" label="General Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612765" start="13329" end="13340" title="Steve Hardy" label="Steve Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147235" start="13563" end="13584" title="How I Met Your Mother" label="How I Met Your Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746317" start="13610" end="13625" title="Bedtime Stories (How I Met Your Mother)" label="Bedtime Stories"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13693" end="13721" title="Bedtime Stories (How I Met Your Mother)#&amp;quot;Mosby At The Bat&amp;quot;" label="&amp;quot;Mosby At The Bat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="13917" end="13930" title="One Tree Hill (TV series)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750149" start="14070" end="14081" title="Jamie Scott (One Tree Hill)" label="Jamie Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509144" start="14145" end="14157" title="Sidney Homer" label="Sidney Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q503225" start="14307" end="14322" title="William Schuman" label="William Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16414" start="14444" end="14463" title="Death Cab for Cutie" label="Death Cab for Cutie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16416" start="14483" end="14526" title="We Have the Facts and We&amp;#x27;re Voting Yes" label="We Have the Facts and We&amp;#x27;re Voting Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060038" start="14579" end="14590" title="Centerfield (song)" label="Centerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q326538" start="14600" end="14612" title="John Fogerty" label="John Fogerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973287" start="14827" end="14842" title="Steroid Maximus" label="Steroid Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="14873" end="14882" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370451" start="14906" end="14924" title="Rocky Mountain Way (song)" label="Rocky Mountain Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="15356" end="15361" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q503225" start="15383" end="15398" title="William Schuman" label="William Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453141" start="15439" end="15450" title="Frank Proto" label="Frank Proto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120290" start="15476" end="15491" title="Cincinnati Pops" label="Cincinnati Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q724158" start="15515" end="15527" title="Erich Kunzel" label="Erich Kunzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155003" start="15547" end="15559" title="Johnny Bench" label="Johnny Bench"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15919" end="15926" title="#Live performances" label="recited"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15940" end="15947" title="#Adaptations" label="adapted"/>
<link wikidata="Q458458" start="16092" end="16106" title="Grantland Rice" label="Grantland Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047261" start="16463" end="16476" title="Casey Stengel" label="Casey Stengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="17699" end="17717" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q13471647" start="17731" end="17743" title="Frank Deford" label="Frank Deford"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="17888" end="17896" title="parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q312086" start="17956" end="17959" title="Mad (magazine)" label="Mad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677016" start="18049" end="18059" title="Jack Davis (cartoonist)" label="Jack Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622408" start="18222" end="18229" title="beatnik" label="beatnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239296" start="18253" end="18263" title="Don Martin (cartoonist)" label="Don Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472983" start="18878" end="18891" title="Howard Cosell" label="Howard Cosell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="19069" end="19083" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="19099" end="19105" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q276523" start="19115" end="19131" title="Batman &amp;amp; Robin (film)" label="Batman and Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="19198" end="19209" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q795416" start="19243" end="19248" title="BALCO" label="BALCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="19310" end="19324" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="19372" end="19390" title="Washington Wizards" label="Washington Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056362" start="19494" end="19526" title="Death of Caylee Anthony" label="the death of her daughter Caylee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="19690" end="19705" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505720" start="19721" end="19736" title="Leonard Koppett" label="Leonard Koppett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248491" start="20140" end="20153" title="Foster Brooks" label="Foster Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037014" start="20356" end="20366" title="Bill James" label="Bill James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960863" start="20506" end="20519" title="Charlie Hough" label="Charlie Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147780" start="20614" end="20624" title="Kent Hrbek" label="Kent Hrbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q183031" start="20709" end="20725" title="Garrison Keillor" label="Garrison Keillor"/>
<link wikidata="Q387943" start="21017" end="21037" title="Tiny Toon Adventures" label="Tiny Toon Adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990037" start="21105" end="21114" title="Sylvester (Looney Tunes)" label="Sylvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q547744" start="21212" end="21222" title="Animaniacs" label="Animaniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047131" start="21245" end="21250" title="Yakko, Wakko, and Dot" label="Wakko"/>
<link wikidata="Q576501" start="21406" end="21426" title="Garfield and Friends" label="Garfield and Friends"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21633" end="21676" title="The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius" label="The Adventures of Jimmy Neutron: Boy Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21909" end="21927" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q62747779" start="21965" end="21978" title="Frank Cammuso" label="Frank Cammuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030203" start="22013" end="22025" title="Phil Rizzuto" label="Phil Rizzuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="22029" end="22045" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018632" start="22235" end="22246" title="David Pogue" label="David Pogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q631823" start="22333" end="22341" title="Macworld" label="Macworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="22411" end="22421" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="22462" end="22471" title="Apple Inc" label="Apple Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q27308139" start="22535" end="22546" title="Dick Flavin (poet)" label="Dick Flavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="22594" end="22608" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="22616" end="22628" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="22677" end="22688" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q888518" start="22805" end="22816" title="Bobby Doerr" label="Bobby Doerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320754" start="22821" end="22833" title="Johnny Pesky" label="Johnny Pesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264652" start="22938" end="22952" title="rhyming scheme" label="rhyming scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053916" start="22964" end="22969" title="Literary theme" label="theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415442" start="23121" end="23148" title="Kirk Gibson&amp;#x27;s 1988 World Series home run" label="Kirk Gibson&amp;#x27;s home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145696" start="23153" end="23169" title="Dennis Eckersley" label="Dennis Eckersley"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="23192" end="23204" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866428" start="23230" end="23246" title="Baseball Almanac" label="Baseball Almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="23397" end="23417" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502395" start="23456" end="23486" title="Shot Heard &amp;#x27;Round the World (baseball)" label="Thomson&amp;#x27;s famous home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="23629" end="23641" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="23644" end="23662" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060889" start="23716" end="23728" title="Shea Serrano" label="Shea Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q155223" start="23757" end="23760" title="NBA" label="NBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q919197" start="23768" end="23782" title="Gordon Hayward" label="Gordon Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612516" start="23857" end="23874" title="Wayne and Shuster" label="Wayne and Shuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="23929" end="23948" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081494" start="24043" end="24063" title="The Ed Sullivan Show" label="The Ed Sullivan Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="24154" end="24163" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="24290" end="24309" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047261" start="24810" end="24823" title="Casey Stengel" label="Casey Stengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="24917" end="24938" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q183259" start="25279" end="25314" title="Super Nintendo Entertainment System" label="Super Nintendo Entertainment System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529000" start="25326" end="25336" title="EarthBound" label="EarthBound"/>
<link wikidata="Q239937" start="25515" end="25522" title="Pokémon (anime)" label="Pokémon"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="25879" end="25891" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662792" start="25905" end="25921" title="Homer at the Bat" label="Homer at the Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354506" start="25990" end="26003" title="Storm Chasers (TV series)" label="Storm Chasers"/>
<link wikidata="Q79784" start="26161" end="26168" title="Friends" label="Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q19869145" start="26346" end="26357" title="Containment (TV series)" label="Containment"/>
<link wikidata="Q558112" start="26477" end="26489" title="Black Mirror" label="Black Mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q119082600" start="26524" end="26538" title="Beyond the Sea (Black Mirror)" label="Beyond the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q206859" start="26637" end="26654" title="Walt Disney World" label="Walt Disney World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324340" start="26662" end="26675" title="Magic Kingdom" label="Magic Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q206521" start="27087" end="27103" title="Disneyland Paris" label="Disneyland Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313567" start="27110" end="27125" title="Disneyland Park (Paris)" label="Disneyland Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229066" start="27261" end="27278" title="Disneyland Resort" label="Disneyland Resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229098" start="27286" end="27313" title="Disney California Adventure Park" label="Disney California Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024739" start="27340" end="27347" title="Cabaret (musical)" label="Cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405081" start="27426" end="27438" title="Sally Bowles" label="Sally Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="27484" end="27512" title="United States Postal Service" label="United States Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="27522" end="27541" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q84164296" start="27629" end="27638" title="folk hero" label="folk hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q150519" start="27675" end="27686" title="Paul Bunyan" label="Paul Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596171" start="27688" end="27698" title="John Henry (folklore)" label="John Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709326" start="27704" end="27714" title="Pecos Bill" label="Pecos Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q253299" start="27847" end="27874" title="National Recording Registry" label="National Recording Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199264" start="27954" end="27976" title="Cylinder Audio Archive" label="Cylinder Audio Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q263064" start="27984" end="28023" title="University of California, Santa Barbara" label="University of California, Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831363" start="28349" end="28366" title="Michael J. Astrue" label="Michael J. Astrue"/>
<link wikidata="Q183031" start="28453" end="28469" title="Garrison Keillor" label="Garrison Keillor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5810" wikidata="Q719120" url="?curid=5810" title="Classical guitar">
<text>The classical guitar, also known as Spanish guitar, is a member of the guitar family used in classical music and other styles. An acoustic wooden string instrument with strings made of gut or nylon, it is a precursor of the modern steel-string acoustic and electric guitars, both of which use metal strings. Classical guitars derive from instruments such as the lute, the vihuela, the gittern (the name being a derivative of the Greek &quot;kithara&quot;), which evolved into the Renaissance guitar and into the 17th and 18th-century baroque guitar. Today&#x27;s &quot;modern classical guitar&quot; was established by the late designs of the 19th-century Spanish luthier, Antonio Torres Jurado.

For a right-handed player, the traditional classical guitar has 12 frets clear of the body and is properly held up by the left leg, so that the hand that plucks or strums the strings does so near the back of the sound hole (this is called the classical position). However, the right-hand may move closer to the fretboard to achieve different tonal qualities. The player typically holds the left leg higher by the use of a foot rest. The modern steel string guitar, on the other hand, usually has 14 frets clear of the body (see Dreadnought) and is commonly held with a strap around the neck and shoulder.

The phrase &quot;classical guitar&quot; may refer to either of two concepts other than the instrument itself:
* The instrumental finger technique common to classical guitar—individual strings plucked with the fingernails or, less frequently, fingertips
* The instrument&#x27;s classical music repertoire

The term &quot;modern classical guitar&quot; sometimes distinguishes the classical guitar from older forms of guitar, which are in their broadest sense also called &quot;classical&quot;, or more specifically, &quot;early guitars&quot;. Examples of early guitars include the six-string early romantic guitar ( – 1880), and the earlier baroque guitars with five courses.

The materials and the methods of classical guitar construction may vary, but the typical shape is either &quot;modern classical guitar&quot; or that &quot;historic classical guitar&quot; similar to the early romantic guitars of Spain, France and Italy. Classical guitar strings once made of gut are now made of materials such as nylon or fluoropolymers, typically with silver-plated copper fine wire wound about the acoustically lower (d-A-E in standard tuning) strings.

A guitar family tree may be identified. The flamenco guitar derives from the modern classical, but has differences in material, construction and sound.

==Contexts==
The classical guitar has a long history and one is able to distinguish various:
*instruments
*repertoire (composers and their compositions, arrangements, improvisations)

Both instrument and repertoire can be viewed from a combination of various perspectives:

Historical (chronological period of time)
*Baroque guitar – 1600 to 1750
*Early romantic guitars – 1750 to 1850 (for music from the Classical and Romantic periods)
*Modern classical guitars
Geographical
*Spanish guitars (Torres), French guitars (René Lacôte, ...), German guitars (Herrmann Hauser), etc.
Cultural
*Baroque court music, nineteenth-century opera and its influences, nineteenth-century folk songs, Latin American music

==Historical perspective==
===Early guitars===
While &quot;classical guitar&quot; is today mainly associated with the modern classical guitar design, there is an increasing interest in early guitars; and understanding the link between historical repertoire and the particular period guitar that was originally used to perform this repertoire. The musicologist and author Graham Wade writes:

Nowadays it is customary to play this repertoire on reproductions of instruments authentically modelled on concepts of musicological research with appropriate adjustments to techniques and overall interpretation. Thus over recent decades we have become accustomed to specialist artists with expertise in the art of vihuela (a 16th-century type of guitar popular in Spain), lute, Baroque guitar, 19th-century guitar, etc.

Different types of guitars have different sound aesthetics, e.g. different colour-spectrum characteristics (the way the sound energy is spread in the fundamental frequency and the overtones), different response, etc. These differences are due to differences in construction; for example, modern classical guitars usually use a different bracing (fan-bracing) from that used in earlier guitars (they had ladder-bracing); and a different voicing was used by the luthier.

There is a historical parallel between musical styles (baroque, classical, romantic, flamenco, jazz) and the style of &quot;sound aesthetic&quot; of the musical instruments used, for example: Robert de Visée played a baroque guitar with a very different sound aesthetic from the guitars used by Mauro Giuliani and Luigi Legnani – they used 19th-century guitars. These guitars in turn sound different from the Torres models used by Segovia that are suited for interpretations of romantic-modern works such as Moreno Torroba.

When considering the guitar from a historical perspective, the musical instrument used is as important as the musical language and style of the particular period. As an example: It is impossible to play a historically informed de Visee or Corbetta (baroque guitarist-composers) on a modern classical guitar. The reason is that the baroque guitar used courses, which are two strings close together (in unison), that are plucked together. This gives baroque guitars an unmistakable sound characteristic and tonal texture that is an integral part of an interpretation. Additionally, the sound aesthetic of the baroque guitar (with its strong overtone presence) is very different from modern classical type guitars, as is shown below.

Today&#x27;s use of Torres and post-Torres type guitars for repertoire of all periods is sometimes critically viewed: Torres and post-Torres style modern guitars (with their fan-bracing and design) have a thick and strong tone, very suitable for modern-era repertoire. However, they are considered to emphasize the fundamental too heavily (at the expense of overtone partials) for earlier repertoire (Classical/Romantic: Carulli, Sor, Giuliani, Mertz, ...; Baroque: de Visee, ...; etc.). &quot;Andrés Segovia presented the Spanish guitar as a versatile model for all playing styles&quot; to the extent, that still today, &quot;many guitarists have tunnel-vision of the world of the guitar, coming from the modern Segovia tradition&quot;.

While fan-braced modern classical Torres and post-Torres style instruments coexisted with traditional ladder-braced guitars at the beginning of the 20th century, the older forms eventually fell away. Some attribute this to the popularity of Segovia, considering him &quot;the catalyst for change toward the Spanish design and the so-called &#x27;modern&#x27; school in the 1920s and beyond.&quot; The styles of music performed on ladder-braced guitars were becoming unfashionable—and, e.g., in Germany, more musicians were turning towards folk music (Schrammel-music and the Contraguitar). This was localized in Germany and Austria and became unfashionable again. On the other hand, Segovia was playing concerts around the world, popularizing modern classical guitar—and, in the 1920s, Spanish romantic-modern style with guitar works by Moreno Torroba, de Falla, etc.

The 19th-century classical guitarist Francisco Tárrega first popularized the Torres design as a classical solo instrument. However, some maintain that Segovia&#x27;s influence led to its domination over other designs. Factories around the world began producing them in large numbers.

====Characteristics====
*Vihuela, renaissance guitars and baroque guitars have a bright sound, rich in overtones, and their courses (double strings) give the sound a very particular texture.
*Early guitars of the classical and romantic period (early romantic guitars) have single strings, but their design and voicing are still such that they have their tonal energy more in the overtones (but without starved fundamental), giving a bright intimate tone.
*Later in Spain a style of music emerged that favoured a stronger fundamental:&quot;With the change of music a stronger fundamental was demanded and the fan bracing system was approached. ... the guitar tone has been changed from a transparent tone, rich in higher partials to a more &#x27;broad&#x27; tone with a strong fundamental.&quot;
*Thus modern guitars with fan bracing (fan strutting) have a design and voicing that gives them a thick, heavy sound, with far more tonal energy found in the fundamental.

==Style periods==

===Renaissance===
Composers of the Renaissance period who wrote for four-course guitar include Alonso Mudarra, Miguel de Fuenllana, Adrian Le Roy, , Guillaume de Morlaye, and .
;Instrument
Four-course guitar

===Baroque===
Some well known composers of the Baroque guitar were Gaspar Sanz, Robert de Visée, Francesco Corbetta and Santiago de Murcia.
;Examples of instruments
*Baroque guitar by Nicolas Alexandre Voboam II: This French instrument has the typical design of the period with five courses of double-strings and a flat back.
*Baroque guitar attributed to Matteo Sellas : This Italian instrument has five courses and a rounded back.

===Classical and romantic===
From approximately 1780 to 1850, the guitar had numerous composers and performers including:
*Filippo Gragnani (1767–1820)
*Antoine de Lhoyer (1768–1852)
*Ferdinando Carulli (1770–1841)
*Wenzel Thomas Matiegka (1773–1830)
*Francesco Molino (1774–1847)
*Fernando Sor (1778–1839)
* ( – 1850)
*Mauro Giuliani (1781–1829)
*Niccolò Paganini (1782–1840)
*Dionisio Aguado (1784–1849)
*Luigi Legnani (1790–1877)
*Matteo Carcassi (1792–1853)
*Napoléon Coste (1805–1883)
*Johann Kaspar Mertz (1806–1856)
*Giulio Regondi (1822–1872)
Hector Berlioz studied the guitar as a teenager; Franz Schubert owned at least two and wrote for the instrument; and Ludwig van Beethoven, after hearing Giuliani play, commented the instrument was &quot;a miniature orchestra in itself&quot;. Niccolò Paganini was also a guitar virtuoso and composer. He once wrote: &quot;I love the guitar for its harmony; it is my constant companion in all my travels&quot;. He also said, on another occasion: &quot;I do not like this instrument, but regard it simply as a way of helping me to think.&quot;

===Francisco Tárrega===
The guitarist and composer Francisco Tárrega (November 21, 1852 – December 15, 1909) was one of the great guitar virtuosos and teachers and is considered the father of modern classical guitar playing. As a professor of guitar at the conservatories of Madrid and Barcelona, he defined many elements of the modern classical technique and elevated the importance of the guitar in the classical music tradition.

===Modern period===
At the beginning of the 1920s, Andrés Segovia popularized the guitar with tours and early phonograph recordings. Segovia collaborated with the composers Federico Moreno Torroba and Joaquín Turina with the aim of extending the guitar repertoire with new music. Segovia&#x27;s tour of South America revitalized public interest in the guitar and helped the guitar music of Manuel Ponce and Heitor Villa-Lobos reach a wider audience. The composers Alexandre Tansman and Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco were commissioned by Segovia to write new pieces for the guitar. Luiz Bonfá popularized Brazilian musical styles such as the newly created Bossa Nova, which was well received by audiences in the USA.

====&quot;New music&quot; – avant-garde====
The classical guitar repertoire also includes modern contemporary works – sometimes termed &quot;New Music&quot; – such as Elliott Carter&#x27;s &quot;Changes&quot;, Cristóbal Halffter&#x27;s &quot;Codex I&quot;, Luciano Berio&#x27;s &quot;Sequenza XI&quot;, Maurizio Pisati&#x27;s &quot;Sette Studi&quot;, Maurice Ohana&#x27;s &quot;Si Le Jour Paraît&quot;, Sylvano Bussotti&#x27;s &quot;Rara (eco sierologico)&quot;, Ernst Krenek&#x27;s &quot;Suite für Guitarre allein, Op. 164&quot;, Franco Donatoni&#x27;s &quot;Algo: Due pezzi per chitarra&quot;, Paolo Coggiola&#x27;s &quot;Variazioni Notturne&quot;, etc.

Performers who are known for including modern repertoire include Jürgen Ruck, Elena Càsoli, Leo Brouwer (when he was still performing), John Schneider, Reinbert Evers, Maria Kämmerling, Siegfried Behrend, David Starobin, Mats Scheidegger, Magnus Andersson, etc.

This type of repertoire is usually performed by guitarists who have particularly chosen to focus on the avant-garde in their performances.

Within the contemporary music scene itself, there are also works which are generally regarded as extreme. These include works such as Brian Ferneyhough&#x27;s &quot;Kurze Schatten II&quot;, Sven-David Sandström&#x27;s &quot;away from&quot; and Rolf Riehm&#x27;s &quot;Toccata Orpheus&quot; etc. which are notorious for their extreme difficulty.

There are also a variety of databases documenting modern guitar works such as Sheer Pluck and others.

==Background==
The evolution of the classical guitar and its repertoire spans more than four centuries. It has a history that was shaped by contributions from earlier instruments, such as the lute, the vihuela, and the baroque guitar.

==History==

===Overview of the classical guitar&#x27;s history===
The origins of the modern guitar are not known with certainty. Some believe it is indigenous to Europe, while others think it is an imported instrument. Guitar-like instruments appear in ancient carvings and statues recovered from Egyptian, Sumerian, and Babylonian civilizations. This means that contemporary Iranian instruments such as the tanbur and setar are distantly related to the European guitar, as they all derive ultimately from the same ancient origins, but by very different historical routes and influences. Gitterns called &quot;guitars&quot; were already in use since the 13th century, but their construction and tuning were different from modern guitars. The time where the most changes were made to the guitar was in the 1500s to the 1800s.

===Renaissance guitar===

Alonso de Mudarra&#x27;s book &quot;Tres Libros de Música&quot;, published in Spain in 1546, contains the earliest known written pieces for a four-course guitarra. This four-course &quot;guitar&quot; was popular in France, Spain, and Italy. In France this instrument gained popularity among aristocrats. A considerable volume of music was published in Paris from the 1550s to the 1570s: Simon Gorlier&#x27;s Le Troysième Livre... mis en tablature de Guiterne was published in 1551. In 1551 Adrian Le Roy also published his Premier Livre de Tablature de Guiterne, and in the same year he also published Briefve et facile instruction pour apprendre la tablature a bien accorder, conduire, et disposer la main sur la Guiterne. Robert Ballard, Grégoire Brayssing from Augsburg, and Guillaume Morlaye ( – ) significantly contributed to its repertoire. Morlaye&#x27;s Le Premier Livre de Chansons, Gaillardes, Pavannes, Bransles, Almandes, Fantasies – which has a four-course instrument illustrated on its title page – was published in partnership with Michel Fedenzat, and among other music, they published six books of tablature by lutenist Albert de Rippe (who was very likely Guillaume&#x27;s teacher).

===Vihuela===
The written history of the classical guitar can be traced back to the early 16th century with the development of the &quot;vihuela&quot; in Spain. While the lute was then becoming popular in other parts of Europe, the Spaniards did not take to it well because of its association with the Moors. Instead, the lute-like vihuela appeared with two more strings that gave it more range and complexity. In its most developed form, the vihuela was a guitar-like instrument with six double strings made of gut, tuned like a modern classical guitar with the exception of the third string, which was tuned half a step lower. It has a high sound and is rather large to hold. Few have survived and most of what is known today come from diagrams and paintings.


===Baroque guitar===

===&quot;Early romantic guitar&quot; or &quot;Guitar during the Classical music era&quot;===

The earliest extant six-string guitar is believed to have been built in 1779 by Gaetano Vinaccia (1759 – after 1831) in Naples, Italy; however, the date on the label is a little ambiguous. The Vinaccia family of luthiers is known for developing the mandolin. This guitar has been examined and does not show tell-tale signs of modifications from a double-course guitar.
The authenticity of guitars allegedly produced before the 1790s is often in question. This also corresponds to when Moretti&#x27;s 6-string method appeared, in 1792.
===Modern classical guitar===

The modern classical guitar was developed in the 19th century by Antonio de Torres Jurado, Ignacio Fleta, Hermann Hauser Sr., and Robert Bouchet. The Spanish luthier and player Antonio de Torres gave the modern classical guitar its definitive form, with a broadened body, increased waist curve, thinned belly, and improved internal bracing. The modern classical guitar replaced an older form for the accompaniment of song and dance called flamenco, and a modified version, known as the flamenco guitar, was created.

===Technique===
The fingerstyle is used fervently on the modern classical guitar. The thumb traditionally plucks the bass – or root note – whereas the fingers ring the melody and its accompanying parts. Often classical guitar technique involves the use of the nails of the right hand to pluck the notes. Noted players were: Francisco Tárrega, Emilio Pujol, Andrés Segovia, Julian Bream, Agustín Barrios, and John Williams (guitarist).
==Performance==
The modern classical guitar is usually played in a seated position, with the instrument resting on the left lap – and the left foot placed on a footstool. Alternatively – if a footstool is not used – a &quot;guitar support&quot; can be placed between the guitar and the left lap (the support usually attaches to the instrument&#x27;s side with suction cups). (There are of course exceptions, with some performers choosing to hold the instrument another way.)

Right-handed players use the fingers of the right hand to pluck the strings, with the thumb plucking from the top of a string downwards (downstroke) and the other fingers plucking from the bottom of the string upwards (upstroke). The little finger in classical technique as it evolved in the 20th century is used only to ride along with the ring finger without striking the strings and to thus physiologically facilitate the ring finger&#x27;s motion.

In contrast, Flamenco technique, and classical compositions evoking Flamenco, employ the little finger semi-independently in the Flamenco four-finger rasgueado, that rapid strumming of the string by the fingers in reverse order employing the back of the fingernail—a familiar characteristic of Flamenco.

Flamenco technique, in the performance of the rasgueado also uses the upstroke of the four fingers and the downstroke of the thumb: the string is hit not only with the inner, fleshy side of the fingertip but also with the outer, fingernail side. This was also used in a technique of the vihuela called dedillo which has recently begun to be introduced on the classical guitar.

Some modern guitarists, such as Štěpán Rak and Kazuhito Yamashita, use the little finger independently, compensating for the little finger&#x27;s shortness by maintaining an extremely long fingernail. Rak and Yamashita have also generalized the use of the upstroke of the four fingers and the downstroke of the thumb (the same technique as in the rasgueado of the Flamenco: as explained above the string is hit not only with the inner, fleshy side of the fingertip but also with the outer, fingernail side) both as a free stroke and as a rest stroke.

===Direct contact with strings===
As with other plucked instruments (such as the lute), the musician directly touches the strings (usually plucking) to produce the sound. This has important consequences: Different tone/timbre (of a single note) can be produced by plucking the string in different manners (apoyando or tirando) and in different positions (such as closer and further away from the guitar bridge). For example, plucking an open string will sound brighter than playing the same note(s) on a fretted position (which would have a warmer tone).

The instrument&#x27;s versatility means it can create a variety of tones, but this finger-picking style also makes the instrument harder to learn than a standard acoustic guitar&#x27;s strumming technique.

===Fingering notation=== 

In guitar &quot;scores&quot; the five fingers of the right-hand (which pluck the strings) are designated by the first letter of their Spanish names namely p = thumb (&quot;pulgar&quot;), i = index finger (&quot;índice&quot;), m = middle finger (&quot;mayor&quot;), a = ring finger (&quot;anular&quot;), c = little finger or pinky (&quot;meñique/chiquito&quot;)

The four fingers of the left hand (which fret the strings) are designated 1 = index, 2 = major, 3 = ring finger, 4 = little finger. 0 designates an open string—a string not stopped by a finger and whose full length thus vibrates when plucked. It is rare to use the left hand thumb in performance, the neck of a classical guitar being too wide for comfort, and normal technique keeps the thumb behind the neck. However Johann Kaspar Mertz, for example, is notable for specifying the thumb to fret bass notes on the sixth string, notated with an up arrowhead (⌃).

Scores (contrary to &quot;tablatures&quot;) do not systematically indicate the string to pluck (though the choice is usually obvious). When indicating the string is useful, the score uses the numbers 1 to 6 inside circles (highest-pitch sting to lowest).

Scores do not systematically indicate fretboard positions (where to put the first finger of the fretting hand), but when helpful (mostly with barrés chords) the score indicates positions with Roman numerals from the first position I (index finger on the 1st fret: F-B flat-E flat-A flat-C-F) to the twelfth position XII (index finger on the 12th fret: E-A-D-G-B-E. The 12th fret is where the body begins) or even higher up to position XIX (the classical guitar most often having 19 frets, with the 19th fret being most often split and not being usable to fret the 3rd and 4th strings).

===Alternation=== 
To achieve tremolo effects and rapid, fluent scale passages, the player must practice alternation, that is, never plucking a string with the same finger twice in a row. 
Using p to indicate the thumb, i the index finger, m the middle finger and a the ring finger, common alternation patterns include:
* &quot;i-m-i-m&quot; : Basic melody line on the treble strings. Has the appearance of &quot;walking along the strings&quot;. This is often used for playing Scale (music) passages.
* &quot;p-i-m-a-i-m-a&quot; : Arpeggio pattern example. However, there are many arpeggio patterns incorporated into the classical guitar repertoire.
* &quot;p-a-m-i-p-a-m-i&quot; : Classical guitar tremolo pattern.
* &quot;p-m-p-m&quot; : A way of playing a melody line on the lower strings.

==Repertoire==

Music written specifically for the classical guitar dates from the addition of the sixth string (the baroque guitar normally had five pairs of strings) in the late 18th century.

A guitar recital may include a variety of works, e.g., works written originally for the lute or vihuela by composers such as John Dowland (b. England 1563) and Luis de Narváez (b. Spain ), and also music written for the harpsichord by Domenico Scarlatti (b. Italy 1685), for the baroque lute by Sylvius Leopold Weiss (b. Germany 1687), for the baroque guitar by Robert de Visée (b. France ) or even Spanish-flavored music written for the piano by Isaac Albéniz (b. Spain 1860) and Enrique Granados (b. Spain 1867). The most important composer who did not write for the guitar but whose music is often played on it is Johann Sebastian Bach (b. Germany 1685), whose baroque lute, violin, and cello works have proved highly adaptable to the instrument.

Of music written originally for guitar, the earliest important composers are from the classical period and include Fernando Sor (b. Spain 1778) and Mauro Giuliani (b. Italy 1781), both of whom wrote in a style strongly influenced by Viennese classicism. In the 19th-century guitar composers such as Johann Kaspar Mertz (b. Slovakia, Austria 1806) were strongly influenced by the dominance of the piano. Not until the end of the nineteenth century did the guitar begin to establish its own unique identity. Francisco Tárrega (b. Spain 1852) was central to this, sometimes incorporating stylized aspects of flamenco&#x27;s Moorish influences into his romantic miniatures. This was part of late 19th century mainstream European musical nationalism. Albéniz and Granados were central to this movement; their evocation of the guitar was so successful that their compositions have been absorbed into the standard guitar repertoire.

The steel-string and electric guitars characteristic to the rise of rock and roll in the post-WWII era became more widely played in North America and the English-speaking world. Agustín Barrios Mangoré of Paraguay composed many works and brought into the mainstream the characteristics of Latin American music, as did the Brazilian composer Heitor Villa-Lobos. Andrés Segovia commissioned works from Spanish composers such as Federico Moreno Torroba and Joaquín Rodrigo, Italians such as Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco and Latin American composers such as Manuel Ponce of Mexico. Other prominent Latin American composers are Leo Brouwer of Cuba, Antonio Lauro of Venezuela and Enrique Solares of Guatemala. Julian Bream of Britain managed to get nearly every British composer from William Walton and Benjamin Britten to Peter Maxwell Davies to write significant works for guitar. Bream&#x27;s collaborations with tenor Peter Pears also resulted in song cycles by Britten, Lennox Berkeley and others. There are significant works by composers such as Hans Werner Henze of Germany, Gilbert Biberian of England and Roland Chadwick of Australia.

The classical guitar also became widely used in popular music and rock &amp; roll in the 1960s after guitarist Mason Williams popularized the instrument in his instrumental hit Classical Gas. Guitarist Christopher Parkening is quoted in the book &quot;Classical Gas: The Music of Mason Williams&quot; as saying that it is the most requested guitar piece besides Malagueña and perhaps the best-known instrumental guitar piece today.
In the field of New Flamenco, the works and performances of Spanish composer and player Paco de Lucía are known worldwide.

Not many classical guitar concertos were written through history. Nevertheless, some guitar concertos are nowadays widely known and popular, especially Joaquín Rodrigo&#x27;s &quot;Concierto de Aranjuez&quot; (with the famous theme from 2nd movement) and &quot;Fantasía para un gentilhombre&quot;. Composers, who also wrote famous guitar concertos are: Antonio Vivaldi (originally for mandolin or lute), Mauro Giuliani, Heitor Villa-Lobos, Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco, Manuel Ponce, Leo Brouwer, Lennox Berkeley and Malcolm Arnold. 
Nowadays, more and more contemporary composers decide to write a guitar concerto, among them &quot;Bosco Sacro&quot; by Federico Biscione, for guitar and string orchestra, is one of the most inspired.

==Physical characteristics==
The classical guitar is distinguished by a number of characteristics:
*It is an instrument. The sound of the plucked string is amplified by the soundboard and resonant cavity of the guitar.
*It has six strings, though some classical guitars have seven or more strings.
*All six strings are made from nylon, or nylon wrapped with metal, as opposed to the metal strings found on other acoustic guitars. Nylon strings also have a much lower tension than steel strings, as do the predecessors to nylon strings, gut strings (made from ox or sheep gut). The lower three strings (&#x27;bass strings&#x27;) are wound with metal, commonly silver-plated copper.
*Because of the low string tension
** The neck can be made entirely of wood without a steel truss rod
** The interior bracing can be lighter
*Typical modern six-string classical guitars are 48–54 mm wide at the nut, compared to around 42 mm for electric guitars.
* Classical fingerboards are normally flat and without inlaid fret markers, or just have dot inlays on the side of the neck—steel string fingerboards usually have a slight radius and inlays.
*Classical guitarists use their right hand to pluck the strings. Players may shape their fingernails for a brighter tone and feel against the strings.
*Strumming is a less common technique in classical guitar, and is often referred to by the Spanish term &quot;rasgueo&quot;, or for strumming patterns &quot;rasgueado&quot;, and uses the backs of the fingernails. Rasgueado is integral to Flamenco guitar.
*Machine heads at the headstock of a classical guitar point backwards—in contrast to most steel-string guitars, which have machine heads that point outward.
*The overall design of a Classical Guitar is very similar to the slightly lighter and smaller Flamenco guitar.

===Parts===

Parts of typical classical guitars include:

* Headstock
* Nut
* Machine heads (or pegheads, tuning keys, tuning machines, tuners)
* Frets
* Neck
* Heel
* Body
* Bridge
* Bottom deck
* Soundboard
* Body sides
* Sound hole, with rosette inlay
* Strings
* Saddle (Bridge nut)
* Fretboard

====Fretboard====
The fretboard (also called the fingerboard) is a piece of wood embedded with metal frets that constitutes the top of the neck. It is flat or slightly curved. The curvature of the fretboard is measured by the fretboard radius, which is the radius of a hypothetical circle of which the fretboard&#x27;s surface constitutes a segment. The smaller the fretboard radius, the more noticeably curved the fretboard is. Fretboards are most commonly made of ebony, but may also be made of rosewood, some other hardwood, or of phenolic composite (&quot;micarta&quot;).

====Frets====
Frets are the metal strips (usually nickel alloy or stainless steel) embedded along the fingerboard and placed at points that divide the length of string mathematically. The strings&#x27; vibrating length is determined when the strings are pressed down behind the frets. Each fret produces a different pitch and each pitch spaced a half-step apart on the 12 tone scale. The ratio of the widths of two consecutive frets is the twelfth root of two (formula_1), whose numeric value is about 1.059463. The twelfth fret divides the string into two exact halves and the 24th fret (if present) divides the string in half yet again. Every twelve frets represents one octave. This arrangement of frets results in equal tempered tuning.

====Neck====
A classical guitar&#x27;s frets, fretboard, tuners, headstock, all attached to a long wooden extension, collectively constitute its neck. The wood for the fretboard usually differs from the wood in the rest of the neck. The bending stress on the neck is considerable, particularly when heavier gauge strings are used. The most common scale length for classical guitar is 650mm (calculated by measuring the distance between the end of the nut and the center of the 12th fret, then doubling that measurement). However, scale lengths may vary from 635-664mm or more.

====Neck joint or &#x27;heel&#x27;====
This is the point where the neck meets the body. In the traditional Spanish neck joint, the neck and block are one piece with the sides inserted into slots cut in the block. Other necks are built separately and joined to the body either with a dovetail joint, mortise or flush joint. These joints are usually glued and can be reinforced with mechanical fasteners. Recently many manufacturers use bolt-on fasteners. Bolt-on neck joints were once associated only with less expensive instruments but now some top manufacturers and hand builders are using variations of this method. Some people believed that the Spanish-style one piece neck/block and glued dovetail necks have better sustain, but testing has failed to confirm this.
While most traditional Spanish style builders use the one-piece neck/heel block, Fleta, a prominent Spanish builder, used a dovetail joint due to the influence of his early training in violin making.
One reason for the introduction of mechanical joints was to make it easier to repair necks. This is more of a problem with steel string guitars than with nylon strings, which have about half the string tension. This is why nylon string guitars often do not include a truss rod either.

====Body====
The body of the instrument is a major determinant of the overall sound variety for acoustic guitars. The guitar top, or soundboard, is a finely crafted and engineered element often made of spruce or red cedar. Considered the most prominent factor in determining the sound quality of a guitar, this thin (often 2 or 3 mm thick) piece of wood has a uniform thickness and is strengthened by different types of internal bracing. The back is made in rosewood and Brazilian rosewood is especially coveted, but mahogany or other decorative woods are sometimes used.

The majority of the sound is caused by the vibration of the guitar top as the energy of the vibrating strings is transferred to it. Different patterns of wood bracing have been used through the years by luthiers (Torres, Hauser, Ramírez, Fleta, and C.F. Martin being among the most influential designers of their times); to not only strengthen the top against collapsing under the tremendous stress exerted by the tensioned strings, but also to affect the resonance of the top. Some contemporary guitar makers have introduced new construction concepts such as &quot;double-top&quot; consisting of two extra-thin wooden plates separated by Nomex, or carbon-fiber reinforced lattice – pattern bracing. The back and sides are made out of a variety of woods such as mahogany, maple, cypress Indian rosewood and highly regarded Brazilian rosewood (&quot;Dalbergia nigra&quot;). Each one is chosen for its aesthetic effect and structural strength, and such choice can also play a role in determining the instrument&#x27;s timbre. These are also strengthened with internal bracing, and decorated with inlays and purfling.
Antonio de Torres Jurado proved that it was the top, and not the back and sides of the guitar that gave the instrument its sound, in 1862 he built a guitar with back and sides of papier-mâché. (This guitar resides in the Museu de la Musica in Barcelona, and before the year 2000 it was restored to playable condition by the brothers Yagüe, Barcelona). 
The body of a classical guitar is a resonating chamber that projects the vibrations of the body through a &quot;sound hole&quot;, allowing the acoustic guitar to be heard without amplification. The sound hole is normally a single round hole in the top of the guitar (under the strings), though some have different placement, shapes, or numbers of holes. How much air an instrument can move determines its maximum volume.

====Binding, purfling and kerfing====
The top, back and sides of a classical guitar body are very thin, so a flexible piece of wood called &quot;kerfing&quot; (because it is often scored, or &quot;kerfed&quot; so it bends with the shape of the rim) is glued into the corners where the rim meets the top and back. This interior reinforcement provides 5 to 20 mm of solid gluing area for these corner joints.

During final construction, a small section of the outside corners is carved or routed out and filled with binding material on the outside corners and decorative strips of material next to the binding, which are called &quot;purfling&quot;. This binding serves to seal off the endgrain of the top and back. Binding and purfling materials are generally made of either wood or high-quality plastic materials.

====Bridge====
The main purpose of the bridge on a classical guitar is to transfer the vibration from the strings to the soundboard, which vibrates the air inside of the guitar, thereby amplifying the sound produced by the strings. The bridge holds the strings in place on the body. Also, the position of the saddle, usually a strip of bone or plastic that supports the strings off the bridge, determines the distance to the nut (at the top of the fingerboard).

===Sizes===
The modern full-size classical guitar has a scale length of around , with an overall instrument length of . The scale length has remained quite consistent since it was chosen by the originator of the instrument, Antonio de Torres. This length may have been chosen because it&#x27;s twice the length of a violin string. As the guitar is tuned to one octave below that of the violin, the same size gut could be used for the first strings of both instruments.

Smaller-scale instruments are produced to assist children in learning the instrument as the smaller scale leads to the frets being closer together, making it easier for smaller hands. The scale-size for the smaller guitars is usually in the range , with an instrument length of . Full-size instruments are sometimes referred to as 4/4, while the smaller sizes are 3/4, 1/2, 1/4, and even as small as 1/8 for very small children. However, there is not a standardized set of dimensions for fractional guitars, and their size difference is not linear from a full size guitar.

==Tuning==

A variety of different tunings are used. The most common by far, which one could call the &quot;standard tuning&quot; is:
*eI – b – g – d – A – E

The above order is the tuning from the &quot;1st string&quot; (highest-pitched string e&#x27;—spatially the bottom string in playing position) to the &quot;6th string&quot; – lowest-pitched string E—spatially the upper string in playing position, and hence comfortable to pluck with the thumb.

The explanation for this &quot;asymmetrical&quot; tuning (in the sense that the maj 3rd is not between the two middle strings, as in the tuning of the viola da gamba) is probably that the guitar originated as a 4-string instrument (actually an instrument with 4 double courses of strings, see above) with a maj 3rd between the 2nd and 3rd strings, and it only became a 6-string instrument by gradual addition of a 5th string and then a 6th string tuned a 4th apart:

&quot;The development of the modern tuning can be traced in stages. One of the tunings from the 16th century is C-F-A-D. This is equivalent to the top four strings of the modern guitar tuned a tone lower. However, the absolute pitch for these notes is not equivalent to modern &quot;concert pitch&quot;. The tuning of the four-course guitar was moved up by a tone and toward the end of the 16th century, five-course instruments were in use with an added lower string tuned to A. This produced A-D-G-B-E, one of a wide number of variant tunings of the period. The low E string was added during the 18th century.&quot;

This tuning is such that neighboring strings are at most 5 semitones apart.
There are also a variety of commonly used alternate tunings. The most common is known as Drop D tuning which has the 6th string tuned down from an E to a D.

==Bibliography==
*&quot;The Guitar and its Music (From the Renaissance to the Classical Era)&quot; (2007) by James Tyler, Paul Sparks. 
*&quot;Cambridge Studies in Performance Practice (No. 6): Performance on Lute, Guitar, and Vihuela&quot; (2005) edited by Victor Anand Coelho. 
*&quot;The Guitar: From the Renaissance to the Present Day&quot; by Harvey Turnbull; published by Bold Strummer, 1991. 
*&quot;The Guitar&quot;; by Sinier de Ridder; published by Edizioni Il Salabue; 
*&quot;La Chitarra, Quattro secoli di Capolavori (The Guitar: Four centuries of Masterpieces)&quot; by Giovanni Accornero, Ivan Epicoco, Eraldo Guerci; published by Edizioni Il Salabue
*&quot;Rosa sonora – Esposizione di chitarre XVII – XX secolo&quot; by Giovanni Accornero; published by Edizioni Il Salabue
*&quot;Lyre-guitar. Étoile charmante, between the 18th and 19th century&quot; by Eleonora Vulpiani
*Summerfield, Maurice, &quot;The Classical Guitar: Its Evolution, Players and Personalities since 1800 – 5th Edition&quot;, Blaydon : Ashley Mark Publishing Company, 2002.
*Various, &quot;Classical Guitar Magazine&quot;, Blaydon : Ashley Mark Publishing Company, monthly publication first published in 1982.
*Wade, Graham, &quot;Traditions of the Classical Guitar&quot;, London : Calder, 1980.
*Antoni Pizà: &quot;Francesc Guerau i el seu temps&quot; (Palma de Mallorca: Govern de les Illes Balears, Conselleria d&#x27;Educació i Cultura, Direcció General de Cultura, Institut d&#x27;Estudis Baleàrics, 2000) 

==See also==

*Classical guitar strings
*Classical guitar pedagogy
*Early classical guitar recordings
*International classical guitar competitions
* Guitar Foundation of America
*Guitar
*Chordophones
*Typaldos D. children&#x27;s choir, a Greek children&#x27;s choir with classical guitars
===Related instruments===
*Brahms guitar
*Extended-range classical guitar
*Harp guitar
*Lyre-guitar
*Six-string alto guitar
===Lists===
* Bibliography of classical guitar
* List of classical guitarists
* List of composers for the classical guitar
* List of composers for the classical guitar (nationality)
==References==
==External links==

*Thematic essay: The guitar Jayson Kerr Dobney, Wendy Powers (The Metropolitan Museum of Art)
*Classical &amp; Fingerstyle Guitar
*Classical Guitar Library A vibrant library of guitar sheet music, which can serve in accomplishing diverse teaching and research needs.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q719120" start="4" end="20" title="Classical guitar" label="classical guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q719120" start="36" end="50" title="Classical guitar" label="Spanish guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="71" end="77" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="93" end="108" title="classical music" label="classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q326426" start="146" end="152" title="string (music)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147086" start="185" end="188" title="catgut" label="gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="192" end="197" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563510" start="231" end="252" title="steel-string acoustic guitar" label="steel-string acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="257" end="273" title="electric guitars" label="electric guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q326426" start="299" end="306" title="string (music)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="362" end="366" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q751884" start="372" end="379" title="vihuela" label="vihuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q516397" start="385" end="392" title="gittern" label="gittern"/>
<link wikidata="Q12634515" start="441" end="448" title="kithara" label="kithara"/>
<link wikidata="Q748119" start="534" end="548" title="baroque guitar" label="baroque guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q762707" start="663" end="670" title="luthier" label="luthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q540093" start="672" end="693" title="Antonio Torres Jurado" label="Antonio Torres Jurado"/>
<link wikidata="Q745887" start="1007" end="1016" title="fretboard" label="fretboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14973416" start="1118" end="1127" title="foot rest" label="foot rest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167999" start="1224" end="1235" title="Dreadnought (guitar type)" label="Dreadnought"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902353" start="1898" end="1913" title="romantic guitar" label="romantic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001047" start="1967" end="1974" title="Course (music)" label="courses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128334" start="2230" end="2254" title="Classical guitar strings" label="Classical guitar strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147086" start="2268" end="2271" title="catgut" label="gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="2306" end="2311" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818706" start="2315" end="2328" title="fluoropolymer" label="fluoropolymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q930531" start="2493" end="2508" title="flamenco guitar" label="flamenco guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34379" start="2696" end="2707" title="Musical instrument" label="instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q6942560" start="2709" end="2719" title="Musical repertoire" label="repertoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="2755" end="2766" title="arrangement" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q748119" start="2919" end="2933" title="Baroque guitar" label="Baroque guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902353" start="2950" end="2972" title="romantic guitar" label="Early romantic guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q17723" start="3008" end="3017" title="Classical period (music)" label="Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="3022" end="3030" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q540093" start="3097" end="3103" title="Antonio Torres Jurado" label="Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144628" start="3122" end="3133" title="René François Lacôte" label="René Lacôte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3157" end="3172" title="Herrmann Hauser" label="Herrmann Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q261967" start="4303" end="4312" title="overtones" label="overtones"/>
<link wikidata="Q580371" start="4785" end="4800" title="Robert de Visée" label="Robert de Visée"/>
<link wikidata="Q379560" start="4888" end="4902" title="Mauro Giuliani" label="Mauro Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876212" start="4907" end="4920" title="Luigi Legnani" label="Luigi Legnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q471121" start="5101" end="5115" title="Federico Moreno Torroba" label="Moreno Torroba"/>
<link wikidata="Q192529" start="6830" end="6837" title="Andrés Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q493345" start="7164" end="7176" title="Contraguitar" label="Contraguitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q313372" start="7495" end="7512" title="Francisco Tárrega" label="Francisco Tárrega"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8764" end="8775" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q554957" start="8824" end="8838" title="Alonso Mudarra" label="Alonso Mudarra"/>
<link wikidata="Q600102" start="8840" end="8859" title="Miguel de Fuenllana" label="Miguel de Fuenllana"/>
<link wikidata="Q373349" start="8861" end="8874" title="Adrian Le Roy" label="Adrian Le Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616086" start="8878" end="8898" title="Guillaume de Morlaye" label="Guillaume de Morlaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="8985" end="8992" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q440048" start="9005" end="9016" title="Gaspar Sanz" label="Gaspar Sanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q580371" start="9018" end="9033" title="Robert de Visée" label="Robert de Visée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380426" start="9035" end="9053" title="Francesco Corbetta" label="Francesco Corbetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q720273" start="9058" end="9076" title="Santiago de Murcia" label="Santiago de Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024950" start="9122" end="9149" title="Nicholas Alexandre Voboam II" label="Nicolas Alexandre Voboam II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071894" start="9495" end="9511" title="Filippo Gragnani" label="Filippo Gragnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q432174" start="9525" end="9542" title="Antoine de Lhoyer" label="Antoine de Lhoyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q332596" start="9556" end="9574" title="Ferdinando Carulli" label="Ferdinando Carulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q119672" start="9588" end="9610" title="Wenzel Thomas Matiegka" label="Wenzel Thomas Matiegka"/>
<link wikidata="Q436575" start="9624" end="9640" title="Francesco Molino" label="Francesco Molino"/>
<link wikidata="Q254110" start="9654" end="9666" title="Fernando Sor" label="Fernando Sor"/>
<link wikidata="Q379560" start="9692" end="9706" title="Mauro Giuliani" label="Mauro Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q66075" start="9720" end="9736" title="Niccolò Paganini" label="Niccolò Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q456851" start="9750" end="9765" title="Dionisio Aguado" label="Dionisio Aguado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876212" start="9779" end="9792" title="Luigi Legnani" label="Luigi Legnani"/>
<link wikidata="Q469912" start="9806" end="9821" title="Matteo Carcassi" label="Matteo Carcassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965046" start="9835" end="9849" title="Napoléon Coste" label="Napoléon Coste"/>
<link wikidata="Q144147" start="9863" end="9882" title="Johann Kaspar Mertz" label="Johann Kaspar Mertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q981612" start="9896" end="9910" title="Giulio Regondi" label="Giulio Regondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151" start="9923" end="9937" title="Hector Berlioz" label="Hector Berlioz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312" start="9972" end="9986" title="Franz Schubert" label="Franz Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q255" start="10040" end="10060" title="Ludwig van Beethoven" label="Ludwig van Beethoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q66075" start="10165" end="10181" title="Niccolò Paganini" label="Niccolò Paganini"/>
<link wikidata="Q313372" start="10516" end="10533" title="Francisco Tárrega" label="Francisco Tárrega"/>
<link wikidata="Q192529" start="10949" end="10963" title="Andrés Segovia" label="Andrés Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q471121" start="11071" end="11094" title="Federico Moreno Torroba" label="Federico Moreno Torroba"/>
<link wikidata="Q318077" start="11099" end="11113" title="Joaquín Turina" label="Joaquín Turina"/>
<link wikidata="Q360206" start="11288" end="11300" title="Manuel Ponce (composer)" label="Manuel Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q203514" start="11305" end="11323" title="Heitor Villa-Lobos" label="Heitor Villa-Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q550218" start="11362" end="11379" title="Alexandre Tansman" label="Alexandre Tansman"/>
<link wikidata="Q377558" start="11384" end="11409" title="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco" label="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q932925" start="11475" end="11485" title="Luiz Bonfá" label="Luiz Bonfá"/>
<link wikidata="Q318835" start="11778" end="11792" title="Elliott Carter" label="Elliott Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q375388" start="11821" end="11839" title="Cristóbal Halffter" label="Cristóbal Halffter"/>
<link wikidata="Q221450" start="11868" end="11881" title="Luciano Berio" label="Luciano Berio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452519" start="11895" end="11906" title="Sequenza XI" label="Sequenza XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747070" start="11914" end="11929" title="Maurizio Pisati" label="Maurizio Pisati"/>
<link wikidata="Q974528" start="11962" end="11975" title="Maurice Ohana" label="Maurice Ohana"/>
<link wikidata="Q981837" start="12014" end="12030" title="Sylvano Bussotti" label="Sylvano Bussotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q158436" start="12074" end="12086" title="Ernst Krenek" label="Ernst Krenek"/>
<link wikidata="Q550236" start="12142" end="12157" title="Franco Donatoni" label="Franco Donatoni"/>
<link wikidata="Q454933" start="12360" end="12371" title="Leo Brouwer" label="Leo Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701691" start="12404" end="12418" title="John Schneider (guitarist)" label="John Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q830879" start="12420" end="12434" title="Reinbert Evers" label="Reinbert Evers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761330" start="12436" end="12452" title="Maria Kämmerling" label="Maria Kämmerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q322972" start="12454" end="12471" title="Siegfried Behrend" label="Siegfried Behrend"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440095" start="12473" end="12487" title="David Starobin" label="David Starobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787963" start="12489" end="12505" title="Mats Scheidegger" label="Mats Scheidegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732054" start="12507" end="12523" title="Magnus Andersson (guitarist)" label="Magnus Andersson"/>
<link wikidata="Q462291" start="12805" end="12822" title="Brian Ferneyhough" label="Brian Ferneyhough"/>
<link wikidata="Q920770" start="12861" end="12881" title="Sven-David Sandström" label="Sven-David Sandström"/>
<link wikidata="Q896948" start="12915" end="12925" title="Rolf Riehm" label="Rolf Riehm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424319" start="13765" end="13771" title="tanbur" label="tanbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544746" start="13776" end="13781" title="setar" label="setar"/>
<link wikidata="Q516397" start="13945" end="13952" title="Gittern" label="Gittern"/>
<link wikidata="Q554957" start="14209" end="14226" title="Alonso de Mudarra" label="Alonso de Mudarra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14596" end="14609" title="Simon Gorlier" label="Simon Gorlier"/>
<link wikidata="Q373349" start="14699" end="14712" title="Adrian Le Roy" label="Adrian Le Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751884" start="15548" end="15555" title="vihuela" label="vihuela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16371" end="16387" title="Gaetano Vinaccia" label="Gaetano Vinaccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="16411" end="16417" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="16419" end="16424" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="16540" end="16548" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q540093" start="16922" end="16946" title="Antonio de Torres Jurado" label="Antonio de Torres Jurado"/>
<link wikidata="Q20003218" start="16948" end="16961" title="Ignacio Fleta" label="Ignacio Fleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406827" start="16963" end="16981" title="Hermann Hauser Sr." label="Hermann Hauser Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q540093" start="17034" end="17051" title="Antonio de Torres" label="Antonio de Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="17296" end="17304" title="flamenco" label="flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q930531" start="17343" end="17358" title="flamenco guitar" label="flamenco guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879974" start="17501" end="17510" title="root note" label="root note"/>
<link wikidata="Q313372" start="17698" end="17715" title="Francisco Tárrega" label="Francisco Tárrega"/>
<link wikidata="Q957563" start="17717" end="17729" title="Emilio Pujol" label="Emilio Pujol"/>
<link wikidata="Q192529" start="17731" end="17745" title="Andrés Segovia" label="Andrés Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q453583" start="17747" end="17759" title="Julian Bream" label="Julian Bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q399102" start="17761" end="17776" title="Agustín Barrios" label="Agustín Barrios"/>
<link wikidata="Q370293" start="17782" end="17807" title="John Williams (guitarist)" label="John Williams (guitarist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q635971" start="18169" end="18180" title="suction cup" label="suction cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="18751" end="18759" title="Flamenco" label="Flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753335" start="18888" end="18897" title="rasgueado" label="rasgueado"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="19043" end="19051" title="Flamenco" label="Flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q751884" start="19330" end="19337" title="vihuela" label="vihuela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19345" end="19352" title="dedillo" label="dedillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2802197" start="19453" end="19463" title="Štěpán Rak" label="Štěpán Rak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262748" start="19468" end="19486" title="Kazuhito Yamashita" label="Kazuhito Yamashita"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="19785" end="19793" title="Flamenco" label="Flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="20192" end="20198" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q13405505" start="20279" end="20287" title="apoyando" label="apoyando"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712888" start="20291" end="20298" title="tirando" label="tirando"/>
<link wikidata="Q179651" start="23008" end="23021" title="Scale (music)" label="Scale (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001047" start="23475" end="23491" title="Course (music)" label="pairs of strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q207355" start="23645" end="23657" title="John Dowland" label="John Dowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083663" start="23680" end="23695" title="Luis de Narváez" label="Luis de Narváez"/>
<link wikidata="Q167837" start="23755" end="23773" title="Domenico Scarlatti" label="Domenico Scarlatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q379571" start="23815" end="23836" title="Sylvius Leopold Weiss" label="Sylvius Leopold Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q580371" start="23882" end="23897" title="Robert de Visée" label="Robert de Visée"/>
<link wikidata="Q185812" start="23967" end="23980" title="Isaac Albéniz" label="Isaac Albéniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q294225" start="24001" end="24017" title="Enrique Granados" label="Enrique Granados"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339" start="24137" end="24158" title="Johann Sebastian Bach" label="Johann Sebastian Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q254110" start="24386" end="24398" title="Fernando Sor" label="Fernando Sor"/>
<link wikidata="Q379560" start="24419" end="24433" title="Mauro Giuliani" label="Mauro Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q144147" start="24570" end="24589" title="Johann Kaspar Mertz" label="Johann Kaspar Mertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q313372" start="24777" end="24794" title="Francisco Tárrega" label="Francisco Tárrega"/>
<link wikidata="Q399102" start="25376" end="25399" title="Agustín Barrios Mangoré" label="Agustín Barrios Mangoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="25403" end="25411" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q203514" start="25539" end="25557" title="Heitor Villa-Lobos" label="Heitor Villa-Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q471121" start="25624" end="25647" title="Federico Moreno Torroba" label="Federico Moreno Torroba"/>
<link wikidata="Q151084" start="25652" end="25667" title="Joaquín Rodrigo" label="Joaquín Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q377558" start="25686" end="25711" title="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco" label="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q360206" start="25749" end="25761" title="Manuel Ponce (composer)" label="Manuel Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q454933" start="25818" end="25829" title="Leo Brouwer" label="Leo Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q602802" start="25839" end="25852" title="Antonio Lauro" label="Antonio Lauro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25870" end="25885" title="Enrique Solares" label="Enrique Solares"/>
<link wikidata="Q453583" start="25900" end="25912" title="Julian Bream" label="Julian Bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q310939" start="25974" end="25988" title="William Walton" label="William Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="25993" end="26009" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q139223" start="26013" end="26033" title="Peter Maxwell Davies" label="Peter Maxwell Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q449274" start="26112" end="26123" title="Peter Pears" label="Peter Pears"/>
<link wikidata="Q893466" start="26141" end="26152" title="song cycles" label="song cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q514975" start="26165" end="26180" title="Lennox Berkeley" label="Lennox Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q76915" start="26242" end="26259" title="Hans Werner Henze" label="Hans Werner Henze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560804" start="26272" end="26288" title="Gilbert Biberian" label="Gilbert Biberian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26304" end="26319" title="Roland Chadwick" label="Roland Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q339892" start="26446" end="26460" title="Mason Williams" label="Mason Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q489275" start="26512" end="26525" title="Classical Gas" label="Classical Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q350040" start="26537" end="26558" title="Christopher Parkening" label="Christopher Parkening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3053954" start="26783" end="26795" title="New Flamenco" label="New Flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q153300" start="26855" end="26868" title="Paco de Lucía" label="Paco de Lucía"/>
<link wikidata="Q151084" start="27043" end="27058" title="Joaquín Rodrigo" label="Joaquín Rodrigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q939989" start="27072" end="27093" title="Concierto de Aranjuez" label="Concierto de Aranjuez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276015" start="27152" end="27181" title="Fantasía para un gentilhombre" label="Fantasía para un gentilhombre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340" start="27244" end="27259" title="Antonio Vivaldi" label="Antonio Vivaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q379560" start="27295" end="27309" title="Mauro Giuliani" label="Mauro Giuliani"/>
<link wikidata="Q203514" start="27311" end="27329" title="Heitor Villa-Lobos" label="Heitor Villa-Lobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q377558" start="27331" end="27356" title="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco" label="Mario Castelnuovo-Tedesco"/>
<link wikidata="Q360206" start="27358" end="27370" title="Manuel Ponce" label="Manuel Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q454933" start="27372" end="27383" title="Leo Brouwer" label="Leo Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q514975" start="27385" end="27400" title="Lennox Berkeley" label="Lennox Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q313554" start="27405" end="27419" title="Malcolm Arnold" label="Malcolm Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189953" start="27797" end="27807" title="Sound board (music)" label="soundboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q326426" start="27855" end="27862" title="string (music)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q177941" start="27953" end="27958" title="nylon" label="nylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q908584" start="28091" end="28098" title="Tension (mechanics)" label="tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q9764" start="29148" end="29156" title="Flamenco" label="Flamenco"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149240" start="29166" end="29178" title="Machine head" label="Machine head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033547" start="29187" end="29196" title="headstock" label="headstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q930531" start="29416" end="29431" title="Flamenco guitar" label="Flamenco guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033547" start="29494" end="29503" title="Headstock" label="Headstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17149240" start="29512" end="29524" title="Machine head" label="Machine head"/>
<link wikidata="Q636309" start="29580" end="29584" title="Fret" label="Fret"/>
<link wikidata="Q221712" start="29658" end="29668" title="Sound hole" label="Sound hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277215" start="29675" end="29682" title="rosette (design)" label="rosette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128334" start="29691" end="29698" title="Classical guitar strings" label="Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q745887" start="29723" end="29732" title="Fretboard" label="Fretboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="30200" end="30205" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q122421" start="30231" end="30239" title="Rosewood (timber)" label="rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q745887" start="30413" end="30424" title="fingerboard" label="fingerboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481047" start="30699" end="30704" title="ratio" label="ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919430" start="30751" end="30770" title="twelfth root of two" label="twelfth root of two"/>
<link wikidata="Q723441" start="31029" end="31043" title="equal temperament" label="equal tempered"/>
<link wikidata="Q944038" start="31198" end="31202" title="neck (music)" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189953" start="33019" end="33029" title="Sound board (music)" label="soundboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="33088" end="33094" title="spruce" label="spruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q147417" start="33098" end="33107" title="Thuja plicata" label="red cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q122421" start="33344" end="33352" title="rosewood" label="rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076881" start="33357" end="33375" title="Brazilian rosewood" label="Brazilian rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q239788" start="33403" end="33411" title="mahogany" label="mahogany"/>
<link wikidata="Q540093" start="33672" end="33678" title="Antonio Torres Jurado" label="Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406827" start="33680" end="33686" title="Hermann Hauser Sr." label="Hauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389740" start="33688" end="33695" title="José Ramírez (luthier)" label="Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022479" start="33708" end="33719" title="C.F. Martin &amp;amp; Company" label="C.F. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319815" start="34098" end="34103" title="Nomex" label="Nomex"/>
<link wikidata="Q122421" start="34253" end="34261" title="rosewood" label="rosewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="34475" end="34481" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q540093" start="34574" end="34598" title="Antonio de Torres Jurado" label="Antonio de Torres Jurado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261191" start="35981" end="35989" title="purfling" label="purfling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423948" start="36033" end="36041" title="endgrain" label="endgrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q942813" start="36683" end="36695" title="Scale (string instruments)" label="scale length"/>
<link wikidata="Q540093" start="36851" end="36868" title="Antonio Torres Jurado" label="Antonio de Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818058" start="39328" end="39345" title="guitar tuning" label="alternate tunings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142436" start="39375" end="39388" title="Drop D tuning" label="Drop D tuning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128334" start="40959" end="40983" title="Classical guitar strings" label="Classical guitar strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128332" start="40985" end="41010" title="Classical guitar pedagogy" label="Classical guitar pedagogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326795" start="41012" end="41045" title="Early classical guitar recordings" label="Early classical guitar recordings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054527" start="41047" end="41090" title="International classical guitar competitions" label="International classical guitar competitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120669" start="41093" end="41121" title="Guitar Foundation of America" label="Guitar Foundation of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="41123" end="41129" title="Guitar" label="Guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798603" start="41131" end="41142" title="Chordophone" label="Chordophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860598" start="41145" end="41178" title="Typaldos D. children&amp;#x27;s choir" label="Typaldos D. children&amp;#x27;s choir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955628" start="41260" end="41273" title="Brahms guitar" label="Brahms guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675207" start="41275" end="41306" title="Extended-range classical guitar" label="Extended-range classical guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q944501" start="41308" end="41319" title="Harp guitar" label="Harp guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675195" start="41321" end="41332" title="Lyre-guitar" label="Lyre-guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7532606" start="41334" end="41356" title="Six-string alto guitar" label="Six-string alto guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903411" start="41371" end="41403" title="Bibliography of classical guitar" label="Bibliography of classical guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022831" start="41406" end="41434" title="List of classical guitarists" label="List of classical guitarists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612601" start="41437" end="41479" title="List of composers for the classical guitar" label="List of composers for the classical guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612601" start="41482" end="41538" title="List of composers for the classical guitar (nationality)" label="List of composers for the classical guitar (nationality)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5813" wikidata="Q9204" url="?curid=5813" title="C. S. Lewis">
<text>Clive Staples Lewis (29 November 1898 – 22 November 1963) was a British writer, literary scholar, and Anglican lay theologian. He held academic positions in English literature at both Magdalen College, Oxford (1925–1954), and Magdalene College, Cambridge (1954–1963). He is best known as the author of &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot;, but he is also noted for his other works of fiction, such as &quot;The Screwtape Letters&quot; and &quot;The Space Trilogy&quot;, and for his non-fiction Christian apologetics, including &quot;Mere Christianity&quot;, &quot;Miracles&quot;, and &quot;The Problem of Pain.&quot;

Lewis was a close friend of J. R. R. Tolkien, author of &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;. Both men served on the English faculty at Oxford University and were active in the informal Oxford literary group known as the Inklings. According to Lewis&#x27;s 1955 memoir &quot;Surprised by Joy&quot;, he was baptized in the Church of Ireland but fell away from his faith during adolescence. Lewis returned to Anglicanism at the age of 32, owing to the influence of Tolkien and other friends, and he became an &quot;ordinary layman of the Church of England&quot;. Lewis&#x27;s faith profoundly affected his work, and his wartime radio broadcasts on the subject of Christianity brought him wide acclaim.

Lewis wrote more than 30 books which have been translated into more than 30 languages and have sold millions of copies. The books that make up &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot; have sold the most and have been popularized on stage, TV, radio, and cinema. His philosophical writings are widely cited by Christian scholars from many denominations.

In 1956, Lewis married American writer Joy Davidman; she died of cancer four years later at the age of 45. Lewis died on 22 November 1963 from kidney failure, at age 64. In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis was honoured with a memorial in Poets&#x27; Corner in Westminster Abbey.

==Life==

===Childhood===

Clive Staples Lewis was born in Belfast in Ulster, Ireland (before partition), on 29 November 1898. His father was Albert James Lewis (1863–1929), a solicitor whose father Richard Lewis had come to Ireland from Wales during the mid-19th century. Lewis&#x27;s mother was Florence Augusta Lewis Hamilton (1862–1908), known as Flora, the daughter of Thomas Hamilton, a Church of Ireland priest, and the great-granddaughter of both Bishop Hugh Hamilton and John Staples. She was the first female mathematics graduate to study at Queen’s College Belfast. Lewis had an elder brother, Warren Hamilton Lewis (known as &quot;Warnie&quot;). He was baptized on 29 January 1899 by his maternal grandfather in St Mark&#x27;s Church, Dundela.

When his dog Jacksie was fatally struck by a horse-drawn carriage, the four-year-old Lewis adopted the name Jacksie. At first, he would answer to no other name, but later accepted Jack, the name by which he was known to friends and family for the rest of his life. When he was seven, his family moved into &quot;Little Lea&quot;, the family home of his childhood, in the Strandtown area of East Belfast.

As a boy, Lewis was fascinated with anthropomorphic animals; he fell in love with Beatrix Potter&#x27;s stories and often wrote and illustrated his own animal tales. Along with his brother Warnie, he created the world of Boxen, a fantasy land inhabited and run by animals. Lewis loved to read from an early age. His father&#x27;s house was filled with books; he later wrote that finding something to read was as easy as walking into a field and &quot;finding a new blade of grass&quot;.

Lewis was schooled by private tutors until age nine, when his mother died in 1908 from cancer. His father then sent him to England to live and study at Wynyard School in Watford, Hertfordshire. Lewis&#x27;s brother had enrolled there three years previously. Not long after, the school was closed due to a lack of pupils. Lewis then attended Campbell College in the east of Belfast about a mile from his home, but left after a few months due to respiratory problems.

He was then sent back to England to the health-resort town of Malvern, Worcestershire, where he attended the preparatory school Cherbourg House, which Lewis referred to as &quot;Chartres&quot; in his autobiography. It was during this time that he abandoned the Christianity he was taught as a child and became an atheist. During this time he also developed a fascination with European mythology and the occult.

In September 1913, Lewis enrolled at Malvern College, where he remained until the following June. He found the school socially competitive, and some of the fellow pupils of his house, such as Donald Hardman, had mixed feelings about him. Hardman later recalled: 

He was a bit of a rebel; he had a wonderful sense of humour and was a past master of mimicry. I think he took his work seriously, but nothing else; never took any interest in games and never played any so for as I can remember unless he had to. ... I met him in Oxford after the war and noticed he had changed, but was staggered to find him the author of &quot;The Screwtape Letters&quot;. When I knew him I can only describe him as a riotously amusing atheist. He really was pretty foul mouthed about it. 

After leaving Malvern, he studied privately with William T. Kirkpatrick, his father&#x27;s old tutor and former headmaster of Lurgan College.

As a teenager, Lewis was wonderstruck by the songs and legends of what he called &quot;Northernness&quot;, the ancient literature of Scandinavia preserved in the Icelandic sagas. These legends intensified an inner longing that he would later call &quot;joy&quot;. He also grew to love nature; its beauty reminded him of the stories of the North, and the stories of the North reminded him of the beauties of nature. His teenage writings moved away from the tales of Boxen, and he began experimenting with different art forms such as epic poetry and opera to try to capture his new-found interest in Norse mythology and the natural world.

Studying with Kirkpatrick (&quot;The Great Knock&quot;, as Lewis afterward called him) instilled in him a love of Greek literature and mythology and sharpened his debate and reasoning skills. In 1916, Lewis was awarded a scholarship at University College, Oxford.

===&quot;My Irish life&quot;===

Lewis experienced a certain cultural shock on first arriving in England: &quot;No Englishman will be able to understand my first impressions of England,&quot; Lewis wrote in &quot;Surprised by Joy&quot;. &quot;The strange English accents with which I was surrounded seemed like the voices of demons. But what was worst was the English landscape ... I have made up the quarrel since; but at that moment I conceived a hatred for England which took many years to heal.&quot;

From boyhood, Lewis had immersed himself in Norse and Greek mythology, and later in Irish mythology and literature. He also expressed an interest in the Irish language, though there is not much evidence that he laboured to learn it. He developed a particular fondness for W. B. Yeats, in part because of Yeats&#x27;s use of Ireland&#x27;s Celtic heritage in poetry. In a letter to a friend, Lewis wrote, &quot;I have here discovered an author exactly after my own heart, whom I am sure you would delight in, W. B. Yeats. He writes plays and poems of rare spirit and beauty about our old Irish mythology.&quot;

In 1921, Lewis met Yeats twice, since Yeats had moved to Oxford. Lewis was surprised to find his English peers indifferent to Yeats and the Celtic Revival movement, and wrote: &quot;I am often surprised to find how utterly ignored Yeats is among the men I have met: perhaps his appeal is purely Irish – if so, then thank the gods that I am Irish.&quot; Early in his career, Lewis considered sending his work to the major Dublin publishers, writing: &quot;If I do ever send my stuff to a publisher, I think I shall try Maunsel, those Dublin people, and so tack myself definitely onto the Irish school.&quot;

After his conversion to Christianity, his interests gravitated towards Christian theology and away from pagan Celtic mysticism (as opposed to Celtic Christian mysticism).

Lewis occasionally expressed a somewhat tongue-in-cheek chauvinism towards the English. Describing an encounter with a fellow Irishman, he wrote: &quot;Like all Irish people who meet in England, we ended by criticisms on the invincible flippancy and dullness of the Anglo-Saxon race. After all, there is no doubt, &quot;ami&quot;, that the Irish are the only people: with all their faults, I would not gladly live or die among another folk.&quot; Throughout his life, he sought out the company of other Irish people living in England and visited Northern Ireland regularly. In 1958 he spent his honeymoon there at the Old Inn, Crawfordsburn, which he called &quot;my Irish life&quot;.

Various critics have suggested that it was Lewis&#x27;s dismay over the sectarian conflict in his native Belfast which led him to eventually adopt such an ecumenical brand of Christianity. As one critic has said, Lewis &quot;repeatedly extolled the virtues of all branches of the Christian faith, emphasising a need for unity among Christians around what the Catholic writer called &#x27;Mere Christianity&#x27;, the core doctrinal beliefs that all denominations share&quot;.

Paul Stevens of the University of Toronto wrote an opinion that &quot;Lewis&#x27; mere Christianity masked many of the political prejudices of an old-fashioned Ulster Protestant, a native of middle-class Belfast for whom British withdrawal from Northern Ireland even in the 1950s and 1960s was unthinkable.&quot;

===First World War and Oxford University===

Lewis entered Oxford in the 1917 summer term, studying at University College, and shortly after, he joined the Officers&#x27; Training Corps at the university as his &quot;most promising route into the army&quot;. From there, he was drafted into a Cadet Battalion for training. After his training, he was commissioned into the 3rd Battalion of the Somerset Light Infantry of the British Army as a Second Lieutenant, and was later transferred to the 1st Battalion of the regiment, then serving in France (he would not remain with the 3rd Battalion as it moved to Northern Ireland). Within months of entering Oxford, he was shipped by the British Army to France to fight in the First World War.

On his 19th birthday (29 November 1917), Lewis arrived at the front line in the Somme Valley in France, where he experienced trench warfare for the first time. On 15 April 1918, as 1st Battalion, Somerset Light Infantry assaulted the village of Riez du Vinage in the midst of the German spring offensive, Lewis was wounded and two of his colleagues were killed by a British shell falling short of its target. He was depressed and homesick during his convalescence and, upon his recovery in October, he was assigned to duty in Andover, England. He was demobilized in December 1918 and soon restarted his studies. In a later letter, Lewis stated that his experience of the horrors of war, along with the loss of his mother and unhappiness in school, were the basis of his pessimism and atheism.

After Lewis returned to Oxford University, he received a First in Honour Moderations (Greek and Latin literature) in 1920, a First in Greats (Philosophy and Ancient History) in 1922, and a First in English in 1923. In 1924 he became a Philosophy tutor at University College and, in 1925, was elected a Fellow and Tutor in English Literature at Magdalen College, where he served for 29 years until 1954.

===Janie Moore===
During his army training, Lewis shared a room with another cadet, Edward Courtnay Francis &quot;Paddy&quot; Moore (1898–1918). Maureen Moore, Paddy&#x27;s sister, said that the two made a mutual pact that if either died during the war, the survivor would take care of both of their families. Paddy was killed in action in 1918 and Lewis kept his promise. Paddy had earlier introduced Lewis to his mother, Janie King Moore, and a friendship quickly sprang up between Lewis, who was 18 when they met, and Janie, who was 45. The friendship with Moore was particularly important to Lewis while he was recovering from his wounds in hospital, as his father did not visit him.

Lewis lived with and cared for Moore until she was hospitalized in the late 1940s. He routinely introduced her as his mother, referred to her as such in letters, and developed a deeply affectionate friendship with her. Lewis&#x27;s own mother had died when he was a child, while his father was distant, demanding, and eccentric.

Speculation regarding their relationship resurfaced with the 1990 publication of A. N. Wilson&#x27;s biography of Lewis. Wilson (who never met Lewis) attempted to make a case for their having been lovers for a time. Wilson&#x27;s biography was not the first to address the question of Lewis&#x27;s relationship with Moore. George Sayer knew Lewis for 29 years, and he had sought to shed light on the relationship during the period of 14 years before Lewis&#x27;s conversion to Christianity. In his biography &quot;Jack: A Life of C. S. Lewis&quot;, he wrote:

Later Sayer changed his mind. In the introduction to the 1997 edition of his biography of Lewis he wrote:

However, the romantic nature of the relationship is doubted by other writers; for example, Philip Zaleski and Carol Zaleski write in &quot;The Fellowship&quot; that

Lewis spoke well of Mrs. Moore throughout his life, saying to his friend George Sayer, &quot;She was generous and taught me to be generous, too.&quot; In December 1917, Lewis wrote in a letter to his childhood friend Arthur Greeves that Janie and Greeves were &quot;the two people who matter most to me in the world&quot;.

In 1930, Lewis moved into The Kilns with his brother Warnie, Mrs. Moore, and her daughter Maureen. The Kilns was a house in the district of Headington Quarry on the outskirts of Oxford, now part of the suburb of Risinghurst. They all contributed financially to the purchase of the house, which eventually passed to Maureen, who by then was Dame Maureen Dunbar, when Warren died in 1973.

Moore had dementia in her later years and was eventually moved into a nursing home, where she died in 1951. Lewis visited her every day in this home until her death.

===Return to Christianity===
Lewis was raised in a religious family that attended the Church of Ireland. He became an atheist at age 15, though he later described his young self as being paradoxically &quot;very angry with God for not existing&quot; and &quot;equally angry with him for creating a world&quot;. His early separation from Christianity began when he started to view his religion as a chore and a duty; around this time, he also gained an interest in the occult, as his studies expanded to include such topics. Lewis quoted Lucretius (&quot;De rerum natura&quot;, 5.198–9) as having one of the strongest arguments for atheism:

&lt;poem&gt;
&lt;/poem&gt;

which he translated poetically as follows:

&lt;poem&gt;Had God designed the world, it would not be
A world so frail and faulty as we see.&lt;/poem&gt;

(This is a highly poetic, rather than a literal translation. A more literal translation, by William Ellery Leonard, reads: &quot;That in no wise the nature of all things / For us was fashioned by a power divine – / So great the faults it stands encumbered with.&quot;)

Lewis&#x27;s interest in the works of the Scottish writer George MacDonald was part of what turned him from atheism. This can be seen particularly well through this passage in Lewis&#x27;s &quot;The Great Divorce&quot;, chapter nine, when the semi-autobiographical main character meets MacDonald in Heaven:

He eventually returned to Christianity, having been influenced by arguments with his Oxford colleague and friend J. R. R. Tolkien, whom he seems to have met for the first time on 11 May 1926, as well as the book &quot;The Everlasting Man&quot; by G. K. Chesterton. Lewis vigorously resisted conversion, noting that he was brought into Christianity like a prodigal, &quot;kicking, struggling, resentful, and darting his eyes in every direction for a chance to escape&quot;. He described his last struggle in &quot;Surprised by Joy&quot;:

After his conversion to theism in 1929, Lewis converted to Christianity in 1931, following a long discussion during a late-night walk along Addison&#x27;s Walk with close friends Tolkien and Hugo Dyson. He records making a specific commitment to Christian belief while on his way to the zoo with his brother. He became a member of the Church of England – somewhat to the disappointment of Tolkien, who had hoped that he would join the Catholic Church.

Lewis was a committed Anglican who upheld a largely orthodox Anglican theology, though in his apologetic writings, he made an effort to avoid espousing any one denomination. In his later writings, some believe that he proposed ideas such as purification of venial sins after death in purgatory (&quot;The Great Divorce&quot; and &quot;Letters to Malcolm&quot;) and mortal sin (&quot;The Screwtape Letters&quot;), which are generally considered to be Roman Catholic teachings, although they are also widely held in Anglicanism (particularly in high church Anglo-Catholic circles). Regardless, Lewis considered himself an entirely orthodox Anglican to the end of his life, reflecting that he had initially attended church only to receive communion and had been repelled by the hymns and the poor quality of the sermons. He later came to consider himself honoured by worshipping with men of faith who came in shabby clothes and work boots and who sang all the verses to all the hymns.

===Second World War===
After the outbreak of the Second World War in 1939, the Lewises took child evacuees from London and other cities into The Kilns. Lewis was only 40 when the war began, and he tried to re-enter military service, offering to instruct cadets; however, his offer was not accepted. He rejected the recruiting office&#x27;s suggestion of writing columns for the Ministry of Information in the press, as he did not want to &quot;write lies&quot; to deceive the enemy. He later served in the local Home Guard in Oxford.

From 1941 to 1943, Lewis spoke on religious programmes broadcast by the BBC from London while the city was under periodic air raids. These broadcasts were appreciated by civilians and servicemen at that stage. For example, Air Chief Marshal Sir Donald Hardman wrote:

:&quot;The war, the whole of life, everything tended to seem pointless. We needed, many of us, a key to the meaning of the universe. Lewis provided just that.&quot;

The youthful Alistair Cooke was less impressed, and in 1944 described &quot;the alarming vogue of Mr. C.S. Lewis&quot; as an example of how wartime tends to &quot;spawn so many quack religions and Messiahs&quot;. The broadcasts were anthologized in &quot;Mere Christianity&quot;. From 1941, Lewis was occupied at his summer holiday weekends visiting R.A.F. stations to speak on his faith, invited by Chaplain-in-Chief Maurice Edwards.

It was also during the same wartime period that Lewis was invited to become first President of the Oxford Socratic Club in January 1942, a position that he enthusiastically held until he resigned on appointment to Cambridge University in 1954.

===Honour declined===
Lewis was named on the last list of honours by George VI in December 1951 as a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) but declined so as to avoid association with any political issues.

===Chair at Cambridge University===
In 1954, Lewis accepted the newly founded chair in Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he finished his career. He maintained a strong attachment to the city of Oxford, keeping a home there and returning on weekends until his death in 1963.

===Joy Davidman===
In later life, Lewis corresponded with Joy Davidman Gresham, an American writer of Jewish background, a former Communist, and a convert from atheism to Christianity. She was separated from her alcoholic and abusive husband, novelist William L. Gresham, and came to England with her two sons, David and Douglas. Lewis at first regarded her as an agreeable intellectual companion and personal friend, and it was on this level that he agreed to enter into a civil marriage contract with her so that she could continue to live in the UK. They were married at the register office, 42 St Giles&#x27;, Oxford, on 23 April 1956. Lewis&#x27;s brother Warren wrote: &quot;For Jack the attraction was at first undoubtedly intellectual. Joy was the only woman whom he had met ... who had a brain which matched his own in suppleness, in width of interest, and in analytical grasp, and above all in humour and a sense of fun.&quot; After complaining of a painful hip, she was diagnosed with terminal bone cancer, and the relationship developed to the point that they sought a Christian marriage. Since she was divorced, this was not straightforward in the Church of England at the time, but a friend, the Rev. Peter Bide, performed the ceremony at her bed in the Churchill Hospital on 21 March 1957.

Gresham&#x27;s cancer soon went into remission, and the couple lived together as a family with Warren Lewis until 1960, when her cancer recurred. She died on 13 July 1960. Earlier that year, the couple took a brief holiday in Greece and the Aegean; Lewis was fond of walking but not of travel, and this marked his only crossing of the English Channel after 1918. Lewis&#x27;s book &quot;A Grief Observed&quot; describes his experience of bereavement in such a raw and personal fashion that he originally released it under the pseudonym N. W. Clerk to keep readers from associating the book with him. Ironically, many friends recommended the book to Lewis as a method for dealing with his own grief. After Lewis&#x27;s death, his authorship was made public by Faber, with the permission of the executors.

Lewis had adopted Gresham&#x27;s two sons and continued to raise them after her death. Douglas Gresham is a Christian like Lewis and his mother, while David Gresham turned to his mother&#x27;s ancestral faith, becoming Orthodox Jewish in his beliefs. His mother&#x27;s writings had featured the Jews in an unsympathetic manner, particularly on &quot;shechita&quot; (ritual slaughter). David informed Lewis that he was going to become a &quot;shohet&quot;, a ritual slaughterer, to present this type of Jewish religious functionary to the world in a more favourable light. In a 2005 interview, Douglas Gresham acknowledged that he and his brother were not close, although they had corresponded via email. 

David died on 25 December 2014. In 2020, Douglas revealed that his brother had died at a Swiss mental hospital, and that when David was a young man he had been diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia.

===Illness and death===

In early June 1961, Lewis became infected with recurrent nephritis which progressed to chronic low-grade sepsis. His illness caused him to miss the autumn term at Cambridge, though his health gradually began improving in 1962 and he returned that April. His health continued to improve and, according to his friend George Sayer, Lewis was fully himself by early 1963.

On 15 July that year, Lewis fell ill and was admitted to the hospital; he had a heart attack at 5:00 pm the next day and lapsed into a coma, but unexpectedly woke the following day at 2:00 pm. After he was discharged from the hospital, Lewis returned to the Kilns, though he was too ill to return to work. As a result, he resigned from his post at Cambridge in August 1963.

Lewis&#x27;s condition continued to decline, and he was diagnosed with end-stage kidney failure in mid-November. He collapsed in his bedroom at 5:30 pm on 22 November, at age 64, and died a few minutes later. He is buried in the churchyard of Holy Trinity Church, Headington, Oxford. His brother Warren died on 9 April 1973 and was buried in the same grave.

Media coverage of Lewis&#x27;s death was largely overshadowed by news of the assassination of John F. Kennedy, which occurred on the same day (approximately 55 minutes following Lewis&#x27;s collapse), as did the death of English writer Aldous Huxley, author of &quot;Brave New World&quot;. This coincidence was the inspiration for Peter Kreeft&#x27;s book &quot;Between Heaven and Hell: A Dialog Somewhere Beyond Death with John F. Kennedy, C. S. Lewis, &amp; Aldous Huxley&quot;. Lewis is commemorated on 22 November in the church calendar of the Episcopal Church.

==Career==

===Scholar===

Lewis began his academic career as an undergraduate student at Oxford University, where he won a triple first, the highest honours in three areas of study. He was then elected a Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxford, where he worked for nearly thirty years, from 1925 to 1954. In 1954, he was awarded the newly founded chair of Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature at Cambridge University, and was elected a fellow of Magdalene College. Concerning his appointed academic field, he argued that there was no such thing as an English Renaissance. Much of his scholarly work concentrated on the later Middle Ages, especially its use of allegory. His &quot;The Allegory of Love&quot; (1936) helped reinvigorate the serious study of late medieval narratives such as the &quot;Roman de la Rose&quot;.

Lewis was commissioned to write the volume &quot;English Literature in the Sixteenth Century (Excluding Drama)&quot; for the Oxford History of English Literature. His book &quot;A Preface to Paradise Lost&quot; is still cited as a criticism of that work. His last academic work, &quot;The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature&quot; (1964), is a summary of the medieval world view, a reference to the &quot;discarded image&quot; of the cosmos.

Lewis was a prolific writer, and his circle of literary friends became an informal discussion society known as the &quot;Inklings&quot;, including J. R. R. Tolkien, Nevill Coghill, Lord David Cecil, Charles Williams, Owen Barfield, and his brother Warren Lewis. Glyer points to December 1929 as the Inklings&#x27; beginning date. Lewis&#x27;s friendship with Coghill and Tolkien grew during their time as members of the Kolbítar, an Old Norse reading group that Tolkien founded and which ended around the time of the inception of the Inklings. At Oxford, he was the tutor of poet John Betjeman, critic Kenneth Tynan, mystic Bede Griffiths, novelist Roger Lancelyn Green and Sufi scholar Martin Lings, among many other undergraduates. The religious and conservative Betjeman detested Lewis, whereas the anti-establishment Tynan retained a lifelong admiration for him.

Of Tolkien, Lewis writes in &quot;Surprised by Joy&quot;:

===Novelist===
In addition to his scholarly work, Lewis wrote several popular novels, including the science fiction &quot;Space Trilogy&quot; for adults and the Narnia fantasies for children. Most deal implicitly with Christian themes such as sin, humanity&#x27;s fall from grace, and redemption.

His first novel after becoming a Christian was &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Regress&quot; (1933), which depicted his journey to Christianity in the allegorical style of John Bunyan&#x27;s &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;. The book was poorly received by critics at the time, although David Martyn Lloyd-Jones, one of Lewis&#x27;s contemporaries at Oxford, gave him much-valued encouragement. Asked by Lloyd-Jones when he would write another book, Lewis replied, &quot;When I understand the meaning of prayer.&quot;

The &quot;Space Trilogy&quot; (also called the &quot;Cosmic Trilogy&quot; or &quot;Ransom Trilogy&quot;) dealt with what Lewis saw as the dehumanizing trends in contemporary science fiction. The first book, &quot;Out of the Silent Planet&quot;, was apparently written following a conversation with his friend J. R. R. Tolkien about these trends. Lewis agreed to write a &quot;space travel&quot; story and Tolkien a &quot;time travel&quot; one, but Tolkien never completed &quot;The Lost Road&quot;, linking his Middle-earth to the modern world. Lewis&#x27;s main character Elwin Ransom is based in part on Tolkien, a fact to which Tolkien alludes in his letters.

The second novel, &quot;Perelandra&quot;, depicts a new Garden of Eden on the planet Venus, a new Adam and Eve, and a new &quot;serpent figure&quot; to tempt Eve. The story can be seen as an account of what might have happened if the terrestrial Adam had defeated the serpent and avoided the Fall of Man, with Ransom intervening in the novel to &quot;ransom&quot; the new Adam and Eve from the deceptions of the enemy. The third novel, &quot;That Hideous Strength&quot;, develops the theme of nihilistic science threatening traditional human values, embodied in Arthurian legend.

Many ideas in the trilogy, particularly opposition to dehumanization as portrayed in the third book, are presented more formally in &quot;The Abolition of Man&quot;, based on a series of lectures by Lewis at Durham University in 1943. Lewis stayed in Durham, where he says he was overwhelmed by the magnificence of the cathedral. &quot;That Hideous Strength&quot; is in fact set in the environs of &quot;Edgestow&quot; university, a small English university like Durham, though Lewis disclaims any other resemblance between the two.

Walter Hooper, Lewis&#x27;s literary executor, discovered a fragment of another science-fiction novel apparently written by Lewis called &quot;The Dark Tower&quot;. Ransom appears in the story but it is not clear whether the book was intended as part of the same series of novels. The manuscript was eventually published in 1977, though Lewis scholar Kathryn Lindskoog doubts its authenticity.

&quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot;, considered a classic of children&#x27;s literature, is a series of seven fantasy novels. Written between 1949 and 1954 and illustrated by Pauline Baynes, the series is Lewis&#x27;s most popular work, having sold over 100 million copies in 41 languages . It has been adapted several times, complete or in part, for radio, television, stage and cinema. In 1956, the final novel in the series, &quot;The Last Battle&quot;, won the Carnegie Medal.

The books contain Christian ideas intended to be easily accessible to young readers. In addition to Christian themes, Lewis also borrows characters from Greek and Roman mythology, as well as traditional British and Irish fairy tales.

Lewis&#x27;s last novel, &quot;Till We Have Faces&quot;, a retelling of the myth of Cupid and Psyche, was published in 1956. Although Lewis called it &quot;far and away my best book&quot;, it was not as well-reviewed as his previous work.

====Other works====
Lewis wrote several works on Heaven and Hell. One of these, &quot;The Great Divorce&quot;, is a short novella in which a few residents of Hell take a bus ride to Heaven, where they are met by people who dwell there. The proposition is that they can stay if they choose, in which case they can call the place where they had come from &quot;Purgatory&quot;, instead of &quot;Hell&quot;, but many find it not to their taste. The title is a reference to William Blake&#x27;s &quot;The Marriage of Heaven and Hell&quot;, a concept that Lewis found a &quot;disastrous error&quot;. This work deliberately echoes two other more famous works with a similar theme: the &quot;Divine Comedy&quot; of Dante Alighieri, and Bunyan&#x27;s &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;.

Another short work, &quot;The Screwtape Letters&quot;, which he dedicated to J. R. R. Tolkien, consists of letters of advice from senior demon Screwtape to his nephew Wormwood on the best ways to tempt a particular human and secure his damnation. Lewis&#x27;s last novel was &quot;Till We Have Faces&quot;, which he thought of as his most mature and masterly work of fiction but which was never a popular success. It is a retelling of the myth of Cupid and Psyche from the unusual perspective of Psyche&#x27;s sister. It is deeply concerned with religious ideas, but the setting is entirely pagan, and the connections with specific Christian beliefs are left implicit.

Before Lewis&#x27;s conversion to Christianity, he published two books: &quot;Spirits in Bondage&quot;, a collection of poems, and &quot;Dymer&quot;, a single narrative poem. Both were published under the pen name Clive Hamilton. Other narrative poems have since been published posthumously, including &quot;Launcelot&quot;, &quot;The Nameless Isle&quot;, and &quot;The Queen of Drum&quot;.

He also wrote &quot;The Four Loves&quot;, which rhetorically explains four categories of love: friendship, eros, affection, and charity.

In 2009, a partial draft was discovered of &quot;Language and Human Nature&quot;, which Lewis had begun co-writing with J. R. R. Tolkien, but which was never completed.

In 2024 an original poem was discovered in a collection of documents in Special Collections at the University of Leeds. Its Old English title, &quot;Mód Þrýþe Ne Wæg&quot;, is not easily translated into modern English and references the epic poem &quot;Beowulf&quot;. The poem was addressed to professor of English Eric Valentine Gordon and his wife Dr Ida Gordon. It was written under the pen name Nat Whilk, meaning &quot;someone&quot; in Old English.

===Christian apologist===
Lewis is also regarded by many as one of the most influential Christian apologists of his time, in addition to his career as an English professor and an author of fiction. &quot;Mere Christianity&quot; was voted best book of the 20th century by &quot;Christianity Today&quot; in 2000. He has been called &quot;The Apostle to the Skeptics&quot; due to his approach to religious belief as a sceptic, and his following conversion.

Lewis was very interested in presenting an argument from reason against metaphysical naturalism and for the existence of God. &quot;Mere Christianity&quot;, &quot;The Problem of Pain&quot;, and &quot;Miracles&quot; were all concerned, to one degree or another, with refuting popular objections to Christianity, such as the question, &quot;How could a good God allow pain to exist in the world?&quot; He also became a popular lecturer and broadcaster, and some of his writing originated as scripts for radio talks or lectures (including much of &quot;Mere Christianity&quot;).

According to George Sayer, losing a 1948 debate with Elizabeth Anscombe, also a Christian, led Lewis to re-evaluate his role as an apologist, and his future works concentrated on devotional literature and children&#x27;s books. Anscombe had a completely different recollection of the debate&#x27;s outcome and its emotional effect on Lewis. Victor Reppert also disputes Sayer, listing some of Lewis&#x27;s post-1948 apologetic publications, including the second and revised edition of his &quot;Miracles&quot; in 1960, in which Lewis addressed Anscombe&#x27;s criticism.&lt;ref name=&quot;Reppert 2005 https://books.google.com/books?id=hn1gaNlri1cC&amp;pg=PA266 266&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Noteworthy too is Roger Teichman&#x27;s suggestion in &quot;The Philosophy of Elizabeth Anscombe&quot; that the intellectual impact of Anscombe&#x27;s paper on Lewis&#x27;s philosophical self-confidence should not be over-rated: &quot;... it seems unlikely that he felt as irretrievably crushed as some of his acquaintances have made out; the episode is probably an inflated legend, in the same category as the affair of Wittgenstein&#x27;s Poker. Certainly, Anscombe herself believed that Lewis&#x27;s argument, though flawed, was getting at something very important; she thought that this came out more in the improved version of it that Lewis presented in a subsequent edition of &quot;Miracles&quot; – though that version also had &#x27;much to criticize in it&#x27;.&quot;

Lewis wrote an autobiography titled &quot;Surprised by Joy&quot;, which places special emphasis on his own conversion. He also wrote many essays and public speeches on Christian belief, many of which were collected in &quot;God in the Dock&quot; and &quot;The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses&quot;.

His most famous works, the &quot;Chronicles of Narnia&quot;, contain many strong Christian messages and are often considered allegory. Lewis, an expert on the subject of allegory, maintained that the books were not allegory, and preferred to call the Christian aspects of them &quot;suppositional&quot;. As Lewis wrote in a letter to a Mrs. Hook in December 1958:

Prior to his conversion, Lewis used the word &quot;Moslem&quot; to refer to Muslims, adherents of Islam; following his conversion, however, he started using &quot;Mohammedans&quot; and described Islam as a Christian heresy rather than an independent religion.

====&quot;Trilemma&quot;====

In a much-cited passage from &quot;Mere Christianity&quot;, Lewis challenged the view that Jesus was a great moral teacher but not God. He argued that Jesus made several implicit claims to divinity, which would logically exclude that claim:

Although this argument is sometimes called &quot;Lewis&#x27;s trilemma&quot;, Lewis did not invent it but rather developed and popularized it. It has also been used by Christian apologist Josh McDowell in his book &quot;More Than a Carpenter&quot;. It has been widely repeated in Christian apologetic literature but largely ignored by professional theologians and biblical scholars.

Lewis&#x27;s Christian apologetics, and this argument in particular, have been criticized. Philosopher John Beversluis described Lewis&#x27;s arguments as &quot;textually careless and theologically unreliable&quot;, and this particular argument as logically unsound and an example of a false dilemma. The Anglican New Testament scholar N. T. Wright criticizes Lewis for failing to recognize the significance of Jesus&#x27;s Jewish identity and setting – an oversight which &quot;at best, drastically short-circuits the argument&quot; and which lays Lewis open to criticism that his argument &quot;doesn&#x27;t work as history, and it backfires dangerously when historical critics question his reading of the gospels&quot;, although he argues that this &quot;doesn&#x27;t undermine the eventual claim&quot;.

Lewis used a similar argument in &quot;The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe&quot;, when the old Professor advises his young guests that their sister&#x27;s claims of a magical world must logically be taken as either lies, madness, or truth.

====Universal morality====
One of the main theses in Lewis&#x27;s apologia is that there is a common morality known throughout humanity, which he calls &quot;natural law&quot;. In the first five chapters of &quot;Mere Christianity&quot;, Lewis discusses the idea that people have a standard of behaviour to which they expect people to adhere. Lewis claims that people all over the earth know what this law is and when they break it. He goes on to claim that there must be someone or something behind such a universal set of principles.

Lewis also portrays Universal Morality in his works of fiction. In &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot; he describes Universal Morality as the &quot;deep magic&quot; which everyone knew.

In the second chapter of &quot;Mere Christianity&quot;, Lewis recognizes that &quot;many people find it difficult to understand what this Law of Human Nature ... is.&quot; And he responds first to the idea &quot;that the Moral Law is simply our herd instinct&quot; and second to the idea &quot;that the Moral Law is simply a social convention&quot;. In responding to the second idea Lewis notes that people often complain that one set of moral ideas is better than another, but that this actually argues for there existing some &quot;Real Morality&quot; to which they are comparing other moralities. Finally, he notes that sometimes differences in moral codes are exaggerated by people who confuse differences in beliefs about morality with differences in beliefs about facts:

Lewis also had fairly progressive views on the topic of &quot;animal morality&quot;, in particular the suffering of animals, as is evidenced by several of his essays: most notably, &quot;On Vivisection&quot; and &quot;On the Pains of Animals&quot;.

==Political views==

Lewis eschewed political involvement and partisan politics, took little interest in transitory political issues, and held many politicians in disdain. He refused a knighthood for fear that his detractors might then use it to accuse him of holding a political viewpoint, and he saw his role as a Christian apologist. His worldview was Christian, but he also did not believe in establishment of Christian parties. He avoided the political sphere, although he was not ignorant of it. He did not see himself as a political philosopher, but his work, &quot;The Abolition of Man&quot; (1943) defends objective value and the concept of natural law. Lewis referred to this work as almost his own favourite, although he felt it had been largely ignored. &quot;The Abolition of Man&quot; was not presented as something new. Instead, he paid attention to ideas, with the intent of recovering them. In &quot;The Abolition of Man&quot;, &quot;Lewis offered the postmodern world a vision of reality that could make sense of our lived moral experiences, and he put forth a powerful defense of natural law as a necessary basis for &quot;the very idea of a rule which is not tyranny or an obedience which is not slavery&quot;.

==Legacy==
Lewis continues to attract a wide readership. In 2008, &quot;The Times&quot; ranked him eleventh on their list of &quot;the 50 greatest British writers since 1945&quot;. Readers of his fiction are often unaware of what Lewis considered the Christian themes of his works. His Christian apologetics are read and quoted by members of many Christian denominations. In 2013, on the 50th anniversary of his death, Lewis joined some of Britain&#x27;s greatest writers recognized at Poets&#x27; Corner, Westminster Abbey. The dedication service, at noon on 22 November 2013, included a reading from &quot;The Last Battle&quot; by Douglas Gresham, younger stepson of Lewis. Flowers were laid by Walter Hooper, trustee and literary advisor to the Lewis Estate. An address was delivered by former Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams. The floor stone inscription is a quotation from an address by Lewis:

Lewis has been the subject of several biographies, a few of which were written by close friends, such as Roger Lancelyn Green and George Sayer. In 1985, the screenplay &quot;Shadowlands&quot; by William Nicholson dramatized Lewis&#x27;s life and relationship with Joy Davidman Gresham. It was aired on British television starring Joss Ackland and Claire Bloom. This was also staged as a theatre play starring Nigel Hawthorne in 1989 and made into the 1993 feature film &quot;Shadowlands&quot; starring Anthony Hopkins and Debra Winger.

Many books have been inspired by Lewis, including &quot;A Severe Mercy&quot; by his correspondent and friend Sheldon Vanauken. &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot; has been particularly influential. Modern children&#x27;s literature has been more or less influenced by Lewis&#x27;s series, such as Daniel Handler&#x27;s &quot;A Series of Unfortunate Events&quot;, Eoin Colfer&#x27;s &quot;Artemis Fowl&quot;, Philip Pullman&#x27;s &quot;His Dark Materials&quot;, and J. K. Rowling&#x27;s &quot;Harry Potter&quot;. Pullman is an atheist and is known to be sharply critical of C. S. Lewis&#x27;s work, accusing Lewis of featuring religious propaganda, misogyny, racism, and emotional sadism in his books. However, he has also modestly praised &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia&quot; for being a &quot;more serious&quot; work of literature in comparison with Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;trivial&quot; &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;. Authors of adult fantasy literature such as Tim Powers have also testified to being influenced by Lewis&#x27;s work.

Most of Lewis&#x27;s posthumous work has been edited by his literary executor Walter Hooper. Kathryn Lindskoog, an independent Lewis scholar, argued that Hooper&#x27;s scholarship is not reliable and that he has made false statements and attributed forged works to Lewis. Lewis&#x27;s stepson, Douglas Gresham, denies the forgery claims, saying that &quot;[t]he whole controversy thing was engineered for very personal reasons ... Her fanciful theories have been pretty thoroughly discredited.&quot;

A bronze statue of Lewis&#x27;s character Digory from &quot;The Magician&#x27;s Nephew&quot; stands in Belfast&#x27;s Holywood Arches in front of the Holywood Road Library.

Several C. S. Lewis Societies exist around the world, including one which was founded in Oxford in 1982. The C.S. Lewis Society at the University of Oxford meets at Pusey House during term time to discuss papers on the life and works of Lewis and the other Inklings, and generally appreciate all things Lewisian.

Live-action film adaptations have been made of three of &quot;The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe&quot; (2005), &quot;Prince Caspian&quot; (2008) and &quot;The Voyage of the Dawn Treader&quot; (2010).

Lewis is featured as a main character in &quot;The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica&quot; series by James A. Owen. He is one of two characters in Mark St. Germain&#x27;s 2009 play &quot;Freud&#x27;s Last Session&quot;, which imagines a meeting between Lewis, aged 40, and Sigmund Freud, aged 83, at Freud&#x27;s house in Hampstead, London, in 1939, as the Second World War is about to break out. In 2023, Freud&#x27;s Last Session was released as a movie starring Anthony Hopkins as Freud and Matthew Goode as Lewis. The movie had additional characters as well, including Anna Freud, played by Liv Lisa Fries.

In 2021, &quot;The Most Reluctant Convert&quot;, a biographical drama about Lewis&#x27;s life and conversion, was released.

The CS Lewis Nature Reserve, on ground owned by Lewis, lies behind his house, The Kilns. There is public access.
==Bibliography==
==Notes==
==See also==

* Marion E. Wade Center at Wheaton College, has the world&#x27;s largest collection of works by and about Lewis
* Courtly love
* Johan Huizinga
* D. W. Robertson Jr.

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* .
* [reprinted as ]
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Aeschliman, Michael D. (1983). &quot;The Restitution of Man: C. S. Lewis and the Case Against Scientism.&quot; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans. 
* 
* Beversluis, John (1985), &quot;C. S. Lewis and the Search for Rational Religion&quot;. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans 
* Bresland, Ronald W. (1999), &quot;The Backward Glance: C. S. Lewis and Ireland&quot;. Belfast: Institute of Irish Studies at Queen&#x27;s University of Belfast.
* Brown, Devin (2013), &quot;A Life Observed: A Spiritual Biography of C. S. Lewis&quot;. Grand Rapids: Brazos Press 
* Christopher, Joe R. &amp; Joan K. Ostling (1972), &quot;C. S. Lewis: An Annotated Checklist of Writings About Him and His Works&quot;. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press, n.d. 
* Como, James (1998), &quot;Branches to Heaven: The Geniuses of C. S. Lewis&quot;. Spence
* Como, James (2006), &quot;Remembering C. S. Lewis&quot; (3rd edn. of &quot;C. S. Lewis at the Breakfast Table&quot;). Ignatius Press
* Connolly, Sean (2007), &quot;Inklings of Heaven: C. S. Lewis and Eschatology&quot;. Gracewing. 
* Coren, Michael (1994), &quot;The Man Who Created Narnia: The Story of C. S. Lewis&quot;. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, reprint edition 1996 (First published 1994 in Canada by Lester Publishing Limited). 
* Derrick, Christopher (1981) &quot;C. S. Lewis and the Church of Rome: A Study in Proto-Ecumenism&quot;. Ignatius Press. 
* Downing, David C. (1992), &quot;Planets in Peril: A Critical Study of C. S. Lewis&#x27;s Ransom Trilogy&quot;. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press. 
* Downing, David C. (2002), &quot;The Most Reluctant Convert: C. S. Lewis&#x27;s Journey to Faith&quot;. InterVarsity. 
* Downing, David C. (2005), &quot;Into the Region of Awe: Mysticism in C. S. Lewis&quot;. InterVarsity. 
* Downing, David C. (2005), &quot;Into the Wardrobe: C. S. Lewis and the Narnia Chronicles&quot;. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
* Duriez, Colin (2003), &quot;Tolkien and C. S. Lewis: The Gift of Friendship&quot;. Paulist Press 
* Duriez, Colin (2015), &quot;Bedeviled: Lewis, Tolkien and the Shadow of Evil&quot;. InterVarsity Press 
* Duriez, Colin &amp; David Porter (2001), &quot;The Inklings Handbook: The Lives, Thought and Writings of C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien, Charles Williams, Owen Barfield, and Their Friends&quot;. London: Azure. 
* 
* Edwards, Bruce L. (2005), &quot;Further Up and Further In: Understanding C. S. Lewis&#x27;s&quot; The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe. Broadman and Holman. 
* Edwards, Bruce L. (2005), &quot;Not a Tame Lion: The Spiritual World of Narnia&quot;. Tyndale. 
* Fowler, Alastair, &quot;C. S. Lewis: Supervisor&quot;, &quot;Yale Review&quot;; Vol. 91, No. 4 (October 2003).
* Gardner, Helen (1966) &quot;† Clive Staples Lewis, 1898–1963&quot;. Biographical memoir, in &quot;Proceedings of the British Academy&quot; 51 (1966), 417–28.
* Gibb, Jocelyn (ed.) (1965), &quot;Light on C. S. Lewis&quot;. Geoffrey Bles, 1965, &amp; Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1976. 
* Gilbert, Douglas &amp; Clyde Kilby (1973) &quot;C. S. Lewis: Images of His World&quot;. Eerdmans, 1973 &amp; 2005. 
* 
* Gresham, Douglas (1994), &quot;Lenten Lands: My Childhood with Joy Davidman and C. S. Lewis&quot;. HarperSanFrancisco. 
* Gresham, Douglas (2005), &quot;Jack&#x27;s Life: A Memory of C. S. Lewis&quot;. Broadman &amp; Holman Publishers. 
* Griffin, William (2005), &quot;C. S. Lewis: The Authentic Voice&quot; (formerly &quot;C. S. Lewis: A Dramatic Life&quot;). Lion. 
* Hart, Dabney Adams (1984), &quot;Through the Open Door: A New Look at C. S. Lewis&quot;. University of Alabama Press. 
* Heck, Joel D. (2006), &quot;Irrigating Deserts: C. S. Lewis on Education&quot;. Concordia Publishing House. 
* 
* 
* 
* Keefe, Carolyn (1979), &quot;C. S. Lewis: Speaker &amp; Teacher&quot;. Zondervan. 
* Kennedy, Jon (2008), &quot;The Everything Guide to C. S. Lewis and Narnia&quot;. Adams Media. 
* Kennedy, Jon (2012), &quot;C. S. Lewis Themes and Threads&quot;. Amazon Kindle ASIN B00ATSY3AQ
* Kilby, Clyde S. (1964), &quot;The Christian World of C. S. Lewis&quot;. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1964, 1995. 
* King, Don W. (2001), &quot;C. S. Lewis, Poet: The Legacy of His Poetic Impulse&quot;. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press. 
* 
* Lindskoog, Kathryn (1994), &quot;Light in the Shadowlands: Protecting the Real C. S. Lewis&quot;. Multnomah Pub. 
* Lowenberg, Susan (1993), &quot;C. S. Lewis: A Reference Guide, 1972–1988&quot;. Hall &amp; Co. 
* Mardindale, Wayne &amp; Jerry Root (1990), &quot;The Quotable Lewis&quot;. Tyndale House Publishers. 
* Martin, Thomas L. (ed.) (2000), &quot;Reading the Classics with C. S. Lewis&quot;. Baker Academic. 
* Miller, Laura (2008) &quot;The Magician&#x27;s Book&quot;, Little, Brown &amp; Co. 
* Mills, David (ed) (1998) &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Guide: C. S. Lewis and the Art of Witness&quot;. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans. 
* 
* Pearce, Joseph (1999), &quot;C. S. Lewis and the Catholic Church&quot;. HarperCollins, 1999; then Ignatius Press, 2003. 
* Peters, Thomas C. (1998), &quot;Simply C. S. Lewis: A Beginner&#x27;s Guide to His Life and Works&quot;. Kingsway Publications. 
* Phillips, Justin (2003), &quot;C. S. Lewis at the BBC: Messages of Hope in the Darkness of War&quot;. Marshall Pickering. 
* Poe, Harry Lee &amp; Rebecca Whitten Poe (eds) (2006), &quot;C. S. Lewis Remembered: Collected Reflections of Students, Friends &amp; Colleagues&quot;. Zondervan. 
* Reppert, Victor (2003), &quot;C. S. Lewis&#x27;s Dangerous Idea: In Defense of the Argument from Reason&quot;. InterVarsity Press. 
* Sayer, George (1988), &quot;Jack: C. S. Lewis and His Times&quot;. London: Macmillan. 
* Schakel, Peter J. (1984), &quot;Reason and Imagination in C. S. Lewis: A Study of &quot;Till We Have Faces&quot; &quot;. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans. 
* Schakel, Peter J. (2002), &quot;Imagination and the Arts in C. S. Lewis: Journeying to Narnia and Other Worlds&quot;. University of Missouri Press. 
* Schakel, Peter J. (ed.) (1977), &quot;The Longing for a Form: Essays on the Fiction of C. S. Lewis&quot;. Kent, Ohio: Kent State University Press. 
* Schakel, Peter J. &amp; Charles A. Huttar (eds.) (1991), &quot;Word and Story in C. S. Lewis&quot;. University of Missouri Press. 
* Schofield, Stephen (1983), &quot;In Search of C. S. Lewis&quot;. Bridge Logos Pub. 
* Schultz, Jeffrey D. &amp; John G. West Jr. (eds) (1998), &quot;The C. S. Lewis Readers&#x27; Encyclopedia&quot;. Zondervan Publishing House. 
* Schwartz, Sanford (2009), &quot;C. S. Lewis on the Final Frontier: Science and the Supernatural in the Space Trilogy&quot;. Oxford University Press. .
* Tennyson, G. B. (ed.) (1989), &quot;Owen Barfield on C. S. Lewis&quot;. Wesleyan University Press 
* Wagner, Richard J. (2005) &quot;C. S. Lewis and Narnia for Dummies&quot;. For Dummies. 
* Walker, Andrew &amp; Patrick James (eds.) (1998), &quot;Rumours of Heaven: Essays in Celebration of C. S. Lewis&quot;, Guildford: Eagle. 
* Walsh, Chad (1949), &quot;C. S. Lewis: Apostle to the Skeptics&quot;. London: Macmillan
* Walsh, Chad (1979), &quot;The Literary Legacy of C. S. Lewis&quot;. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 
* Ward, Michael (2008), &quot;Planet Narnia&quot;. Oxford University Press. 
* Watson, George (ed.) (1992), &quot;Critical Essays on C. S. Lewis&quot;. Menston: Scolar Press. 
* White, Michael (2005), &quot;C. S. Lewis: The Boy Who Chronicled Narnia&quot;. Abacus. 
* Wielenberg, Erik J. (2007), &quot;God and the Reach of Reason&quot;. Cambridge University Press. 
* 
== External links ==

* 
* 
* Journal of Inklings Studies peer-reviewed journal on Lewis and his literary circle, based at Oxford
* C. S. Lewis Reading Room , with extensive links to online primary and secondary literature (Tyndale Seminary)
* C. S. Lewis research collection at The Marion E. Wade Center at Wheaton College
* C. S. Lewis at the &quot;Encyclopedia of Science Fiction&quot;
* C. S. Lewis at the &quot;Encyclopedia of Fantasy&quot;
*BBC Radio 4 – Great Lives – Suzannah Lipscomb on CS Lewis – 3 January 2017 Step though the wardrobe on Great Lives as CS Lewis – creator of the Narnia Chronicles – is this week&#x27;s choice</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="0" end="19" title="C. S. Lewis" label="Clive Staples Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="102" end="110" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505433" start="111" end="125" title="lay theologian" label="lay theologian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81162" start="184" end="208" title="Magdalen College, Oxford" label="Magdalen College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="226" end="254" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="308" end="332" title="The Chronicles of Narnia" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267287" start="407" end="428" title="The Screwtape Letters" label="The Screwtape Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070438" start="445" end="462" title="The Space Trilogy" label="The Space Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="494" end="515" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian apologetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078487" start="533" end="550" title="Mere Christianity" label="Mere Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858707" start="564" end="572" title="Miracles (book)" label="Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179147" start="590" end="609" title="The Problem of Pain" label="The Problem of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="646" end="662" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="680" end="701" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q81984" start="836" end="844" title="Inklings" label="Inklings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367535" start="890" end="906" title="Surprised by Joy" label="Surprised by Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="937" end="954" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="1022" end="1033" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1151" end="1168" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q465594" start="1705" end="1717" title="Joy Davidman" label="Joy Davidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275898" start="1921" end="1939" title="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner" label="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="1943" end="1960" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="2022" end="2029" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="2033" end="2039" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="2057" end="2066" title="Partition of Ireland" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2201" end="2206" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="2356" end="2373" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931024" start="2425" end="2438" title="Hugh Hamilton (bishop)" label="Hugh Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258882" start="2443" end="2455" title="John Staples" label="John Staples"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="2515" end="2538" title="Queen’s College Belfast" label="Queen’s College Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038321" start="2568" end="2589" title="Warren Lewis" label="Warren Hamilton Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17778202" start="2687" end="2717" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Church, Dundela" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Church, Dundela"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621302" start="3091" end="3101" title="Strandtown" label="Strandtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="3110" end="3122" title="Belfast" label="East Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="3161" end="3176" title="anthropomorphic" label="anthropomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214565" start="3207" end="3221" title="Beatrix Potter" label="Beatrix Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951665" start="3346" end="3351" title="Boxen (C. S. Lewis)" label="Boxen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8040273" start="3765" end="3779" title="Wynyard School" label="Wynyard School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598" start="3783" end="3790" title="Watford" label="Watford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="3792" end="3805" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028025" start="3954" end="3970" title="Campbell College" label="Campbell College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286546" start="4057" end="4077" title="Respiratory disease" label="respiratory problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q623323" start="4142" end="4149" title="Malvern, Worcestershire" label="Malvern"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="4151" end="4165" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="4189" end="4207" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q130272" start="4258" end="4266" title="Chartres" label="Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184" start="4280" end="4293" title="autobiography" label="autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="4393" end="4400" title="Atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="4465" end="4469" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="4483" end="4489" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536562" start="4529" end="4544" title="Malvern College" label="Malvern College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294485" start="4684" end="4698" title="Donald Hardman" label="Donald Hardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22018659" start="5313" end="5335" title="William T. Kirkpatrick" label="William T. Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6704918" start="5390" end="5404" title="Lurgan College" label="Lurgan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="5518" end="5551" title="Norse mythology" label="ancient literature of Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="5569" end="5584" title="Icelandic sagas" label="Icelandic sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="5939" end="5950" title="epic poetry" label="epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="5955" end="5960" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="6005" end="6020" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089547" start="6159" end="6175" title="Greek literature" label="Greek literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="6180" end="6189" title="Greek mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="6281" end="6307" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q268586" start="6371" end="6385" title="Culture shock" label="cultural shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367535" start="6523" end="6539" title="Surprised by Joy" label="Surprised by Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309189" start="6565" end="6580" title="Regional accents of English speakers" label="English accents"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="6860" end="6865" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="6870" end="6875" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="6900" end="6915" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326673" start="6920" end="6930" title="Early Irish literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="6969" end="6983" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="7088" end="7099" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106575" start="7155" end="7170" title="Celtic mythology" label="Celtic heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="7567" end="7581" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="7848" end="7854" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543943" start="7945" end="7952" title="George Roberts (publisher)" label="Maunsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="8045" end="8071" title="conversion to Christianity" label="conversion to Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q216545" start="8106" end="8124" title="Christian theology" label="Christian theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q263031" start="8139" end="8161" title="Ancient Celtic religion" label="pagan Celtic mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="8177" end="8203" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Celtic Christian mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993049" start="8247" end="8262" title="tongue-in-cheek" label="tongue-in-cheek"/>
<link wikidata="Q226418" start="8263" end="8273" title="chauvinism" label="chauvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="8368" end="8380" title="Irish people" label="Irish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="8473" end="8484" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q116767" start="8834" end="8847" title="Crawfordsburn" label="Crawfordsburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638227" start="8965" end="8983" title="Partition of Ireland" label="sectarian conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="9048" end="9058" title="Ecumenism" label="ecumenical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316589" start="9252" end="9260" title="Catholic Church in the United Kingdom" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="9342" end="9355" title="Christian denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="9390" end="9411" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017729" start="9530" end="9547" title="Ulster Protestants" label="Ulster Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="9787" end="9805" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q10607900" start="9840" end="9869" title="Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps" label="Officers&amp;#x27; Training Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="10034" end="10046" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489806" start="10077" end="10100" title="Somerset Light Infantry" label="Somerset Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="10108" end="10120" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="10126" end="10143" title="Second Lieutenant" label="Second Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10405" end="10420" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37646" start="10503" end="10508" title="River Somme" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="10548" end="10562" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303061" start="10789" end="10796" title="Friendly fire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="10797" end="10802" title="Shell (projectile)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q492805" start="10949" end="10956" title="Andover, Hampshire" label="Andover"/>
<link wikidata="Q934433" start="10974" end="10985" title="demobilized" label="demobilized"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="11274" end="11279" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q12020091" start="11283" end="11301" title="Honour Moderations" label="Honour Moderations"/>
<link wikidata="Q184890" start="11313" end="11329" title="Latin literature" label="Latin literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647565" start="11351" end="11357" title="Literae Humaniores" label="Greats"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="11406" end="11411" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="11415" end="11422" title="English studies" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="11472" end="11490" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404101" start="11519" end="11525" title="Fellow" label="Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q81162" start="11561" end="11577" title="Magdalen College, Oxford" label="Magdalen College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648203" start="12721" end="12733" title="A. N. Wilson" label="A. N. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101901" start="12963" end="12975" title="George Sayer (biographer)" label="George Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744401" start="13823" end="13832" title="The Kilns" label="The Kilns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792670" start="13887" end="13894" title="Maureen Dunbar" label="Maureen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689637" start="13937" end="13954" title="Headington Quarry" label="Headington Quarry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336203" start="14009" end="14020" title="Risinghurst" label="Risinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792670" start="14137" end="14156" title="Maureen Dunbar" label="Dame Maureen Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="14195" end="14203" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837142" start="14255" end="14267" title="nursing home" label="nursing home"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="14438" end="14455" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47154" start="14889" end="14898" title="Lucretius" label="Lucretius"/>
<link wikidata="Q178952" start="14959" end="14978" title="Argument from poor design" label="strongest arguments"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="15502" end="15518" title="George MacDonald" label="George MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326672" start="15639" end="15656" title="The Great Divorce" label="The Great Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="15709" end="15723" title="Protagonist" label="main character"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="15743" end="15749" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="15865" end="15881" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820059" start="15970" end="15989" title="The Everlasting Man" label="The Everlasting Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="15999" end="16015" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q262135" start="16107" end="16115" title="Parable of the Prodigal Son" label="prodigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367535" start="16265" end="16281" title="Surprised by Joy" label="Surprised by Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q620805" start="16314" end="16320" title="theism" label="theism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681218" start="16430" end="16449" title="Addison&amp;#x27;s Walk" label="Addison&amp;#x27;s Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271933" start="16481" end="16491" title="Hugo Dyson" label="Hugo Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="16625" end="16642" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="16765" end="16773" title="Church of England" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763556" start="16804" end="16821" title="Anglican doctrine" label="Anglican theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q191776" start="16837" end="16847" title="apologetics" label="apologetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754656" start="17000" end="17010" title="venial sin" label="venial sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="17027" end="17036" title="purgatory" label="purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326672" start="17044" end="17061" title="The Great Divorce" label="The Great Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533783" start="17078" end="17096" title="Letters to Malcolm" label="Letters to Malcolm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321540" start="17108" end="17118" title="mortal sin" label="mortal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267287" start="17126" end="17147" title="The Screwtape Letters" label="The Screwtape Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="17286" end="17297" title="high church" label="high church"/>
<link wikidata="Q541235" start="17298" end="17312" title="Anglo-Catholic" label="Anglo-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="17479" end="17488" title="Eucharist" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="17775" end="17791" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917386" start="17818" end="17844" title="Evacuations of civilians in Britain during World War II" label="child evacuees from London"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744401" start="17867" end="17876" title="The Kilns" label="The Kilns"/>
<link wikidata="Q821726" start="18104" end="18127" title="Ministry of Information (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q919431" start="18238" end="18248" title="Home Guard (United Kingdom)" label="Home Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18329" end="18336" title="BBC" label="the BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="18383" end="18392" title="The Blitz" label="air raids"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294485" start="18484" end="18520" title="Donald Hardman" label="Air Chief Marshal Sir Donald Hardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094347" start="18708" end="18722" title="Alistair Cooke" label="Alistair Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="19045" end="19051" title="Royal Air Force" label="R.A.F."/>
<link wikidata="Q16149968" start="19095" end="19112" title="Chaplain-in-Chief" label="Chaplain-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793048" start="19113" end="19128" title="Maurice Edwards" label="Maurice Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553125" start="19230" end="19250" title="Socratic Club" label="Oxford Socratic Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="19345" end="19365" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="19445" end="19454" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="19477" end="19521" title="Commander of the Order of the British Empire" label="Commander of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248215" start="19674" end="19719" title="Professor of Medieval and Renaissance English (Cambridge)" label="chair in Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="19723" end="19751" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="19832" end="19838" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q465594" start="19971" end="19991" title="Joy Gresham" label="Joy Davidman Gresham"/>
<link wikidata="Q678551" start="20015" end="20032" title="American Jews" label="Jewish background"/>
<link wikidata="Q308714" start="20043" end="20052" title="Communist Party USA" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q938844" start="20165" end="20183" title="William Lindsay Gresham" label="William L. Gresham"/>
<link wikidata="Q354538" start="20234" end="20241" title="Douglas Gresham" label="Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q205572" start="20387" end="20401" title="civil marriage" label="civil marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q29127138" start="20491" end="20506" title="register office" label="register office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499975" start="20511" end="20533" title="St Giles&amp;#x27;, Oxford" label="St Giles&amp;#x27;, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328805" start="20918" end="20929" title="bone cancer" label="bone cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772868" start="21074" end="21091" title="Marriage in England and Wales" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118186" start="21181" end="21199" title="Churchill Hospital" label="Churchill Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="21256" end="21265" title="Remission (medicine)" label="remission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038321" start="21314" end="21326" title="Warren Lewis" label="Warren Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="21460" end="21466" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="21554" end="21569" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657189" start="21606" end="21622" title="A Grief Observed" label="A Grief Observed"/>
<link wikidata="Q898097" start="21978" end="21983" title="Faber and Faber" label="Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426712" start="22012" end="22021" title="Literary estate" label="executors"/>
<link wikidata="Q354538" start="22111" end="22126" title="Douglas Gresham" label="Douglas Gresham"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="22243" end="22258" title="Orthodox Judaism" label="Orthodox Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q861258" start="22374" end="22382" title="shechita" label="shechita"/>
<link wikidata="Q861258" start="22466" end="22472" title="shohet" label="shohet"/>
<link wikidata="Q599151" start="22543" end="22554" title="Official" label="functionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q210999" start="22825" end="22840" title="mental hospital" label="mental hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="22905" end="22927" title="paranoid schizophrenia" label="paranoid schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q401402" start="23012" end="23021" title="nephritis" label="nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="23060" end="23066" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101901" start="23270" end="23282" title="George Sayer (biographer)" label="George Sayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="23770" end="23794" title="end-stage kidney failure" label="end-stage kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246860" start="23942" end="23961" title="Holy Trinity Church, Headington Quarry" label="Holy Trinity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090863" start="23963" end="23973" title="Headington" label="Headington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038321" start="23995" end="24001" title="Warren Lewis" label="Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="24135" end="24167" title="assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassination of John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="24295" end="24308" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="24326" end="24341" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q555572" start="24390" end="24402" title="Peter Kreeft" label="Peter Kreeft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899089" start="24421" end="24532" title="Between Heaven and Hell (novel)" label="Between Heaven and Hell: A Dialog Somewhere Beyond Death with John F. Kennedy, C. S. Lewis, &amp;amp; Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019509" start="24584" end="24599" title="Calendar of saints (Episcopal Church)" label="church calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="24607" end="24623" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="24716" end="24733" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q81162" start="24841" end="24865" title="Magdalen College, Oxford" label="Magdalen College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248215" start="24969" end="25014" title="Professor of Medieval and Renaissance English (Cambridge)" label="chair of Mediaeval and Renaissance Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="25018" end="25038" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="25068" end="25085" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272912" start="25173" end="25192" title="English Renaissance" label="English Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q212976" start="25241" end="25258" title="Late Middle Ages" label="later Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4062569" start="25302" end="25322" title="The Allegory of Love" label="The Allegory of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q642211" start="25420" end="25436" title="Roman de la Rose" label="Roman de la Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q162633" start="25709" end="25722" title="academia" label="academic work"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730298" start="25730" end="25749" title="The Discarded Image" label="The Discarded Image"/>
<link wikidata="Q81984" start="26045" end="26053" title="Inklings" label="Inklings"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="26071" end="26087" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338877" start="26089" end="26103" title="Nevill Coghill" label="Nevill Coghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q523064" start="26105" end="26121" title="Lord David Cecil" label="Lord David Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q124735" start="26123" end="26139" title="Charles Williams (British writer)" label="Charles Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q305034" start="26141" end="26154" title="Owen Barfield" label="Owen Barfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3038321" start="26172" end="26184" title="Warren Lewis" label="Warren Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="26504" end="26517" title="John Betjeman" label="John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q374900" start="26526" end="26539" title="Kenneth Tynan" label="Kenneth Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q813829" start="26548" end="26562" title="Bede Griffiths" label="Bede Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044868" start="26573" end="26593" title="Roger Lancelyn Green" label="Roger Lancelyn Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q957553" start="26611" end="26623" title="Martin Lings" label="Martin Lings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558113" start="26726" end="26744" title="anti-establishment" label="anti-establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367535" start="26826" end="26842" title="Surprised by Joy" label="Surprised by Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070438" start="26973" end="26986" title="Space Trilogy" label="Space Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="27012" end="27018" title="Narnia" label="Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="27115" end="27130" title="Fall of Man" label="fall from grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757110" start="27202" end="27228" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Regress" label="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Regress"/>
<link wikidata="Q108206" start="27314" end="27325" title="John Bunyan" label="John Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="27339" end="27366" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q31362" start="27442" end="27460" title="Martyn Lloyd-Jones" label="Martyn Lloyd-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070438" start="27678" end="27691" title="Space Trilogy" label="Space Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687429" start="27881" end="27905" title="Out of the Silent Planet" label="Out of the Silent Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q502579" start="28146" end="28159" title="The Lost Road and Other Writings" label="The Lost Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q79734" start="28179" end="28191" title="Middle-earth" label="Middle-earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368303" start="28241" end="28253" title="Elwin Ransom" label="Elwin Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q392170" start="28356" end="28366" title="Perelandra" label="Perelandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="28388" end="28402" title="Garden of Eden" label="Garden of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q58701" start="28430" end="28442" title="Adam and Eve" label="Adam and Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135949" start="28624" end="28635" title="Fall of Man" label="Fall of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218012" start="28774" end="28795" title="That Hideous Strength" label="That Hideous Strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q841640" start="29051" end="29071" title="The Abolition of Man" label="The Abolition of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q458393" start="29121" end="29138" title="Durham University" label="Durham University"/>
<link wikidata="Q746207" start="29228" end="29241" title="Durham Cathedral" label="the cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634290" start="29447" end="29460" title="Walter Hooper" label="Walter Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q373647" start="29590" end="29604" title="The Dark Tower (1977 novel)" label="The Dark Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377083" start="29798" end="29815" title="Kathryn Lindskoog" label="Kathryn Lindskoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q483412" start="29848" end="29872" title="The Chronicles of Narnia" label="The Chronicles of Narnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101951" start="30018" end="30032" title="Pauline Baynes" label="Pauline Baynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211909" start="30223" end="30229" title="The Chronicles of Narnia (film series)" label="cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q289130" start="30277" end="30292" title="The Last Battle" label="The Last Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043985" start="30308" end="30322" title="Carnegie Medal (literary award)" label="Carnegie Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="30478" end="30483" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q122173" start="30488" end="30503" title="Roman mythology" label="Roman mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280994" start="30591" end="30609" title="Till We Have Faces" label="Till We Have Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="30849" end="30855" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q564" start="30860" end="30864" title="Hell" label="Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326672" start="30886" end="30903" title="The Great Divorce" label="The Great Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="31159" end="31168" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="31270" end="31283" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132673" start="31297" end="31328" title="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell" label="The Marriage of Heaven and Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40185" start="31485" end="31498" title="Divine Comedy" label="Divine Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067" start="31508" end="31523" title="Dante Alighieri" label="Dante Alighieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="31549" end="31576" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267287" start="31611" end="31632" title="The Screwtape Letters" label="The Screwtape Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="31722" end="31727" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31821" end="31830" title="Damnation#Religious" label="damnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280994" start="31866" end="31884" title="Till We Have Faces" label="Till We Have Faces"/>
<link wikidata="Q135662" start="32032" end="32048" title="Cupid and Psyche" label="Cupid and Psyche"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="32176" end="32181" title="paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578079" start="32333" end="32351" title="Spirits in Bondage" label="Spirits in Bondage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318841" start="32392" end="32397" title="Dymer (poem)" label="Dymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q474090" start="32414" end="32428" title="narrative poetry" label="narrative poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759010" start="32621" end="32638" title="The Queen of Drum" label="The Queen of Drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283958" start="32667" end="32681" title="The Four Loves" label="The Four Loves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242529" start="32742" end="32752" title="philia" label="friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361301" start="32754" end="32758" title="Eros (concept)" label="eros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995866" start="32760" end="32769" title="storge" label="affection"/>
<link wikidata="Q210143" start="32775" end="32782" title="agape" label="charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q330499" start="32834" end="32859" title="Language and Human Nature" label="Language and Human Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q503424" start="33054" end="33073" title="University of Leeds" label="University of Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="33208" end="33215" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q81877" start="33270" end="33291" title="E. V. Gordon" label="Eric Valentine Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377898" start="33498" end="33518" title="Christian apologetics" label="Christian apologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078487" start="33614" end="33631" title="Mere Christianity" label="Mere Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q680794" start="33687" end="33705" title="Christianity Today" label="Christianity Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789744" start="33908" end="33928" title="argument from reason" label="argument from reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q260994" start="33937" end="33960" title="metaphysical naturalism" label="metaphysical naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699404" start="33973" end="33989" title="existence of God" label="existence of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179147" start="34028" end="34047" title="The Problem of Pain" label="The Problem of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858707" start="34065" end="34073" title="Miracles (book)" label="Miracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q229646" start="34495" end="34513" title="G. E. M. Anscombe" label="Elizabeth Anscombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909226" start="35551" end="35576" title="Wittgenstein&amp;#x27;s Poker" label="Wittgenstein&amp;#x27;s Poker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11482443" start="36133" end="36148" title="God in the Dock" label="God in the Dock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774164" start="36165" end="36204" title="The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses" label="The Weight of Glory and Other Addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q18535" start="36338" end="36346" title="allegory" label="allegory"/>
<link wikidata="Q462024" start="36496" end="36507" title="supposition" label="supposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367463" start="36741" end="36751" title="Mohammedan" label="Mohammedan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192569" start="37299" end="37312" title="Josh McDowell" label="Josh McDowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q265623" start="37781" end="37794" title="false dilemma" label="false dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="37800" end="37808" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q335125" start="37831" end="37843" title="N. T. Wright" label="N. T. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q485093" start="38342" end="38378" title="The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe" label="The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386582" start="38391" end="38408" title="Digory Kirke" label="the old Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="38703" end="38714" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="41602" end="41611" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="41877" end="41899" title="Christian denomination" label="Christian denomination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275898" start="42016" end="42034" title="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner" label="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="42036" end="42053" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q289130" start="42138" end="42153" title="The Last Battle" label="The Last Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q354538" start="42163" end="42178" title="Douglas Gresham" label="Douglas Gresham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634290" start="42227" end="42240" title="Walter Hooper" label="Walter Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q49615" start="42352" end="42366" title="Rowan Williams" label="Rowan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044868" start="42543" end="42563" title="Roger Lancelyn Green" label="Roger Lancelyn Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769106" start="42612" end="42623" title="Shadowlands (TV Movie)" label="Shadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q706935" start="42633" end="42650" title="William Nicholson (writer)" label="William Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q471879" start="42768" end="42780" title="Joss Ackland" label="Joss Ackland"/>
<link wikidata="Q235622" start="42785" end="42797" title="Claire Bloom" label="Claire Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q269589" start="42847" end="42862" title="Nigel Hawthorne" label="Nigel Hawthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403132" start="42913" end="42924" title="Shadowlands (1993 film)" label="Shadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="42940" end="42955" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q229009" start="42960" end="42972" title="Debra Winger" label="Debra Winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659427" start="43031" end="43045" title="A Severe Mercy" label="A Severe Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493564" start="43084" end="43100" title="Sheldon Vanauken" label="Sheldon Vanauken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060636" start="43273" end="43287" title="Daniel Handler" label="Daniel Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q213841" start="43301" end="43331" title="A Series of Unfortunate Events" label="A Series of Unfortunate Events"/>
<link wikidata="Q211893" start="43339" end="43350" title="Eoin Colfer" label="Eoin Colfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q325283" start="43364" end="43376" title="Artemis Fowl (series)" label="Artemis Fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q190220" start="43384" end="43398" title="Philip Pullman" label="Philip Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q129240" start="43412" end="43430" title="His Dark Materials" label="His Dark Materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="43442" end="43455" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="43469" end="43481" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="43503" end="43510" title="atheism" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="43869" end="43890" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q363810" start="43942" end="43952" title="Tim Powers" label="Tim Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634290" start="44094" end="44107" title="Walter Hooper" label="Walter Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377083" start="44109" end="44126" title="Kathryn Lindskoog" label="Kathryn Lindskoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q354538" start="44310" end="44325" title="Douglas Gresham" label="Douglas Gresham"/>
<link wikidata="Q477831" start="44577" end="44603" title="The Magician&amp;#x27;s Nephew" label="The Magician&amp;#x27;s Nephew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625366" start="44635" end="44643" title="Holywood, County Down" label="Holywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7261714" start="44856" end="44867" title="Pusey House, Oxford" label="Pusey House"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45093" end="45130" title="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe" label="The Lion, the Witch, and the Wardrobe"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45151" end="45165" title="The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian" label="Prince Caspian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="45189" end="45219" title="The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader" label="The Voyage of the Dawn Treader"/>
<link wikidata="Q609457" start="45282" end="45327" title="The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica" label="The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica"/>
<link wikidata="Q609457" start="45344" end="45357" title="James A. Owen" label="James A. Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769812" start="45390" end="45406" title="Mark St. Germain" label="Mark St. Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="45516" end="45529" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q116032513" start="45649" end="45674" title="Freud&amp;#x27;s Last Session" label="Freud&amp;#x27;s Last Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q65932" start="45708" end="45723" title="Anthony Hopkins" label="Anthony Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q317337" start="45737" end="45750" title="Matthew Goode" label="Matthew Goode"/>
<link wikidata="Q78485" start="45816" end="45826" title="Anna Freud" label="Anna Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866182" start="45838" end="45852" title="Liv Lisa Fries" label="Liv Lisa Fries"/>
<link wikidata="Q112161130" start="45870" end="45896" title="The Most Reluctant Convert" label="The Most Reluctant Convert"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="45906" end="45924" title="biographical drama" label="biographical drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q89800297" start="45984" end="46007" title="CS Lewis Nature Reserve" label="CS Lewis Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765181" start="46136" end="46157" title="Marion E. Wade Center" label="Marion E. Wade Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q747179" start="46161" end="46176" title="Wheaton College (Illinois)" label="Wheaton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q851650" start="46248" end="46260" title="Courtly love" label="Courtly love"/>
<link wikidata="Q276280" start="46263" end="46277" title="Johan Huizinga" label="Johan Huizinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203866" start="46280" end="46299" title="D. W. Robertson Jr." label="D. W. Robertson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="46794" end="46828" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University of Belfast" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University of Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330166" start="46976" end="46991" title="Joan K. Ostling" label="Joan K. Ostling"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728158" start="47134" end="47145" title="James Como" label="Como, James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892159" start="47657" end="47677" title="Christopher Derrick" label="Derrick, Christopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895718" start="47900" end="47933" title="University of Massachusetts Press" label="University of Massachusetts Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15458143" start="48290" end="48303" title="Colin Duriez" label="Duriez, Colin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948933" start="48970" end="48986" title="Alastair Fowler" label="Fowler, Alastair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702334" start="49083" end="49097" title="Helen Gardner (critic)" label="Gardner, Helen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310041" start="49391" end="49402" title="Clyde Kilby" label="Clyde Kilby"/>
<link wikidata="Q354538" start="49489" end="49505" title="Douglas Gresham" label="Gresham, Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131753657" start="49728" end="49744" title="William Griffin (author)" label="Griffin, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213345" start="49981" end="49994" title="Joel D. Heck" label="Heck, Joel D."/>
<link wikidata="Q2310041" start="50380" end="50395" title="Clyde S. Kilby" label="Kilby, Clyde S."/>
<link wikidata="Q20675612" start="51044" end="51057" title="Laura Miller (writer)" label="Miller, Laura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237584" start="51130" end="51142" title="David Mills (editor)" label="Mills, David"/>
<link wikidata="Q95103" start="51259" end="51273" title="Joseph Pearce" label="Pearce, Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452353" start="51638" end="51652" title="Harry Lee Poe" label="Poe, Harry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101901" start="51938" end="51951" title="George Sayer (biographer)" label="Sayer, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q105428130" start="52500" end="52517" title="Charles A. Huttar" label="Charles A. Huttar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990340" start="53521" end="53534" title="Michael Ward (scholar)" label="Ward, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160851" start="53697" end="53711" title="Michael White (author)" label="White, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q747179" start="54196" end="54211" title="Wheaton College (Illinois)" label="Wheaton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099499" start="54239" end="54270" title="The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction" label="Encyclopedia of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732033" start="54304" end="54327" title="The Encyclopedia of Fantasy" label="Encyclopedia of Fantasy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5814" wikidata="Q5254574" url="?curid=5814" title="Chinese dominoes">
<text>Chinese dominoes are used in several tile-based games, namely, tien gow, pai gow, tiu u and kap tai shap. In Cantonese they are called (), which literally means &quot;bone tiles&quot;; it is also the name of a northern Chinese game, where the rules are quite different from the southern Chinese version of tien gow.

==History==
Ming author Xie Zhaozhe (1567–1624) records the legend of dominoes having been presented to Song Emperor Huizong in 1112. However the contemporary Li Qingzhao (1084 – ) made no mention of dominoes in her compendium of games.

In China, early &quot;domino&quot; tiles were functionally identical to playing cards. An identifiable version of Chinese dominoes developed in the 12th or 13th century.

The oldest confirmed written mention of dominoes in China comes from the &quot;Former Events in Wulin&quot; (i.e. the capital Hangzhou) written by the Yuan Dynasty (1271–1368) author Zhou Mi (1232–1298), who listed &quot;pupai&quot; (gambling plaques or dominoes) as well as dice as items sold by peddlers during the reign of Song Emperor Xiaozong (). Andrew Lo asserts that Zhou Mi meant dominoes when referring to &quot;pupai&quot;, since the Ming author Lu Rong (1436–1494) explicitly defined &quot;pupai&quot; as dominoes (in regards to a story of a suitor who won a maiden&#x27;s hand by drawing out four winning &quot;pupai&quot; from a set). Tiles dating from the 12th to 14th centuries have survived. Unlike most modern tiles they are white with black and red pips.

The earliest known manual written about dominoes is the &quot;Manual of the Xuanhe Period&quot; () written by Qu You (1341–1427), but some Chinese scholars believe this manual is a forgery from a later time. In the &quot;Encyclopedia of a Myriad of Treasures&quot;, Zhang Pu (1602–1641) described the game of laying out dominoes as &quot;pupai&quot;, although the character for &quot;pu&quot; had changed, yet retained a similar pronunciation.

During the Qing dynasty (1644-1912), the suits known as &quot;Chinese&quot; and &quot;barbarian&quot; were renamed to &quot;civil&quot; and &quot;military&quot; respectively to avoid offending the ruling Manchus. Tiles with blank ends, like those found in Western &quot;double-six&quot; dominoes, once existed during the 17th century. These games employed two sets of &quot;double-six&quot; tiles. It is possible that these were the types of dominoes that made it to Europe the following century. However, the 32-piece Chinese domino set, made to represent each possible face of two thrown dice and thus have no blank faces, differs from the 28-piece domino set found in the West during the mid 18th century. Chinese dominoes with blank faces were known during the 17th century.
Each domino originally represented one of the 21 results of throwing two six-sided dice (2d6). One half of each domino is set with the pips from one die and the other half contains the pips from the second die. Chinese sets also introduce duplicates of some throws and divide the tiles into two suits: military and civil. Chinese dominoes are also longer than typical European ones.

Traditional Chinese domino games include &quot;Tien Gow, Pai Gow, Che Deng&quot;, and others.

==Deck composition and ranking==

Each tile pattern in the Chinese domino set is equivalent to a single outcome when two six-sided dice are thrown. Each combination is only used once, so there are 21 unique possible patterns. Eleven of these 21 unique patterns are repeated to make a total of 32 tiles in a Chinese dominoes set. The 32-tile set is divided into two &quot;suits&quot; or groups called &quot;military&quot; and &quot;civil&quot;. There are no markings on the tiles to distinguish these suits; a player must simply remember which tiles belong to which group. There are two each of the eleven civil suit tiles (6-6, 1-1, 4-4, 1-3, 5-5, 3-3, 2-2, 5-6, 4-6, 1-6, 1-5) and one each of the ten military suit tiles (3-6, 4-5; 2-6, 3-5; 2-5, 3-4; 2-4; 1-4, 2-3; 1-2).

===Civil suit===
Each civil tile also has a Chinese name. Here are the Cantonese names and rough English translations:
* 6-6 is &quot;tin&quot; ( heaven)
* 1-1 is &quot;dei&quot; ( earth)
* 4-4 is &quot;yan&quot; ( man)
* 1-3 is &quot;ngo&quot; ( goose or harmony)
* 5-5 is &quot;mui&quot; ( plum flower)
* 3-3 is &quot;cheung&quot; ( long)
* 2-2 is &quot;ban&quot; ( board)
* 5-6 is &quot;fu&quot; ( hatchet)
* 4-6 is &quot;ping&quot; ( partition)
* 1-6 is &quot;tsat&quot; ( long leg seven)
* 1-5 is &quot;luk&quot; ( big head six)

The civil tiles are ranked according to the Chinese cultural significance of the tile names, and must be memorized. The hendiatris of () dates back for over two thousand years while the harmony () of the three have been in dice and domino games since at least the Ming dynasty. Remembering the suits and rankings of the tiles is easier if one understands the Chinese names of the tiles and the symbolism behind them.

===Military suit===
The military tiles are named and ranked according to the total pips or points on the tiles. For example, the &quot;nines&quot; (3-6 and 4-5) rank higher than the &quot;eights&quot; (2-6 and 3-5). The rankings of the individual tiles are similar in most games. However, the ranking of combinations of tiles is slightly different in Pai Gow and Tien Gow.

Since there is only one of each military tile, these are usually grouped in four mixed &quot;pairs&quot; of equivalent total points: nines, eights, sevens, and fives; for example, the 3-6 and 4-5 tiles &quot;match&quot; because they have same total points (nine) and both are in the military suit. Among the military tiles, individual tiles of the same pair rank equally, such as 1-4 and 2-3, each totaling five.
The 2-4 (six) and 1-2 (three) military tiles also are paired together in many games despite the nominal difference in total points. They are the only tiles in the entire set that have no corresponding tile in the military suit, considering sums. In Pai Gow both of these tiles may be scored as three or six, depending on which is more advantageous. This pair when played together is considered a suit on its own, called the &quot;gi jun&quot; ( supreme). It is the highest ranking pair in the game of Pai Gow, though the tiles rank low individually (in their normal order). When either tile of this pair is played individually in the game of Tien Gow, each takes its regular ranking according to the total points among the other military suit tiles.

===Physical characteristics===
Stewart Culin stated that traditional dominoes are made of Chinese ebony with measurements of long, wide, and thick.

Values are marked with white and red pips. Using the same coloring scheme as traditional Chinese dice, every half-domino with 1 or 4 pips has those pips colored red; for example, the 4-5 domino has four red pips and five white pips. The only exception is the pair of 6-6 tiles. Half of the pips on the 6-6 domino are colored red to make them stand out as the top ranking tiles.

Typically, one of the short edges is marked with a single red pip, and the backs may be marked with three pips, arrayed diagonally white-red-white.

===Variants===

There are also sets with where the tiles have Xiangqi characters next to the pips. As Xiangqi also has 32 pieces, these dual use sets can be used to play Giog.

Variant sets include the Digging Flowers () game, which use the same 21 patterns generated by the 2d6 combination; some tiles have flowers or frames printed on them while others have their values duplicated. In addition, a Digging Flowers set may include several bonus tiles from mahjong, including flower, season, and blank tiles.

Dominoes from Korea also come in a set of 32 and bear markings schematically identical to Chinese dominoes, based on the throw of two dice, although the tiles are closer in size and shape to those used in mahjong, measuring , and the pip size may vary, especially for the 1- and 4-pip halves. The pairings for the &quot;military&quot; suit also differ: 1-2 and 4-5; 1-4 and 2-3, 2-4 and 3-4, 2-5 and 3-5, and 2-6 and 3-6.

Chinese Dominoes may also appear in a card format (:zh:纸骨牌). () have the 21 patterns (from the 2d6 combinations) quadruplicated to form an 84-card deck. Si Chuan Cards () may have the 21 patterns plus two additional cards (the &quot;listen - use&quot; and the &quot;god of wealth&quot;) duplicated up to 5 times to form a 115-card deck.

==Bone tiles game==

The eponymous game of Bone Tiles (&quot;gǔpái&quot; in Mandarin) is played in northern and central China and as far south as Hunan. The name suggests that it is or became the default game played with dominoes in those regions. It is a trick-taking game similar to Tien Gow but has been simplified. In single-tile tricks, the civil and military suits have been merged into a single suit. In double-tile tricks, there is a new ranking order similar to Pai Gow. Triple-tile and quadruple-tile tricks are not allowed as in older versions of Tien Gow. Scoring has been simplified to number of stacks won.

==References==
===Works cited===

==External links==
* Domino games rules (including Chinese Dominoes)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5254574" start="0" end="16" title="Chinese dominoes" label="Chinese dominoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272194" start="37" end="52" title="tile-based game" label="tile-based game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801031" start="63" end="71" title="Tien Gow" label="tien gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278119" start="73" end="80" title="pai gow" label="pai gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="109" end="118" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="329" end="333" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q32907" start="387" end="393" title="domino" label="domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="421" end="425" title="Song Dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7486" start="426" end="441" title="Emperor Huizong of Song" label="Emperor Huizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q464470" start="476" end="487" title="Li Qingzhao" label="Li Qingzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646528" start="627" end="640" title="Chinese playing cards" label="playing cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="852" end="860" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="877" end="889" title="Yuan Dynasty" label="Yuan Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="1001" end="1005" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492" start="1057" end="1073" title="Emperor Xiaozong of Song" label="Emperor Xiaozong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820709" start="1183" end="1190" title="Lu Rong" label="Lu Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q710519" start="1611" end="1617" title="Qu You" label="Qu You"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1957" end="1969" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030751" start="2002" end="2047" title="Hua–Yi distinction" label="&amp;quot;Chinese&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;barbarian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973041" start="2064" end="2106" title="Wen and wu" label="&amp;quot;civil&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;military&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="2150" end="2157" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2614" end="2625" title="Western world" label="in the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q27905" start="3020" end="3025" title="Suit (cards)" label="suits"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801031" start="3156" end="3164" title="Tien Gow" label="Tien Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278119" start="3166" end="3173" title="Pai Gow" label="Pai Gow"/>
<link wikidata="Q45089" start="3335" end="3339" title="dice" label="dice"/>
<link wikidata="Q157763" start="4271" end="4275" title="Prunus mume" label="plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152802" start="4634" end="4644" title="hendiatris" label="hendiatris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889722" start="6501" end="6514" title="Stewart Culin" label="Stewart Culin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="6568" end="6573" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q191448" start="7209" end="7216" title="Xiangqi" label="Xiangqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15220892" start="7349" end="7364" title="Digging Flowers" label="Digging Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12263" start="7604" end="7611" title="mahjong" label="mahjong"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8131" end="8138" title=":zh:纸骨牌" label=":zh:纸骨牌"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8233" end="8247" title="Si Chuan Cards" label="Si Chuan Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="8564" end="8569" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191150" start="8674" end="8691" title="trick-taking game" label="trick-taking game"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5816" wikidata="Q102416" url="?curid=5816" title="Cenozoic">
<text>The Cenozoic Era ( ; ) is Earth&#x27;s current geological era, representing the last 66million years of Earth&#x27;s history. It is characterized by the dominance of mammals, insects, birds and angiosperms (flowering plants). It is the latest of three geological eras of the Phanerozoic Eon, preceded by the Mesozoic and Paleozoic. The Cenozoic started with the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event, when many species, including the non-avian dinosaurs, became extinct in an event attributed by most experts to the impact of a large asteroid or other celestial body, the Chicxulub impactor.

The Cenozoic is also known as the Age of Mammals because the terrestrial animals that dominated both hemispheres were mammalsthe eutherians (placentals) in the Northern Hemisphere and the metatherians (marsupials, now mainly restricted to Australia and to some extent South America) in the Southern Hemisphere. The extinction of many groups allowed mammals and birds to greatly diversify so that large mammals and birds dominated life on Earth. The continents also moved into their current positions during this era.

The climate during the early Cenozoic was warmer than today, particularly during the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum. However, the Eocene to Oligocene transition and the Quaternary glaciation dried and cooled Earth.

==Nomenclature==
&quot;Cenozoic&quot; derives from the Greek words ( &#x27;new&#x27;) and ( &#x27;life&#x27;). The name was proposed in 1840 by the British geologist John Phillips (1800–1874), who originally spelled it &quot;Kainozoic&quot;. The era is also known as the &quot;Cænozoic&quot;, &quot;Caenozoic&quot;, or &quot;Cainozoic&quot; ().

In name, the Cenozoic () is comparable to the preceding Mesozoic (&#x27;middle life&#x27;) and Paleozoic (&#x27;old life&#x27;) Eras, as well as to the Proterozoic (&#x27;earlier life&#x27;) Eon.

==Divisions==
The Cenozoic is divided into three periods: the Paleogene, Neogene, and Quaternary; and seven epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene, Oligocene, Miocene, Pliocene, Pleistocene, and Holocene. The Quaternary Period was officially recognised by the International Commission on Stratigraphy in June 2009. In 2004, the Tertiary Period was officially replaced by the Paleogene and Neogene Periods. The common use of epochs during the Cenozoic helps palaeontologists better organise and group the many significant events that occurred during this comparatively short interval of time. Knowledge of this era is more detailed than any other era because of the relatively young, well-preserved rocks associated with it.

===Paleogene===
The Paleogene spans from the extinction of non-avian dinosaurs, 66 million years ago, to the dawn of the Neogene, 23.03 million years ago. It features three epochs: the Paleocene, Eocene and Oligocene. 

The Paleocene Epoch lasted from 66 million to 56 million years ago. Modern placental mammals originated during this time. The devastation of the K–Pg extinction event included the extinction of large herbivores, which permitted the spread of dense but usually species-poor forests. The Early Paleocene saw the recovery of Earth. The continents began to take their modern shape, but all the continents and the subcontinent of India were separated from each other. Afro-Eurasia was separated by the Tethys Sea, and the Americas were separated by the strait of Panama, as the isthmus had not yet formed. This epoch featured a general warming trend, with jungles eventually reaching the poles. The oceans were dominated by sharks as the large reptiles that had once predominated were extinct. Archaic mammals filled the world such as creodonts (extinct carnivores, unrelated to existing Carnivora).

The Eocene Epoch ranged from 56 million years to 33.9 million years ago. In the Early-Eocene, species living in dense forest were unable to evolve into larger forms, as in the Paleocene. Among them were early primates, whales and horses along with many other early forms of mammals. At the top of the food chains were huge birds, such as Paracrax. Carbon dioxide levels were approximately 1,400 ppm. The temperature was 30 degrees Celsius with little temperature gradient from pole to pole. In the Mid-Eocene, the Antarctic Circumpolar Current between Australia and Antarctica formed. This disrupted ocean currents worldwide and as a result caused a global cooling effect, shrinking the jungles. This allowed mammals to grow to mammoth proportions, such as whales which, by that time, had become almost fully aquatic. Mammals like &quot;Andrewsarchus&quot; were at the top of the food-chain. The Late Eocene saw the rebirth of seasons, which caused the expansion of savanna-like areas, along with the evolution of grasses. The end of the Eocene was marked by the Eocene–Oligocene extinction event, the European face of which is known as the Grande Coupure.

The Oligocene Epoch spans from 33.9 million to 23.03 million years ago. The Oligocene featured the expansion of grasslands which had led to many new species to evolve, including the first elephants, cats, dogs, marsupials and many other species still prevalent today. Many other species of plants evolved in this period too. A cooling period featuring seasonal rains was still in effect. Mammals still continued to grow larger and larger.

===Neogene===
The Neogene spans from 23.03 million to 2.58 million years ago. It features two epochs: the Miocene, and the Pliocene.

The Miocene Epoch spans from 23.03 to 5.333 million years ago and is a period in which grasses spread further, dominating a large portion of the world, at the expense of forests. Kelp forests evolved, encouraging the evolution of new species, such as sea otters. During this time, Perissodactyla thrived, and evolved into many different varieties. Apes evolved into 30 species. The Tethys Sea finally closed with the creation of the Arabian Peninsula, leaving only remnants as the Black, Red, Mediterranean and Caspian Seas. This increased aridity. Many new plants evolved: 95% of modern seed plants families were present by the end of the Miocene.

The Pliocene Epoch lasted from 5.333 to 2.58 million years ago. The Pliocene featured dramatic climatic changes, which ultimately led to modern species of flora and fauna. The Mediterranean Sea dried up for several million years (because the ice ages reduced sea levels, disconnecting the Atlantic from the Mediterranean, and evaporation rates exceeded inflow from rivers). &quot;Australopithecus&quot; evolved in Africa, beginning the human branch. The Isthmus of Panama formed, and animals migrated between North and South America during the great American interchange, wreaking havoc on local ecologies. Climatic changes brought: savannas that are still continuing to spread across the world; Indian monsoons; deserts in central Asia; and the beginnings of the Sahara desert. The world map has not changed much since, save for changes brought about by the glaciations of the Quaternary, such as the Great Lakes, Hudson Bay, and the Baltic Sea.

===Quaternary===
The Quaternary spans from 2.58 million years ago to present day, and is the shortest geological period in the Phanerozoic Eon. It features modern animals, and dramatic changes in the climate. It is divided into two epochs: the Pleistocene and the Holocene.
The Pleistocene lasted from 2.58 million to 11,700 years ago. This epoch was marked by ice ages as a result of the cooling trend that started in the Mid-Eocene. There were at least four separate glaciation periods marked by the advance of ice caps as far south as 40° N in mountainous areas. Meanwhile, Africa experienced a trend of desiccation which resulted in the creation of the Sahara, Namib, and Kalahari deserts. Many animals evolved including mammoths, giant ground sloths, dire wolves, sabre-toothed cats, and &quot;Homo sapiens&quot;. 100,000 years ago marked the end of one of the worst droughts in Africa, and led to the expansion of primitive humans. As the Pleistocene drew to a close, a major extinction wiped out much of the world&#x27;s megafauna, including some of the hominid species, such as Neanderthals. All the continents were affected, but Africa to a lesser extent. It still retains many large animals, such as hippos.

The Holocene began 11,700 years ago and lasts to the present day. All recorded history and &quot;the Human history&quot; lies within the boundaries of the Holocene Epoch. Human activity is blamed for a mass extinction that began roughly 10,000 years ago, though the species becoming extinct have only been recorded since the Industrial Revolution. This is sometimes referred to as the &quot;Sixth Extinction&quot;. It is often cited that over 322 recorded species have become extinct due to human activity since the Industrial Revolution, but the rate may be as high as 500 vertebrate species alone, the majority of which have occurred after 1900.

==Tectonics==
Geologically, the Cenozoic is the era when the continents moved into their current positions. Australia-New Guinea, having split from Pangea during the early Cretaceous, drifted north and, eventually, collided with Southeast Asia; Antarctica moved into its current position over the South Pole; the Atlantic Ocean widened and, later in the era (2.8 million years ago), South America became attached to North America with the isthmus of Panama.

India collided with Asia creating the Himalayas; Arabia collided with Eurasia, closing the Tethys Ocean and creating the Zagros Mountains, around .

The break-up of Gondwana in Late Cretaceous and Cenozoic times led to a shift in the river courses of various large African rivers including the Congo, Niger, Nile, Orange, Limpopo and Zambezi.

==Climate==
In the Cretaceous, the climate was hot and humid with lush forests at the poles, there was no permanent ice and sea levels were around 300 metres higher than today. This continued for the first 10 million years of the Paleocene, culminating in the Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum about . Around , Earth entered a period of long term cooling. This was mainly due to the collision of India with Eurasia, which caused the rise of the Himalayas: the upraised rocks eroded and reacted with in the air, causing a long-term reduction in the proportion of this greenhouse gas in the atmosphere. Around , permanent ice began to build up on Antarctica. The cooling trend continued in the Miocene, with relatively short warmer periods. When South America became attached to North America creating the Isthmus of Panama around , the Arctic region cooled due to the strengthening of the Humboldt and Gulf Stream currents, eventually leading to the glaciations of the Quaternary ice age, the current interglacial of which is the Holocene Epoch.
Recent analysis of the geomagnetic reversal frequency, oxygen isotope record, and tectonic plate subduction rate, which are indicators of the changes in the heat flux at the core mantle boundary, climate and plate tectonic activity, shows that all these changes indicate similar rhythms on million years&#x27; timescale in the Cenozoic Era occurring with the common fundamental periodicity of ~13 Myr during most of the time. The levels of carbonate ions in the ocean fell over the course of the Cenozoic.

==Life==

Early in the Cenozoic, following the K-Pg event, the planet was dominated by relatively small fauna, including small mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians. From a geological perspective, it did not take long for mammals to greatly diversify in the absence of the dinosaurs that had dominated during the Mesozoic. Birds also diversified rapidly; some flightless birds grew larger than humans. These species are sometimes referred to as &quot;terror birds&quot;, and were formidable predators. Mammals came to occupy almost every available niche (both marine and terrestrial), and some also grew very large, attaining sizes not seen in most of today&#x27;s terrestrial mammals. The ranges of many Cenozoic bird clades were governed by latitude and temperature and have contracted over the course of this era as the world cooled.

During the Cenozoic, mammals proliferated from a few small, simple, generalised forms into a diverse collection of terrestrial, marine, and flying animals, giving this period its other name, the Age of Mammals. The Cenozoic is just as much the age of savannas, the age of co-dependent flowering plants and insects, and the age of birds. Grasses also played a very important role in this era, shaping the evolution of the birds and mammals that fed on them. One group that diversified significantly in the Cenozoic as well were the snakes. Evolving in the Cenozoic, the variety of snakes increased tremendously, resulting in many colubrids, following the evolution of their current primary prey source, the rodents.

In the earlier part of the Cenozoic, the world was dominated by the gastornithid birds, terrestrial crocodylians like &quot;Pristichampsus&quot;, large sharks such as Otodus, and a handful of primitive large mammal groups like uintatheres, mesonychians, and pantodonts. But as the forests began to recede and the climate began to cool, other mammals took over.

The Cenozoic is full of mammals both strange and familiar, including chalicotheres, creodonts, whales, primates, entelodonts, sabre-toothed cats, mastodons and mammoths, three-toed horses, giant rhinoceros like &quot;Paraceratherium&quot;, the rhinoceros-like brontotheres, various bizarre groups of mammals from South America, such as the vaguely elephant-like pyrotheres and the dog-like marsupial relatives called borhyaenids and the monotremes and marsupials of Australia. Mammal evolution in the Cenozoic was predominantly shaped by climatic and geological processes.

Cenozoic calcareous nannoplankton experienced rapid rates of speciation and reduced species longevity, while suffering prolonged declines in diversity during the Eocene and Neogene. Diatoms, in contrast, experienced major diversification over the Eocene, especially at high latitudes, as the world&#x27;s oceans cooled. Diatom diversification was particularly concentrated at the Eocene-Oligocene boundary. A second major pulse of diatom diversification occurred over the course of the Middle and Late Miocene.

==See also==

* Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary (K–T boundary)
* Geologic time scale
* Late Cenozoic Ice Age

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
* Western Australian Museum – The Age of the Mammals
* Cenozoic (chronostratigraphy scale)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="4" end="16" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="58" end="61" title="Era (geology)" label="era"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="166" end="172" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="184" end="188" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="194" end="204" title="flowering plant" label="angiosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="275" end="286" title="Phanerozoic" label="Phanerozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="287" end="290" title="Eon (geology)" label="Eon"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="308" end="316" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75507" start="321" end="330" title="Paleozoic" label="Paleozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="362" end="399" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="444" end="453" title="dinosaurs" label="dinosaurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q55816" start="572" end="590" title="Chicxulub impactor" label="Chicxulub impactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="627" end="641" title="Cenozoic" label="Age of Mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092469" start="722" end="730" title="eutheria" label="eutheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25833" start="734" end="743" title="placental" label="placental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096960" start="781" end="791" title="metatheria" label="metatheria"/>
<link wikidata="Q25336" start="795" end="804" title="marsupial" label="marsupial"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="832" end="841" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="861" end="874" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q55826" start="1196" end="1228" title="Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum" label="Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="1243" end="1249" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="1253" end="1262" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="1282" end="1303" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Quaternary glaciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701428" start="1495" end="1508" title="John Phillips (geologist)" label="John Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q55810" start="1934" end="1943" title="Paleogene" label="Paleogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q103924" start="1945" end="1952" title="Neogene" label="Neogene"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="1958" end="1968" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="1980" end="1985" title="Epoch (geology)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="1992" end="2001" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="2003" end="2009" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="2011" end="2020" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="2022" end="2029" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="2031" end="2039" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="2041" end="2052" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="2058" end="2066" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q402104" start="2123" end="2163" title="International Commission on Stratigraphy" label="International Commission on Stratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188645" start="2191" end="2206" title="Tertiary Period" label="Tertiary Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="2320" end="2335" title="palaeontologist" label="palaeontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="2761" end="2766" title="epoch (geology)" label="epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="2773" end="2782" title="Paleocene" label="Paleocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="2784" end="2790" title="Eocene" label="Eocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="2795" end="2804" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76252" start="2812" end="2827" title="Paleocene Epoch" label="Paleocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="2953" end="2974" title="K–Pg extinction event" label="K–Pg extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="3008" end="3018" title="Herbivore" label="herbivores"/>
<link wikidata="Q27527" start="3271" end="3283" title="Afro-Eurasia" label="Afro-Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="3305" end="3315" title="Tethys Sea" label="Tethys Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="3381" end="3388" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q691406" start="3638" end="3647" title="creodonts" label="creodonts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="3691" end="3700" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q76274" start="3708" end="3720" title="Eocene Epoch" label="Eocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259259" start="4042" end="4050" title="Paracrax" label="Paracrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="4099" end="4102" title="Parts per million" label="ppm"/>
<link wikidata="Q55828" start="4218" end="4247" title="Antarctic Circumpolar Current" label="Antarctic Circumpolar Current"/>
<link wikidata="Q133214" start="4541" end="4554" title="Andrewsarchus" label="Andrewsarchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="4718" end="4725" title="grasses" label="grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542955" start="4767" end="4800" title="Eocene–Oligocene extinction event" label="Eocene–Oligocene extinction event"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542955" start="4845" end="4859" title="Grande Coupure" label="Grande Coupure"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="4866" end="4881" title="Oligocene Epoch" label="Oligocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="5440" end="5453" title="Miocene Epoch" label="Miocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="5523" end="5530" title="grasses" label="grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055316" start="5615" end="5619" title="Kelp" label="Kelp"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="5687" end="5696" title="sea otter" label="sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25374" start="5717" end="5731" title="Perissodactyla" label="Perissodactyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="5784" end="5788" title="Apes" label="Apes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="5818" end="5828" title="Tethys Sea" label="Tethys Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q31945" start="5869" end="5886" title="Arabian Peninsula" label="Arabian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="5917" end="5922" title="Black Sea" label="Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="5924" end="5927" title="Red Sea" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="5929" end="5942" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="5947" end="5958" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25814" start="6024" end="6035" title="Spermatophyte" label="seed plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="6090" end="6104" title="Pliocene Epoch" label="Pliocene Epoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="6328" end="6335" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="6375" end="6383" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q103237" start="6466" end="6482" title="Australopithecus" label="Australopithecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="6500" end="6506" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="6540" end="6557" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="6595" end="6600" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="6605" end="6618" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q278170" start="6630" end="6656" title="great American interchange" label="great American interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="6719" end="6726" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="6789" end="6796" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8514" start="6799" end="6805" title="desert" label="desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="6818" end="6822" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="6850" end="6856" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q602963" start="6945" end="6956" title="glaciations" label="glaciations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="6988" end="6999" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040" start="7001" end="7011" title="Hudson Bay" label="Hudson Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="7021" end="7031" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="7055" end="7065" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q101313" start="7161" end="7176" title="Phanerozoic Eon" label="Phanerozoic Eon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="7312" end="7323" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="7395" end="7403" title="ice ages" label="ice ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="7641" end="7652" title="desiccation" label="desiccation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="7691" end="7697" title="Sahara desert" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q131377" start="7699" end="7704" title="Namib Desert" label="Namib"/>
<link wikidata="Q47700" start="7710" end="7718" title="Kalahari Desert" label="Kalahari"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="7759" end="7766" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q933583" start="7769" end="7788" title="giant ground sloths" label="giant ground sloths"/>
<link wikidata="Q496689" start="7790" end="7801" title="dire wolves" label="dire wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="7833" end="7845" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="8120" end="8131" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="8257" end="8265" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="8354" end="8367" title="Human history" label="Human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="8578" end="8599" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="8644" end="8660" title="Sixth Extinction" label="Sixth Extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="8916" end="8928" title="Geology" label="Geologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107" start="8963" end="8972" title="continent" label="continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960" start="9010" end="9030" title="Australia (continent)" label="Australia-New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="9050" end="9056" title="Pangea" label="Pangea"/>
<link wikidata="Q44626" start="9074" end="9084" title="Cretaceous" label="Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="9131" end="9145" title="South-east Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="9147" end="9157" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q933" start="9199" end="9209" title="South Pole" label="South Pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="9215" end="9229" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="9285" end="9298" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="9318" end="9331" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="9341" end="9358" title="isthmus of Panama" label="isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q208136" start="9452" end="9464" title="Tethys Ocean" label="Tethys Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q167021" start="9482" end="9498" title="Zagros Mountains" label="Zagros Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q338199" start="9538" end="9553" title="Late Cretaceous" label="Late Cretaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503" start="9655" end="9660" title="Congo River" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542" start="9662" end="9667" title="Niger River" label="Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="9669" end="9673" title="Nile" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q181475" start="9675" end="9681" title="Orange River" label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q173017" start="9683" end="9690" title="Limpopo River" label="Limpopo"/>
<link wikidata="Q43106" start="9695" end="9702" title="Zambezi River" label="Zambezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55826" start="9965" end="9997" title="Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum" label="Paleocene–Eocene Thermal Maximum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="10149" end="10158" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="10396" end="10403" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q182139" start="10508" end="10525" title="Isthmus of Panama" label="Isthmus of Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q143888" start="10592" end="10600" title="Humboldt Current" label="Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="10605" end="10616" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040770" start="10672" end="10690" title="Quaternary glaciation" label="Quaternary ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q487294" start="10704" end="10716" title="interglacial" label="interglacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="10733" end="10741" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q55811" start="11303" end="11313" title="Cretaceous-Paleogene Extinction Event" label="K-Pg event"/>
<link wikidata="Q752173" start="11710" end="11721" title="terror bird" label="terror bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="11807" end="11812" title="ecological niche" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="11830" end="11841" title="terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12118" end="12138" title="Mammal evolution#Expansion of ecological niches in the Mesozoic" label="mammals proliferated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248864" start="12212" end="12223" title="Terrestrial animal" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q382441" start="12225" end="12231" title="Marine mammal" label="marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="12237" end="12243" title="bat" label="flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="12348" end="12355" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="12382" end="12397" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="12403" end="12409" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="12434" end="12441" title="Grasses" label="Grasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="12628" end="12633" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q182751" start="12726" end="12735" title="colubrids" label="colubrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="12803" end="12809" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q131477" start="12881" end="12893" title="Gastornithidae" label="gastornithid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25363" start="12913" end="12924" title="crocodylian" label="crocodylian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455388" start="12937" end="12951" title="Pristichampsus" label="Pristichampsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293316" start="12980" end="12986" title="Otodus" label="Otodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q132815" start="13040" end="13050" title="uintathere" label="uintathere"/>
<link wikidata="Q132961" start="13053" end="13065" title="Mesonychia" label="mesonychians"/>
<link wikidata="Q132156" start="13071" end="13080" title="pantodont" label="pantodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081383" start="13244" end="13256" title="chalicothere" label="chalicothere"/>
<link wikidata="Q691406" start="13259" end="13267" title="creodont" label="creodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865281" start="13270" end="13275" title="whale" label="whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380" start="13278" end="13285" title="primate" label="primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131139" start="13288" end="13298" title="entelodont" label="entelodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q778615" start="13301" end="13318" title="sabre-toothed cat" label="sabre-toothed cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192272" start="13321" end="13329" title="mastodon" label="mastodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36715" start="13335" end="13342" title="mammoth" label="mammoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q942905" start="13345" end="13361" title="three-toed horse" label="three-toed horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="13370" end="13380" title="rhinoceros" label="rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q311212" start="13392" end="13407" title="Paraceratherium" label="Paraceratherium"/>
<link wikidata="Q132865" start="13435" end="13446" title="brontothere" label="brontothere"/>
<link wikidata="Q133505" start="13537" end="13546" title="pyrotheria" label="pyrothere"/>
<link wikidata="Q139151" start="13592" end="13603" title="borhyaenidae" label="borhyaenids"/>
<link wikidata="Q21790" start="13612" end="13621" title="monotreme" label="monotreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964635" start="13758" end="13782" title="Calcareous nannofossils" label="calcareous nannoplankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q162678" start="13931" end="13938" title="Diatom" label="Diatoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q682871" start="14277" end="14306" title="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary" label="Cretaceous–Paleogene boundary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="14324" end="14343" title="Geologic time scale" label="Geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q56926766" start="14346" end="14367" title="Late Cenozoic Ice Age" label="Late Cenozoic Ice Age"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5820" wikidata="Q9581" url="?curid=5820" title="Confucianism">
<text>Confucianism, also known as Ruism or Ru classicism, is a system of thought and behavior originating in ancient China, and is variously described as a tradition, philosophy (humanistic or rationalistic), religion, theory of government, or way of life. Confucianism developed from teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551–479 BC), during a time that was later referred to as the Hundred Schools of Thought era. Confucius considered himself a transmitter of cultural values inherited from the Xia (c. 2070–1600 BC), Shang (c. 1600–1046 BC), and Western Zhou (c. 1046–771 BC) dynasties. Confucianism was suppressed during the Legalist and autocratic Qin dynasty (221–206 BC), but survived. During the Han dynasty (206 BC – 220 AD), Confucian approaches edged out the &quot;proto-Taoist&quot; Huang–Lao as the official ideology, while the emperors mixed both with the realist techniques of Legalism.

Confucianism regards principles contained in the Five Classics, the key tenets that should be followed to promote the harmony of the family and the society as a whole. A Confucian revival began during the Tang dynasty (618–907 AD). In the late Tang, Confucianism further developed in response to the increasing influence of Buddhism and Taoism and was reformulated as Neo-Confucianism. This reinvigorated form was adopted as the basis of the imperial exams and the core philosophy of the scholar-official class in the Song dynasty (960–1297). The abolition of the examination system in 1905 marked the end of official Confucianism. The intellectuals of the New Culture Movement of the early twentieth century blamed Confucianism for China&#x27;s weaknesses. They searched for new doctrines to replace Confucian teachings; some of these new ideologies include the &quot;Three Principles of the People&quot; with the establishment of the Republic of China, and then Maoism under the People&#x27;s Republic of China. In the late twentieth century, the Confucian work ethic has been credited with the rise of the East Asian economy.

With particular emphasis on the importance of the family and social harmony, rather than on an otherworldly source of spiritual values, the core of Confucianism is humanistic. According to American philosopher Herbert Fingarette&#x27;s conceptualisation of Confucianism as a philosophical system which regards &quot;the secular as sacred&quot;, Confucianism transcends the dichotomy between religion and humanism, considering the ordinary activities of human life—and especially human relationships—as a manifestation of the sacred, because they are the expression of humanity&#x27;s moral nature (), which has a transcendent anchorage in &quot;tian&quot; (). While the Confucian concept of &quot;tian&quot; shares some similarities with the concept of a deity, it is primarily an impersonal absolute principle like the &quot;tao&quot; or the &quot;Brahman&quot;. Most scholars and practitioners do not think of &quot;tian&quot; as a god, and the deities that many Confucians worship do not originate from orthodox Confucianism. Confucianism focuses on the practical order that is given by a this-worldly awareness of &quot;tian&quot;.

The worldly concern of Confucianism rests upon the belief that human beings are fundamentally good, and teachable, improvable, and perfectible through personal and communal endeavor, especially self-cultivation and self-creation. Confucian thought focuses on the cultivation of virtue in a morally organised world. Some of the basic Confucian ethical concepts and practices include &quot;ren&quot;, &quot;yi&quot;, &quot;li&quot;, and &quot;zhi&quot;. &quot;Ren&quot; is the essence of the human being which manifests as compassion. It is the virtue-form of Heaven. &quot;Yi&quot; is the upholding of righteousness and the moral disposition to do good. &quot;Li&quot; is a system of ritual norms and propriety that determines how a person should properly act in everyday life in harmony with the law of Heaven. &quot;Zhi&quot; () is the ability to see what is right and fair, or the converse, in the behaviors exhibited by others. Confucianism holds one in contempt, either passively or actively, for failure to uphold the cardinal moral values of &quot;ren&quot; and &quot;yi&quot;.

Traditionally, cultures and countries in the Chinese cultural sphere are strongly influenced by Confucianism, including China, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, and Vietnam, as well as various territories settled predominantly by Han Chinese people, such as Singapore. Today, it has been credited for shaping East Asian societies and overseas Chinese communities, and to some extent, other parts of Asia. Most Confucianist movements have had significant differences from the original Zhou-era teachings, and are typically much more complex because of their reliance on &quot;elaborate doctrine&quot; and other factors such as traditions with long histories. In the past few decades, there have been talks of a &quot;Confucian Revival&quot; in the academic and the scholarly community, and there has been a grassroots proliferation of various types of Confucian churches. In late 2015, many Confucian personalities formally established a national Confucian Church () in China to unify the many Confucian congregations and civil society organisations.

==Terminology==

Strictly speaking, there is no term in Chinese which directly corresponds to &quot;Confucianism&quot;. The closest catch-all term for things related to Confucianism is the word &quot;ru&quot; (). Its literal meanings in modern Chinese include &#x27;scholar&#x27;, &#x27;learned&#x27;, or &#x27;refined man&#x27;. In Old Chinese the word had a distinct set of meanings, including &#x27;to tame&#x27;, &#x27;to mould&#x27;, &#x27;to educate&#x27;, and &#x27;to refine&#x27;. Several different terms, some of which with modern origin, are used in different situations to express different facets of Confucianism, including:
* – &quot;the &quot;ru&quot; school of thought&quot;;
* – &quot;&quot;ru&quot; religious doctrine&quot;;
* – &quot;&quot;ru&quot; studies&quot;;
* – &quot;Confucius&#x27;s religious doctrine&quot;;
* – &quot;Confucius&#x27;s family&#x27;s business&quot;, a pejorative phrase used during the New Culture Movement and the Cultural Revolution.

Three of them use &quot;ru&quot;. These names do not use the name &quot;Confucius&quot; at all, but instead focus on the ideal of the Confucian man. The use of the term &quot;Confucianism&quot; has been avoided by some modern scholars, who favor &quot;Ruism&quot; and &quot;Ruists&quot; instead. Robert Eno argues that the term has been &quot;burdened... with the ambiguities and irrelevant traditional associations&quot;. Ruism, as he states, is more faithful to the original Chinese name for the school.

The term &quot;Traditionalist&quot; has been suggested by David Schaberg to emphasize the connection to the past, its standards, and inherited forms, in which Confucius himself placed so much importance. This translation of the word &quot;ru&quot; is followed by e.g. Yuri Pines.

According to Zhou Youguang, &quot;ru&quot; originally referred to shamanic methods of holding rites and existed before Confucius&#x27;s times, but with Confucius it came to mean devotion to propagating such teachings to bring civilisation to the people. Confucianism was initiated by the disciples of Confucius, developed by Mencius ( 372–289 BC) and inherited by later generations, undergoing constant transformations and restructuring since its establishment, but preserving the principles of humaneness and righteousness at its core.

In the Western world, the character for water is often used as a symbol for Confucianism, which is not the case in modern China. However, the &quot;five phases&quot; were used as important symbols representing leadership in Han dynasty thought, including Confucianist works.

===Five Classics and the Confucian vision===

Traditionally, Confucius was thought to be the author or editor of the Five Classics which were the basic texts of Confucianism, all edited into their received versions around 500 years later by Imperial Librarian Liu Xin. The scholar Yao Xinzhong allows that there are good reasons to believe that Confucian classics took shape in the hands of Confucius, but that &quot;nothing can be taken for granted in the matter of the early versions of the classics&quot;. The sixth classic similar to the Classic of Poetry was the Classic of Music. It was lost during the Han Dynasty. Music carried an invaluable tool to induce focus in performing rituals. These were the internal (music) and external (rites) keys to harmonizing society. Yao suggests that most modern scholars hold the &quot;pragmatic&quot; view that Confucius and his followers did not intend to create a system of classics, but nonetheless &quot;contributed to their formation&quot;.

The scholar Tu Weiming explains these classics as embodying &quot;five visions&quot; which underlie the development of Confucianism:
* &quot;I Ching&quot; (&quot;Classic of Change&quot; or &quot;Book of Changes&quot;), generally held to be the earliest of the classics, shows a metaphysical vision which combines divinatory art with numerological technique and ethical insight; philosophy of change sees cosmos as interaction between the two energies yin and yang; universe always shows organismic unity and dynamism.
* &quot;Classic of Poetry&quot; or &quot;Book of Songs&quot; is the earliest anthology of Chinese poems and songs, with the earliest strata antedating the Zhou conquest. It shows the poetic vision in the belief that poetry and music convey common human feelings and mutual responsiveness.
* &quot;Book of Documents&quot; or &quot;Book of History&quot; is a compilation of speeches of major figures and records of events in ancient times, embodying the political vision and addressing the kingly way in terms of the ethical foundation for humane government. The documents show the sagacity, filial piety, and work ethic of mythical sage-emperors Yao, Shun, and Yu, who established a political culture which was based on responsibility and trust. Their virtue formed a covenant of social harmony which did not depend on punishment or coercion.
* &quot;Book of Rites&quot; describes the social forms, administration, and ceremonial rites of the Zhou Dynasty. This social vision defined society not as an adversarial system based on contractual relations but as a network of kinship groups bound by cultural identity and ritual practice, socially responsible for one another and the transmission of proper antique forms. The four functional occupations are cooperative (farmer, scholar, artisan, merchant).
* &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals&quot; chronicles the period to which it gives its name, Spring and Autumn period (771–481 BC), from the perspective of Confucius&#x27;s home state of Lu. These events emphasise the significance of collective memory for communal self-identification, for reanimating the old is the best way to attain the new.

==Doctrines==

===Theory and theology===

Confucianism revolves around the pursuit of the unity of the individual self and &quot;tian&quot; (&quot;heaven&quot;). To put it another way, it focuses on the relationship between humanity and heaven. The principle or way of Heaven (&quot;tian li&quot; or &quot;tian tao&quot;) is the order of the world and the source of divine authority. &quot;Tian li&quot; or &quot;tian tao&quot; is monistic, meaning that it is singular and indivisible. Individuals may realise their humanity and become one with Heaven through the contemplation of such order. This transformation of the self may be extended to the family and society to create a harmonious community. Joël Thoraval studied Confucianism as a diffused civil religion in contemporary China, finding that it expresses itself in the widespread worship of five cosmological entities: Heaven and Earth (), the sovereign or the government (), ancestors (), and masters ().

According to the scholar Stephan Feuchtwang, in Chinese cosmology, which is not merely Confucian but shared by many Chinese religions, &quot;the universe creates itself out of a primary chaos of material energy&quot; (&quot;hundun&quot; and &quot;qi&quot;), and is organized through the polarity of yin and yang that characterises any thing and life. Creation is therefore a continuous ordering; it is not creation &quot;&quot;ex nihilo&quot;.&quot; &quot;Yin and yang are the invisible and visible, the receptive and the active, the unshaped and the shaped; they characterise the yearly cycle (winter and summer), the landscape (shady and bright), the sexes (female and male), and even sociopolitical history (disorder and order). Confucianism is concerned with finding &quot;middle ways&quot; between yin and yang at every new configuration of the world.&quot;&quot;&quot;

Confucianism conciliates both the inner and outer polarities of spiritual cultivation—that is to say self-cultivation and world redemption—synthesised in the ideal of &quot;sageliness within and kingliness without&quot;. &quot;Ren&quot;, translated as &quot;humaneness&quot; or the essence proper of a human being, is the character of compassionate mind; it is the virtue endowed by Heaven and at the same time the means by which man may achieve oneness with Heaven comprehending his own origin in Heaven and therefore divine essence. In the &quot;&quot;, it is defined as &quot;to form one body with all things&quot; and &quot;when the self and others are not separated... compassion is aroused&quot;.

&quot;Lord Heaven&quot; and &quot;Jade Emperor&quot; were terms for a Confucianist supreme deity who was an anthropomorphized &quot;tian&quot;, and some conceptions of it thought of the two names as synonymous.

====&quot;Tian&quot; and the gods====

&quot;Tian&quot;, a key concept in Chinese thought, refers to the God of Heaven, the northern culmen of the skies and its spinning stars, earthly nature and its laws which come from Heaven, to &#x27;Heaven and Earth&#x27; (that is, &quot;all things&quot;), and to the awe-inspiring forces beyond human control. There are so many uses in Chinese thought that it is impossible to give a single English translation.

Confucius used the term in a mystical way. He wrote in the &quot;Analects&quot; (7.23) that &quot;tian&quot; gave him life, and that &quot;tian&quot; watched and judged (6.28; 9.12). In 9.5 Confucius says that a person may know the movements of &quot;tian&quot;, and this provides with the sense of having a special place in the universe. In 17.19 Confucius says that &quot;tian&quot; spoke to him, though not in words. The scholar Ronnie Littlejohn warns that &quot;tian&quot; was not to be interpreted as a personal God comparable to that of the Abrahamic faiths, in the sense of an otherworldly or transcendent creator. Rather it is similar to what Taoists meant by &quot;Dao&quot;: &quot;the way things are&quot; or &quot;the regularities of the world&quot;, which Stephan Feuchtwang equates with the ancient Greek concept of &quot;physis&quot;, &quot;nature&quot; as the generation and regenerations of things and of the moral order. &quot;Tian&quot; may also be compared to the &quot;Brahman&quot; of Hindu and Vedic traditions. The scholar Promise Hsu, in the wake of Robert B. Louden, explained 17:19 (&quot;What does &quot;Tian&quot; ever say? Yet there are four seasons going round and there are the hundred things coming into being. What does &quot;Tian&quot; say?&quot;) as implying that even though &quot;Tian&quot; is not a &quot;speaking person&quot;, it constantly &quot;does&quot; through the rhythms of nature, and communicates &quot;how human beings ought to live and act&quot;, at least to those who have learnt to carefully listen to it.

Duanmu Ci, a disciple of Confucius, said that &quot;Tian&quot; had set the master on the path to become a wise man (9.6). In 7.23 Confucius says that he has no doubt left that &quot;Tian&quot; gave him life, and from it he had developed right virtue (&quot;de&quot;). In 8.19, he says that the lives of the sages are interwoven with &quot;Tian&quot;.

Regarding personal gods (&quot;shen&quot;, energies who emanate from and reproduce &quot;Tian&quot;) enliving nature, in the &quot;Analects&quot; Confucius says that it is appropriate (&quot;yi&quot;) for people to worship () them, although only through proper rites (&quot;li&quot;), implying respect of positions and discretion. Confucius himself was a ritual and sacrificial master.

Answering to a disciple who asked whether it is better to sacrifice to the god of the stove or to the god of the family (a popular saying), in 3.13 Confucius says that in order to appropriately pray to gods, one should first know and respect Heaven. In 3.12, he explains that religious rituals produce meaningful experiences, and one has to offer sacrifices in person, acting in presence, otherwise &quot;it is the same as not having sacrificed at all&quot;. Rites and sacrifices to the gods have an ethical importance: they generate good life, because taking part in them leads to the overcoming of the self. Analects 10.11 tells that Confucius always took a small part of his food and placed it on the sacrificial bowls as an offering to his ancestors.

Some Confucian movements worship Confucius, although not as a supreme being or anything else approaching the power of &quot;tian&quot; or the &quot;tao&quot;, and/or gods from Chinese folk religion. These movements are not a part of mainstream Confucianism, although the boundary between Chinese folk religion and Confucianism can be blurred.

Other movements, such as Mohism which was later absorbed by Taoism, developed a more theistic idea of Heaven. Feuchtwang explains that the difference between Confucianism and Taoism primarily lies in the fact that the former focuses on the realisation of the starry order of Heaven in human society, while the latter on the contemplation of the Dao which spontaneously arises in nature. However, Confucianism does venerate many aspects of nature and also respects various &quot;tao&quot;, as well as what Confucius saw as the main &quot;tao&quot;, the &quot;[Way] of Heaven.&quot;

The Way of Heaven involves &quot;lifelong and sincere devotion to traditional cultural forms&quot; and &quot;wu wei&quot;, &quot;a state of spontaneous harmony between individual inclinations and the sacred Way&quot;.

Kelly James Clark argued that Confucius himself saw &quot;Tian&quot; as an anthropomorphic god that Clark hypothetically refers to as &quot;Heavenly Supreme Emperor&quot;, although most other scholars on Confucianism disagree with this view.

===Social morality and ethics===


As explained by Stephan Feuchtwang, the order coming from Heaven preserves the world, and has to be followed by humanity finding a &quot;middle way&quot; between yin and yang forces in each new configuration of reality. Social harmony or morality is identified as patriarchy, which is expressed in the worship of ancestors and deified progenitors in the male line, at ancestral shrines.

Confucian ethical codes are described as humanistic. They may be practiced by all the members of a society. Confucian ethics is characterised by the promotion of virtues, encompassed by the Five Constants, elaborated by Confucian scholars out of the inherited tradition during the Han dynasty. The Five Constants are:
* &quot;Ren&quot; (benevolence, humaneness)
* &quot;Yi&quot; (righteousness, justice)
* &quot;Li&quot; (propriety, rites)
* &quot;Zhi&quot; (: wisdom, knowledge)
* &quot;Xin&quot; (sincerity, faithfulness)

These are accompanied by the classical four virtues (), one of which (&quot;Yi&quot;) is also included among the Five Constants:
* &quot;Yi&quot; (see above)
* Loyalty ()
* Filial piety ()

There are many other traditionally Confucian values, such as , , , , a , , , , , and ).

====Ren====

&quot;Ren (仁 )&quot; is the Confucian virtue denoting the good feeling a virtuous human experiences when being altruistic. Internally &quot;ren&quot; can mean &quot;to look up&quot; meaning &quot;to aspire to higher Heavenly principles or ideals&quot;, It is exemplified by a normal adult&#x27;s protective feelings for children. It is considered the essence of the human being, endowed by Heaven, and at the same time the means by which someone may act according to the principle of Heaven and become one with it.

Yan Hui, Confucius&#x27;s most outstanding student, once asked his master to describe the rules of &quot;ren&quot; and Confucius replied, &quot;one should see nothing improper, hear nothing improper, say nothing improper, do nothing improper.&quot; Confucius also defined &quot;ren&quot; in the following way: &quot;wishing to be established himself, seeks also to establish others; wishing to be enlarged himself, he seeks also to enlarge others.&quot;

Another meaning of &quot;ren&quot; is &quot;not to do to others as you would not wish done to yourself.&quot; Confucius also said, &quot;&quot;ren&quot; is not far off; he who seeks it has already found it.&quot; &quot;Ren&quot; is close to man and never leaves him.

====Rite and centring====

&quot;Li&quot; () is a word which finds its most extensive use in Confucian and post-Confucian Chinese philosophy. &quot;Li&quot; is variously translated as &#x27;rite&#x27; or &#x27;reason&#x27;, &#x27;ratio&#x27; in the pure sense of Vedic (&#x27;right&#x27;, &#x27;order&#x27;) when referring to the cosmic law, but when referring to its realisation in the context of human social behaviour it has also been translated as &#x27;customs&#x27;, &#x27;measures&#x27; and &#x27;rules&#x27;, among other terms. &quot;Li&quot; also means religious rites which establish relations between humanity and the gods.

According to Stephan Feuchtwang, rites are conceived as &quot;what makes the invisible visible&quot;, making possible for humans to cultivate the underlying order of nature. Correctly performed rituals move society in alignment with earthly and heavenly (astral) forces, establishing the harmony of the three realms—Heaven, Earth and humanity. This practice is defined as &quot;centering&quot; ( or ). Among all things of creation, humans themselves are &quot;central&quot; because they have the ability to cultivate and centre natural forces.

&quot;Li&quot; embodies the entire web of interaction between humanity, human objects, and nature. Confucius includes in his discussions of &quot;li&quot; such diverse topics as learning, tea drinking, titles, mourning, and governance. Xunzi cites &quot;songs and laughter, weeping and lamentation... rice and millet, fish and meat... the wearing of ceremonial caps, embroidered robes, and patterned silks, or of fasting clothes and mourning clothes... spacious rooms and secluded halls, soft mats, couches and benches&quot; as vital parts of the fabric of &quot;li&quot;.

Confucius envisioned proper government being guided by the principles of &quot;li&quot;. Some Confucians proposed that all human beings may pursue perfection by learning and practising &quot;li&quot;. Overall, Confucians believe that governments should place more emphasis on &quot;li&quot; and rely much less on penal punishment when they govern.

====Loyalty====
Loyalty () is particularly relevant for the social class to which most of Confucius&#x27;s students belonged, because the most important way for an ambitious young scholar to become a prominent official was to enter a ruler&#x27;s civil service.

Confucius himself did not propose that &quot;might makes right&quot;, but rather that a superior should be obeyed because of his moral rectitude. In addition, loyalty does not mean subservience to authority. This is because reciprocity is demanded from the superior as well. As Confucius stated &quot;a prince should employ his minister according to the rules of propriety; ministers should serve their prince with faithfulness (loyalty).&quot;

Similarly, Mencius also said that &quot;when the prince regards his ministers as his hands and feet, his ministers regard their prince as their belly and heart; when he regards them as his dogs and horses, they regard him as another man; when he regards them as the ground or as grass, they regard him as a robber and an enemy.&quot; Moreover, Mencius indicated that if the ruler is incompetent, he should be replaced. If the ruler is evil, then the people have the right to overthrow him. A good Confucian is also expected to remonstrate with his superiors when necessary. At the same time, a proper Confucian ruler should also accept his ministers&#x27; advice, as this will help him govern the realm better.

In later ages, however, emphasis was often placed more on the obligations of the ruled to the ruler, and less on the ruler&#x27;s obligations to the ruled. Like filial piety, loyalty was often subverted by the autocratic regimes in China. Nonetheless, throughout the ages, many Confucians continued to fight against unrighteous superiors and rulers. Many of these Confucians suffered and sometimes died because of their conviction and action. During the Ming-Qing era, prominent Confucians such as Wang Yangming promoted individuality and independent thinking as a counterweight to subservience to authority. The famous thinker Huang Zongxi also strongly criticised the autocratic nature of the imperial system and wanted to keep imperial power in check.

Many Confucians also realised that loyalty and filial piety have the potential of coming into conflict with one another. This may be true especially in times of social chaos, such as during the period of the Ming-Qing transition.

====Filial piety====
In Confucian philosophy, is a virtue of respect for one&#x27;s parents and ancestors, and of the hierarchies within society: father–son, elder–junior and male–female. The Confucian classic &quot;Xiaojing&quot; (&quot;Book of Piety&quot;), thought to be written during the Qin or Han dynasties, has historically been the authoritative source on the Confucian tenet of &quot;xiao&quot;. The book, a conversation between Confucius and his disciple Zeng Shen, is about how to set up a good society using the principle of &quot;xiao&quot;.

In more general terms, filial piety means to be good to one&#x27;s parents; to take care of one&#x27;s parents; to engage in good conduct not just towards parents but also outside the home so as to bring a good name to one&#x27;s parents and ancestors; to perform the duties of one&#x27;s job well so as to obtain the material means to support parents as well as carry out sacrifices to the ancestors; not be rebellious; show love, respect and support; the wife in filial piety must obey her husband absolutely and take care of the whole family wholeheartedly. display courtesy; ensure male heirs, uphold fraternity among brothers; wisely advise one&#x27;s parents, including dissuading them from moral unrighteousness, for blindly following the parents&#x27; wishes is not considered to be &quot;xiao&quot;; display sorrow for their sickness and death; and carry out sacrifices after their death.

Filial piety is considered a key virtue in Chinese culture, and it is the main concern of a large number of stories. One of the most famous collections of such stories is &quot;The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars&quot;. These stories depict how children exercised their filial piety in the past. While China has always had a diversity of religious beliefs, filial piety has been common to almost all of them; historian Hugh D.R. Baker calls respect for the family the only element common to almost all Chinese believers.

===Relationships===
Social harmony results in part from every individual knowing his or her place in the natural order, and playing his or her part well. Reciprocity or responsibility (&quot;renqing&quot;) extends beyond filial piety and involves the entire network of social relations, even the respect for rulers. This is shown in the story where Duke Jing of Qi asks Confucius about government, by which he meant proper administration so as to bring social harmony:

Particular duties arise from one&#x27;s particular situation in relation to others. The individual stands simultaneously in several different relationships with different people: as a junior in relation to parents and elders, and as a senior in relation to younger siblings, students, and others. While juniors are considered in Confucianism to owe their seniors reverence, seniors also have duties of benevolence and concern toward juniors. The same is true with the husband and wife relationship where the husband needs to show benevolence towards his wife and the wife needs to respect the husband in return. This theme of mutuality still exists in East Asian cultures even to this day.

The Five Bonds are: ruler to ruled, father to son, husband to wife, elder brother to younger brother, friend to friend. Specific duties were prescribed to each of the participants in these sets of relationships. Such duties are also extended to the dead, where the living stand as sons to their deceased family. The only relationship where respect for elders is not stressed was the friend to friend relationship, where mutual equal respect is emphasised instead. All these duties take the practical form of prescribed rituals, for instance wedding and death rituals.

===&quot;Junzi&quot;===

The &quot;junzi&quot; (&#x27;lord&#x27;s son&#x27;) is a Chinese philosophical term often translated as &quot;gentleman&quot; or &quot;superior person&quot; and employed by Confucius in the &quot;Analects&quot; to describe the ideal man.

In Confucianism, the sage or wise is the ideal personality; however, it is very hard to become one of them. Confucius created the model of &quot;junzi&quot;, gentleman, which may be achieved by any individual. Later, Zhu Xi defined &quot;junzi&quot; as second only to the sage. There are many characteristics of the &quot;junzi&quot;: he may live in poverty, he does more and speaks less, he is loyal, obedient and knowledgeable. The &quot;junzi&quot; disciplines himself. &quot;Ren&quot; is fundamental to become a &quot;junzi&quot;.

As the potential leader of a nation, a son of the ruler is raised to have a superior ethical and moral position while gaining inner peace through his virtue. To Confucius, the &quot;junzi&quot; sustained the functions of government and social stratification through his ethical values. Despite its literal meaning, any righteous man willing to improve himself may become a &quot;junzi&quot;.

In contrast to the &quot;junzi&quot;, the &quot;xiaoren&quot; (, &quot;small or petty person&quot;) does not grasp the value of virtues and seeks only immediate gains. The petty person is egotistic and does not consider the consequences of his action in the overall scheme of things. Should the ruler be surrounded by &quot;xiaoren&quot; as opposed to &quot;junzi&quot;, his governance and his people will suffer due to their small-mindness. Examples of such &quot;xiaoren&quot; individuals may range from those who continually indulge in sensual and emotional pleasures all day to the politician who is interested merely in power and fame; neither sincerely aims for the long-term benefit of others.

The &quot;junzi&quot; enforces his rule over his subjects by acting virtuously himself. It is thought that his pure virtue would lead others to follow his example. The ultimate goal is that the government behaves much like a family, the &quot;junzi&quot; being a beacon of filial piety.

===Rectification of names===
Confucius believed that social disorder often stemmed from failure to perceive, understand, and deal with reality. Fundamentally, then, social disorder may stem from the failure to call things by their proper names, and his solution to this was the . He gave an explanation of this concept to one of his disciples:
Zi-lu said, &quot;The vassal of Wei has been waiting for you, in order with you to administer the government. What will you consider the first thing to be done?&quot;
The Master replied, &quot;What is necessary to rectify names.&quot;
&quot;So! indeed!&quot; said Zi-lu. &quot;You are wide off the mark! Why must there be such rectification?&quot;
The Master said, &quot;How uncultivated you are, Yu! The superior man [Junzi] cannot care about the everything, just as he cannot go to check all himself!
        If names be not correct, language is not in accordance with the truth of things.
        If language be not in accordance with the truth of things, affairs cannot be carried on to success.
        When affairs cannot be carried on to success, proprieties and music do not flourish.
        When proprieties and music do not flourish, punishments will not be properly awarded.
        When punishments are not properly awarded, the people do not know how to move hand or foot.
Therefore a superior man considers it necessary that the names he uses may be spoken appropriately, and also that what he speaks may be carried out appropriately. What the superior man requires is just that in his words there may be nothing incorrect.&quot;
(&quot;Analects&quot; XIII, 3, tr. Legge)
&quot;Xunzi&quot; chapter (22) &quot;On the Rectification of Names&quot; claims the ancient sage-kings chose names () that directly corresponded with actualities (), but later generations confused terminology, coined new nomenclature, and thus could no longer distinguish right from wrong. Since social harmony is of utmost importance, without the proper rectification of names, society would essentially crumble and &quot;undertakings [would] not [be] completed.&quot;

==History==
===Metaphysical antecedents===

According to He Guanghu, Confucianism may be identified as a continuation of the Shang-Zhou (–256 BC) official religion, or the Chinese aboriginal religion which has lasted uninterrupted for three thousand years. Both the dynasties worshipped a supreme &quot;godhead&quot;, called &quot;Shangdi&quot; (&#x27;Highest Deity&#x27;) or &quot;Di&quot; by the Shang and &quot;Tian&quot; (&#x27;Heaven&#x27;) by the Zhou. &quot;Shangdi&quot; was conceived as the first ancestor of the Shang royal house, an alternate name for him being the &quot;Supreme Progenitor&quot; (). Shang theology viewed the multiplicity of gods of nature and ancestors as parts of &quot;Di&quot;. &quot;Di&quot; manifests as the &quot;Wufang Shangdi&quot; with the winds () as its cosmic will. With the Zhou dynasty, which overthrew the Shang, the name for the supreme godhead became &quot;tian&quot;. While the Shang identified &quot;Shangdi&quot; as their ancestor-god to assert their claim to power by divine right, the Zhou transformed this claim into a legitimacy based on moral power, the Mandate of Heaven. In Zhou theology, &quot;Tian&quot; had no singular earthly progeny, but bestowed divine favour on virtuous rulers. Zhou kings declared that their victory over the Shang was because they were virtuous and loved their people, while the Shang were tyrants and thus were deprived of power by &quot;Tian&quot;.

John C. Didier and David Pankenier relate the shapes of both the ancient Chinese characters for &quot;Di&quot; and &quot;Tian&quot; to the patterns of stars in the northern skies, either drawn, in Didier&#x27;s theory by connecting the constellations bracketing the north celestial pole as a square, or in Pankenier&#x27;s theory by connecting some of the stars which form the constellations of the Big Dipper and broader Ursa Major, and Ursa Minor (Little Dipper). Cultures in other parts of the world have also conceived these stars or constellations as symbols of the origin of things, the supreme godhead, divinity and royal power. The supreme godhead was also identified with the dragon, symbol of unlimited power (&quot;qi&quot;), of the protean primordial power which embodies both yin and yang in unity, associated to the constellation Draco which winds around the north ecliptic pole, and slithers between the Little and Big Dipper.

===Zhou traditions wane===
By the 6th century BC, the power of &quot;Tian&quot; and the symbols that represented it on earth (architecture of cities, temples, altars and ritual vessels, and the Zhou system of rites) became &quot;diffuse&quot; and claimed by different potentates in the Zhou states to legitimise economic, political, and military ambitions. Communication with the divine no longer was an exclusive privilege of the Zhou royal house, but might be bought by anyone able to afford the elaborate ceremonies and the old and new rites required to access the authority of &quot;Tian&quot;.

Besides the waning Zhou ritual system, what may be defined as traditions, or traditions outside of the official system, developed as attempts to access the will of &quot;Tian&quot;. As central political authority crumbled in the wake of the collapse of the Western Zhou, the population lost faith in the official tradition, which was no longer perceived as an effective way to communicate with Heaven. The traditions of the and of the &quot;Yijing&quot; flourished. Chinese thinkers, faced with this challenge to legitimacy, diverged in a &quot;Hundred Schools of Thought&quot;, each positing its own philosophical lens for understanding the processes of the world.

Confucius (551–479 BC) appeared in this period of political reconfiguration and spiritual questioning. He was educated in Shang–Zhou traditions, which he contributed to transmit and reformulate giving centrality to self-cultivation and agency of humans, and the educational power of the self-established individual in assisting others to establish themselves (the ). As the Zhou reign collapsed, traditional values were abandoned resulting in a period of perceived moral decline. Confucius saw an opportunity to reinforce values of compassion and tradition into society, with the intended goal of reconstructing what he believed to be a lost perfect moral order of high antiquity. Disillusioned with the culture, opposing scholars, and religious authorities of the time, he began to advance an ethical interpretation of traditional Zhou religion. In his view, the power of &quot;Tian&quot; is pervasive, and responds positively to the sincere heart driven by humaneness and rightness, decency and altruism. Confucius conceived these qualities as the foundation needed to restore socio-political harmony. Like many contemporaries, Confucius saw ritual practices as efficacious ways to access &quot;Tian&quot;, but he thought that the crucial knot was the reverent inner state that participants enter prior to engaging in the ritual acts. Confucius is said to have amended and recodified the classical books inherited from the Xia-Shang-Zhou dynasties, and to have composed the &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals&quot;.

===Confucianism rises===
Philosophers in the Warring States period, both focused on state-endorsed ritual and non-aligned to state ritual built upon Confucius&#x27;s legacy, compiled in the &quot;Analects&quot;, and formulated the classical metaphysics that became the lash of Confucianism. In accordance with Confucius, they identified mental tranquility as the state of &quot;Tian&quot;, or , which in each individual is the Heaven-bestowed divine power to rule one&#x27;s own life and the world. They also extended the theory, proposing the oneness of production and reabsorption into the cosmic source, and the possibility to understand and therefore reattain it through correct state of mind. This line of thought would have influenced all Chinese individual and collective-political mystical theories and practices thereafter.

In the Han dynasty, Confucians beginning with Dong Zhongshu synthesised Warring States Confucianism with ideas of yin and yang, and &quot;wuxing&quot;, as well as folk superstition and the prior schools that led up to the School of Naturalists.

In the 460s, Confucianism competed with Chinese Buddhism and &quot;traditional Confucianism&quot; was &quot;a broad cosmology that was as much about personal ethics as about spiritual beliefs&quot; and had roots that went back to Confucianist philosophers from over a thousand years before.

===Decline===

The Confucian examination system was abolished in Korea in 1894, in China in 1905, and in Vietnam in 1919. This meant that conformity to Confucian ideology was no longer a prerequisite for a career in the civil service or politics, allowing persons of other ideologies (notably Nationalism and Socialism) to attain leading positions in society.

==Organisation and liturgy==

Since the 2000s, there has been a growing identification of the Chinese intellectual class with Confucianism. In 2003, the Confucian intellectual Kang Xiaoguang published a manifesto in which he made four suggestions: Confucian education should enter official education at any level, from elementary to high school; the state should establish Confucianism as the state religion by law; Confucian religion should enter the daily life of ordinary people through standardisation and development of doctrines, rituals, organisations, churches and activity sites; the Confucian religion should be spread through non-governmental organisations. Another modern proponent of the institutionalisation of Confucianism in a state church is Jiang Qing.

In 2005, the Center for the Study of Confucian Religion was established, and &quot;guoxue&quot; started to be implemented in public schools on all levels. Being well received by the population, even Confucian preachers have appeared on television since 2006. The most enthusiastic New Confucians proclaim the uniqueness and superiority of Confucian Chinese culture, and have generated some popular sentiment against Western cultural influences in China.

The idea of a &quot;Confucian church&quot; as the state religion of China has roots in the thought of Kang Youwei, an exponent of the early New Confucian search for a regeneration of the social relevance of Confucianism, at a time when it was de-institutionalised with the collapse of the Qing dynasty and the Chinese empire. Kang modeled his ideal &quot;Confucian Church&quot; after European national Christian churches, as a hierarchic and centralised institution, closely bound to the state, with local church branches, devoted to the worship and the spread of the teachings of Confucius.

In contemporary China, the Confucian revival has developed into various interwoven directions: the proliferation of Confucian schools or academies, the resurgence of Confucian rites, and the birth of new forms of Confucian activity on the popular level, such as the Confucian communities (). Some scholars also consider the reconstruction of lineage churches and their ancestral temples, as well as cults and temples of natural and national gods within broader Chinese traditional religion, as part of the renewal of Confucianism.

Other forms of revival are salvationist folk religious movements groups with a specifically Confucian focus, or Confucian churches, for example the of Beijing, the of Shanghai, Confucian Shenism (also known as the &quot;phoenix churches&quot;), the Confucian Fellowship () in northern Fujian which has spread rapidly over the years after its foundation, and ancestral temples of the Kong kin (the lineage of the descendants of Confucius himself) operating as Confucian-teaching churches.

Also, the Hong Kong Confucian Academy, one of the direct heirs of Kang Youwei&#x27;s Confucian Church, has expanded its activities to the mainland, with the construction of statues of Confucius, Confucian hospitals, restoration of temples and other activities. In 2009, Zhou Beichen founded another institution which inherits the idea of Kang Youwei&#x27;s Confucian Church, the Holy Hall of Confucius () in Shenzhen, affiliated with the Federation of Confucian Culture of Qufu City. It was the first of a nationwide movement of congregations and civil organisations that was unified in 2015 in the Holy Confucian Church. The first spiritual leader of the church is the scholar Jiang Qing, the founder and manager of the Yangming Confucian Abode (), a Confucian academy in Guiyang, Guizhou.

Chinese folk religious temples and kinship ancestral shrines may, on peculiar occasions, choose Confucian liturgy (called or led by Confucian ritual masters () to worship the gods, instead of Taoist or popular ritual. &quot;Confucian businessmen&quot; (, also &quot;refined businessman&quot;) is a recently &quot;rediscovered&quot; concept defining people of the economic-entrepreneurial elite who recognise their social responsibility and therefore apply Confucian culture to their business.

Confucianists historically tried to proselytize to others, although this is rarely done in modern times. Given Confucianism&#x27;s place of importance in historical Chinese governments, the argument has been made that Imperial China&#x27;s wars were Confucianism&#x27;s wars, but the connection between Confucianism and war is not so direct or simple. Modern Confucianism is the descendant of movements that greatly changed how they practiced the teachings of Confucius and his disciples from previous orthodox teachings.

==Governance==

A key Confucian concept is that in order to govern others one must first govern oneself according to the universal order. When actual, the king&#x27;s personal virtue (&quot;de&quot;) spreads beneficent influence throughout the kingdom. This idea is developed further in the Great Learning and is tightly linked with the Taoist concept of &quot;wu wei&quot;: the less the king does, the more gets done. By being the &quot;calm center&quot; around which the kingdom turns, the king allows everything to function smoothly and avoids having to tamper with the individual parts of the whole.

This idea may be traced back to the ancient shamanic beliefs of the king being the axle between the sky, human beings, and the Earth. The emperors of China were considered agents of Heaven, endowed with the Mandate of Heaven, one of the most vital concepts in imperial-era political theory. Some Confucianists believed they held the power to define the hierarchy of divinities, by bestowing titles upon mountains, rivers and dead people, acknowledging them as powerful and therefore establishing their cults.

Confucianism, despite supporting the importance of obeying national authority, places this obedience under absolute moral principles that curbed the willful exercise of power, rather than being unconditional. Submission to authority was only taken within the context of the moral obligations that rulers had toward their subjects, in particular &quot;ren&quot;. Confucians—including the most pro-authoritarian scholars such as Xunzi—have always recognised the right of revolution against tyranny.

==Meritocracy==
Although Confucius claimed that he never invented anything but was only transmitting ancient knowledge (&quot;Analects&quot; 7.1), he did produce a number of new ideas. Many European and American admirers such as Voltaire and Herrlee G. Creel point to the revolutionary idea of replacing nobility of blood with nobility of virtue. &quot;Junzi&quot; (&#x27;lord&#x27;s son&#x27;), which originally signified the younger, non-inheriting, offspring of a noble, became, in Confucius&#x27;s work, an epithet having much the same meaning and evolution as the English &quot;gentleman&quot;.

A virtuous commoner who cultivates his qualities may be a &quot;gentleman&quot;, while a shameless son of the king is only a &quot;petty person&quot;. That Confucius admitted students of different classes as disciples is a clear demonstration that he fought against the feudal structures that defined pre-imperial Chinese society.

Another new idea, that of meritocracy, led to the introduction of the imperial examination system in China. This system allowed anyone who passed an examination to become a government officer, a position which would bring wealth and honour to the whole family. The Chinese imperial examination system started in the Sui dynasty. Over the following centuries the system grew until finally almost anyone who wished to become an official had to prove his worth by passing a set of written government examinations.

Confucian political meritocracy is not merely a historical phenomenon. The practice of meritocracy still exists across China and East Asia today, and a wide range of contemporary intellectuals—from Daniel Bell to Tongdong Bai, Joseph Chan, and Jiang Qing—defend political meritocracy as a viable alternative to liberal democracy.

In &quot;Just Hierarchy&quot;, Daniel Bell and Wang Pei argue that hierarchies are inevitable. Faced with ever-increasing complexity at scale, modern societies must build hierarchies to coordinate collective action and tackle long-term problems such as climate change. In this context, people need not—and should not—want to flatten hierarchies as much as possible. They ought to ask what makes political hierarchies just and use these criteria to decide the institutions that deserve preservation, those that require reform, and those that need radical transformation. They call this approach &quot;progressive conservatism&quot;, a term that reflects the ambiguous place of the Confucian tradition within the Left-Right dichotomy.

Bell and Wang propose two justifications for political hierarchies that do not depend on a &quot;one person, one vote&quot; system. First is raw efficiency, which may require centralized rule in the hands of the competent few. Second, and most important, is serving the interests of the people (and the common good more broadly). In &quot;Against Political Equality&quot;, Tongdong Bai complements this account by using a proto-Rawlsian &quot;political difference principle&quot;. Just as Rawls claims that economic inequality is justified so long as it benefits those at the bottom of the socioeconomic ladder, so Bai argues that political inequality is justified so long as it benefits those materially worse off.

Bell, Wang, and Bai all criticize liberal democracy to argue that government the people may not be government the people in any meaningful sense of the term. They argue that voters tend to act in irrational, tribal, short-termist ways; they are vulnerable to populism and struggle to account for the interests of future generations. In other words, at a minimum, democracy needs Confucian meritocratic checks.

In &quot;The China Model&quot;, Bell argues that Confucian political meritocracy provides—and has provided—a blueprint for China&#x27;s development. For Bell, the ideal according to which China should reform itself (and has reformed itself) follows a simple structure: Aspiring rulers first pass hyper-selective examinations, then have to rule well at the local level to be promoted to positions as the provincial level, then have to excel at the provincial level to access positions at the national level, and so on. This system aligns with what Harvard historian James Hankins calls &quot;virtue politics&quot;, or the idea that institutions should be built to select the most competent and virtuous rulers—as opposed to institutions concerned first and foremost with limiting the power of rulers.

While contemporary defenders of Confucian political meritocracy all accept this broad frame, they disagree with each other on three main questions: institutional design, the means by which meritocrats are promoted, and the compatibility of Confucian political meritocracy with liberalism.

===Institutional design===
Bell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers. As Bell puts it, he defends &quot;democracy at the bottom, experimentation in the middle, and meritocracy at the top.&quot; Bell and Wang argue that this combination conserves the main advantages of democracy—involving the people in public affairs at the local level, strengthening the legitimacy of the system, forcing some degree of direct accountability, etc.—while preserving the broader meritocratic character of the regime.

Jiang Qing, by contrast, imagines a tricameral government with one chamber selected by the people (the ), one chamber composed of Confucian meritocrats selected via examination and gradual promotion (the ), and one body made up of descendants of Confucius himself (the ). Jiang&#x27;s aim is to construct a legitimacy that will go beyond what he sees as the atomistic, individualist, and utilitarian ethos of modern democracies and ground authority in something sacred and traditional. While Jiang&#x27;s model is closer to an ideal theory than Bell&#x27;s proposals, it represents a more traditionalist alternative.

Tongdong Bai presents an in-between solution by proposing a two-tiered bicameral system. At the local level, as with Bell, Bai advocates Deweyan participatory democracy. At the national level, Bai proposes two chambers: one of meritocrats (selected by examination, by examination and promotion, from leaders in certain professional fields, etc.), and one of representatives elected by the people. While the lower house does not have any legislative power per se, it acts as a popular accountability mechanism by championing the people and putting pressure on the upper house. More generally, Bai argues that his model marries the best of meritocracy and democracy. Following Dewey&#x27;s account of democracy as a way of life, he points to the participatory features of his local model: citizens still get to have a democratic lifestyle, participate in political affairs, and be educated as &quot;democratic men&quot;. Similarly, the lower house allows citizens to be represented, have a voice in public affairs (albeit a weak one), and ensure accountability. Meanwhile, the meritocratic house preserves competence, statesmanship, and Confucian virtues.

===Promotion system===
Defenders of Confucian political meritocracy generally champion a system in which rulers are selected on the basis of intellect, social skills, and virtue. Bell proposes a model wherein aspiring meritocrats take hyper-selective exams and prove themselves at the local levels of government before reaching the higher levels of government, where they hold more centralized power. In his account, the exams select for intellect and other virtues—for instance, the ability to argue three different viewpoints on a contentious issue may indicate a certain degree of openness. Tongdong Bai&#x27;s approach incorporates different ways to select members of the meritocratic house, from exams to performance in various fields—business, science, administration, and so on. In every case, Confucian meritocrats draw on China&#x27;s extensive history of meritocratic administration to outline the pros and cons of competing methods of selection.

For those who, like Bell, defend a model in which performance at the local levels of government determines future promotion, an important question is how the system judges who &quot;performs best&quot;. In other words, while examinations may ensure that early-career officials are competent and educated, how is it thereafter ensured that &quot;only&quot; those who rule well get promoted? The literature opposes those who prefer evaluation by peers to evaluation by superiors, with some thinkers including quasi-democratic selection mechanisms along the way. Bell and Wang favour a system in which officials at the local level are democratically elected and higher-level officials are promoted by peers. Because they believe that promotion should depend upon peer evaluations only, Bell and Wang argue against transparency—i.e. the public should not know how officials are selected, since ordinary people are in no position to judge officials beyond the local level. Others, like Jiang Qing, defend a model in which superiors decide who gets promoted; this method is in line with more traditionalist strands of Confucian political thought, which place a greater emphasis on strict hierarchies and epistemic paternalism—that is, the idea that older and more experienced people know more.

===Compatibility with liberalism and democracy, and critique of political meritocracy===
Another key question is whether Confucian political thought is compatible with liberalism. Tongdong Bai, for instance, argues that while Confucian political thought departs from the &quot;one person, one vote&quot; model, it can conserve many of the essential characteristics of liberalism, such as freedom of speech and individual rights. In fact, both Daniel Bell and Tongdong Bai hold that Confucian political meritocracy can tackle challenges that liberalism wants to tackle, but cannot by itself. At the cultural level, for instance, Confucianism, its institutions, and its rituals offer bulwarks against atomization and individualism. At the political level, the non-democratic side of political meritocracy is—for Bell and Bai—more efficient at addressing long-term questions such as climate change, in part because the meritocrats do not have to worry about the whims of public opinion.

Joseph Chan defends the compatibility of Confucianism with both liberalism and democracy. In his book &quot;Confucian Perfectionism&quot;, he argues that Confucians can embrace both democracy and liberalism on instrumental grounds; that is, while liberal democracy may not be valuable for its own sake, its institutions remain valuable—particularly when combined with a broadly Confucian culture—to serve Confucian ends and inculcate Confucian virtues.

Other Confucians have criticized Confucian meritocrats like Bell for their rejection of democracy. For them, Confucianism does not have to be premised on the assumption that meritorious, virtuous political leadership is inherently incompatible with popular sovereignty, political equality and the right to political participation. These thinkers accuse the meritocrats of overestimating the flaws of democracy, mistaking temporary flaws for permanent and inherent features, and underestimating the challenges that the construction of a true political meritocracy poses in practice—including those faced by contemporary China and Singapore. Franz Mang claims that, when decoupled from democracy, meritocracy tends to deteriorate into an oppressive regime under putatively &quot;meritorious&quot; but actually &quot;authoritarian&quot; rulers; Mang accuses Bell&#x27;s China model of being self-defeating, as—Mang claims—the CCP&#x27;s authoritarian modes of engagement with the dissenting voices illustrate. He Baogang and Mark Warren add that &quot;meritocracy&quot; should be understood as a concept describing a regime&#x27;s character rather than its type, which is determined by distribution of political power—on their view, democratic institutions can be built which are meritocratic insofar as they favour competence.

Roy Tseng, drawing on the New Confucians of the twentieth century, argues that Confucianism and liberal democracy can enter into a dialectical process, in which liberal rights and voting rights are rethought into resolutely modern, but nonetheless Confucian ways of life. This synthesis, blending Confucians rituals and institutions with a broader liberal democratic frame, is distinct from both Western-style liberalism—which, for Tseng, suffers from excessive individualism and a lack of moral vision—and from traditional Confucianism—which, for Tseng, has historically suffered from rigid hierarchies and sclerotic elites. Against defenders of political meritocracy, Tseng claims that the fusion of Confucian and democratic institutions can conserve the best of both worlds, producing a more communal democracy which draws on a rich ethical tradition, addresses abuses of power, and combines popular accountability with a clear attention to the cultivation of virtue in elites.

==Influence==

===In 17th-century Europe===
The works of Confucius were translated into European languages through the agency of Jesuit missionaries stationed in China. Matteo Ricci was among the very earliest to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and father Prospero Intorcetta wrote about the life and works of Confucius in Latin in 1687.

Translations of Confucian texts influenced European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization.

Confucianism influenced the German philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, who was attracted to the philosophy because of its perceived similarity to his own. It is postulated that certain elements of Leibniz&#x27;s philosophy, such as &quot;simple substance&quot; and &quot;Pre-established harmony&quot;, were borrowed from his interactions with Confucianism. 

The French philosopher Voltaire, Leibniz&#x27;s intellectual rival, was also influenced by Confucius, seeing the concept of Confucian rationalism as an alternative to Christian dogma. He praised Confucian ethics and politics, portraying the sociopolitical hierarchy of China as a model for Europe:
===On Islamic thought===
From the late 17th century onwards a whole body of literature known as the Han Kitab developed amongst the Hui Muslims of China who infused Islamic thought with Confucianism. Especially the works of Liu Zhi such as &quot;Tianfang Dianli&quot; () sought to harmonise Islam with not only Confucianism but also with Taoism and is considered to be one of the crowning achievements of the Chinese Islamic culture.

===In modern times===
Important military and political figures in modern Chinese history continued to be influenced by Confucianism, like the Muslim warlord Ma Fuxiang. The New Life Movement in the early 20th century was also influenced by Confucianism.

Referred to variously as the Confucian hypothesis and as a debated component of the more all-encompassing Asian Development Model, there exists among political scientists and economists a theory that Confucianism plays a large latent role in the ostensibly non-Confucian cultures of modern-day East Asia, in the form of the rigorous work ethic it endowed those cultures with. These scholars have held that, if not for Confucianism&#x27;s influence on these cultures, many of the people of the East Asia region would not have been able to modernise and industrialise as quickly as Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Japan, South Korea and even China have done.

For example, the impact of the Vietnam War on Vietnam was devastating, but over the last few decades Vietnam has been re-developing in a very fast pace. Most scholars attribute the origins of this idea to futurologist Herman Kahn&#x27;s &quot;World Economic Development: 1979 and Beyond&quot;.

Other studies, for example Cristobal Kay&#x27;s &quot;Why East Asia Overtook Latin America: Agrarian Reform, Industrialization, and Development&quot;, have attributed the Asian growth to other factors, for example the character of agrarian reforms, &quot;state-craft&quot; (state capacity), and interaction between agriculture and industry.

Historical and current Confucianists were and are often environmentalists out of their respect for &quot;tian&quot; and the other aspects of nature and the &quot;Principle&quot; that comes from their unity and, more generally, harmony as a whole, which is &quot;the basis for a sincere mind&quot;.

===On Chinese martial arts===
After Confucianism had become the official &#x27;state religion&#x27; in China, its influence penetrated all walks of life and all streams of thought in Chinese society for the generations to come. This did not exclude martial arts culture. Though in his own day, Confucius had rejected the practice of Martial Arts (with the exception of Archery), he did serve under rulers who used military power extensively to achieve their goals. In later centuries, Confucianism heavily influenced many educated martial artists of great influence, such as Sun Lutang, especially from the 19th century onwards, when bare-handed martial arts in China became more widespread and had begun to more readily absorb philosophical influences from Confucianism, Buddhism and Daoism.

==Criticism==

Confucius and Confucianism were opposed or criticised from the start, including Laozi&#x27;s philosophy and Mozi&#x27;s critique, and Legalists such as Han Fei ridiculed the idea that virtue would lead people to be orderly. In modern times, waves of opposition and vilification showed that Confucianism, instead of taking credit for the glories of Chinese civilisation, now had to take blame for its failures. The Taiping Rebellion described Confucianism sages as well as gods in Taoism and Buddhism as devils.

===Contradiction with modernist values===

In the New Culture Movement, Lu Xun criticised Confucianism for shaping Chinese people into the condition they had reached by the late Qing dynasty: his criticisms are expressed metaphorically in the work &quot;Diary of a Madman&quot;, in which traditional Chinese Confucian society is portrayed as feudalistic, hypocritical, socially cannibalistic, despotic, fostering a &quot;slave mentality&quot; favouring despotism, lack of critical thinking and blind obedience and worship of authority, fuelling a form of &quot;Confucian authoritarianism&quot; which persists into the present day. Leftists during the Cultural Revolution described Confucius as the representative of the slave-owning class.

In South Korea, there has long been criticism. Some South Koreans believe Confucianism has not contributed to the modernisation of South Korea. For example, South Korean writer Kim Kyong-il wrote a book in 1998 entitled &quot;Confucius Must Die For the Nation to Live&quot; (, &quot;gongjaga jug-eoya naraga sanda&quot;). Kim said that filial piety is one-sided and blind, and if it continues, social problems will continue as government keeps forcing Confucian filial obligations onto families.
===Women in Confucian thought===

Confucianism &quot;largely defined the mainstream discourse on gender in China from the Han dynasty onward.&quot; The gender roles prescribed in the Three Obediences and Four Virtues became a cornerstone of the family, and thus, societal stability. The Three Obediences and Four Virtues is one of the moral standards for feudal etiquette to bind women. Starting from the Han period, Confucians began to teach that a virtuous woman was supposed to follow the males in her family: the father before her marriage, the husband after she marries, and her sons in widowhood. In the later dynasties, more emphasis was placed on the virtue of chastity. The Song dynasty Confucian Cheng Yi stated that: &quot;To starve to death is a small matter, but to lose one&#x27;s chastity is a great matter.&quot; It was during the Song dynasty that the value of chastity was so severe, Confucian scholars criminalized the remarriage of widows. Widows were revered and memorialised during the Ming and Qing periods. The principle of chaste widowhood was made an official institution during the Ming dynasty. This &quot;cult of chastity&quot; accordingly condemned many widows to poverty and loneliness by placing a social stigma on remarriage. Though the repercussions for widows at times went beyond poverty and loneliness, as for some the preservation of chastity resulted in suicide. The ideal of a chaste widow became an extremely high honor and esteem, especially for a woman who chose to end her life after her husband&#x27;s death. Many instances of such acts were recorded in, Biographies of Virtuous Women, &quot;a collection of stories of women who distinguished themselves by committing suicide after their husband’s deaths to guard their chastity and purity&quot;. Though it can be contested whether all these instances can be deemed self-sacrificing for the virtue of chastity, as it became common practice for women to be forced to commit suicide after their husband&#x27;s death. This resulted from the honor which chaste widowhood garnered, lending itself to the husband&#x27;s family as well as his clan or village.

For years, many modern scholars have regarded Confucianism as a sexist, patriarchal ideology that was historically damaging to Chinese women. It has also been argued by some Chinese and Western writers that the rise of neo-Confucianism during the Song dynasty had led to a decline of status of women. Some critics have also accused the prominent Song neo-Confucian scholar Zhu Xi for believing in the inferiority of women and that men and women need to be kept strictly separate, while Sima Guang also believed that women should remain indoors and not deal with the matters of men in the outside world. Finally, scholars have discussed the attitudes toward women in Confucian texts such as Analects. In a much-discussed passage, women are grouped together with , meaning people of low status or low morals) and described as being difficult to cultivate or deal with. Many traditional commentators and modern scholars have debated over the precise meaning of the passage, and whether Confucius referred to all women or just certain groups of women.

Further analysis suggests, however, that women&#x27;s place in Confucian society may be more complex. During the Han dynasty period, the influential Confucian text &quot;Lessons for Women&quot; was written by Ban Zhao (45–114 CE) to instruct her daughters how to be proper Confucian wives and mothers, that is, to be silent, hard-working, and compliant. She stresses the complementarity and equal importance of the male and female roles according to yin-yang theory, but she clearly accepts the dominance of the male. However, she does present education and literary power as important for women. In later dynasties, a number of women took advantage of the Confucian acknowledgment of education to become independent in thought.

Joseph A. Adler points out that &quot;Neo-Confucian writings do not necessarily reflect either the prevailing social practices or the scholars&#x27; own attitudes and practices in regard to actual women.&quot; Matthew Sommers has also indicated that the Qing dynasty government began to realise the utopian nature of enforcing the &quot;cult of chastity&quot; and began to allow practices such as widow remarrying to stand. Moreover, some Confucian texts like Dong Zhongshu&#x27;s &quot;Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals&quot; have passages that suggest a more equal relationship between a husband and his wife. More recently, some scholars have also begun to discuss the viability of constructing a &quot;Confucian feminism&quot;.

==Catholic controversy over Chinese rites==

Ever since Europeans first encountered Confucianism, the issue of how Confucianism should be classified has been subject to debate. In the 16th and the 17th centuries, the earliest European arrivals in China, the Christian Jesuits, considered Confucianism to be an ethical system, not a religion, and one that was compatible with Christianity. The Jesuits, including Matteo Ricci, saw Chinese rituals as &quot;civil rituals&quot; that could co-exist alongside the spiritual rituals of Catholicism.

By the early 18th century, this initial portrayal was rejected by the Dominicans and Franciscans, creating a dispute among Catholics in East Asia that was known as the &quot;Rites Controversy&quot;. The Dominicans and Franciscans argued that Chinese ancestral worship was a form of idolatry that was contradictory to the tenets of Christianity. This view was reinforced by Pope Benedict XIV, who ordered a ban on Chinese rituals, though this ban was re-assessed and repealed in 1939 by Pope Pius XII, provided that such traditions harmonize with the true and authentic spirit of the liturgy.

Some critics view Confucianism as definitely pantheistic and nontheistic, in that it is not based on the belief in the supernatural or in a personal god existing separate from the temporal plane. Confucius views about &quot;tian&quot; and about the divine providence ruling the world, can be found above (in this page) and in Analects 6:26, 7:22, and 9:12, for example. On spirituality, Confucius said to Chi Lu, one of his students: &quot;You are not yet able to serve men, how can you serve spirits?&quot; Attributes such as ancestor worship, ritual, and sacrifice were advocated by Confucius as necessary for social harmony; these attributes may be traced to the traditional Chinese folk religion.

Scholars recognise that classification ultimately depends on how one defines religion. Using stricter definitions of religion, Confucianism has been described as a moral science or philosophy. But using a broader definition, such as Frederick Streng&#x27;s characterisation of religion as &quot;a means of ultimate transformation&quot;, Confucianism could be described as a &quot;sociopolitical doctrine having religious qualities&quot;. With the latter definition, Confucianism is religious, even if non-theistic, in the sense that it &quot;performs some of the basic psycho-social functions of full-fledged religions&quot;.

==See also==
==Notes==
==Citations==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
**&quot;Volume I: The Ancient Eurasian World and the Celestial Pivot&quot;.
**&quot;Volume II: Representations and Identities of High Powers in Neolithic and Bronze China&quot;.
**&quot;Volume III: Terrestrial and Celestial Transformations in Zhou and Early-Imperial China&quot;.
* 
* 
* 
* .
* 
* .
* 
* 
* .
* 
* 
Translations of the &quot;Analects&quot;
* Confucian Analects (1893) Translated by James Legge.
* &quot;The Analects of Confucius&quot; (1915; rpr. NY: Paragon, 1968). Translated by William Edward Soothill.
* &quot;The Analects of Confucius: A Philosophical Translation&quot; (New York: Ballantine, 1998). Translated by Roger T. Ames, Henry Rosemont.
* &quot;Confucius: The Analects (Lun yü)&quot; (London: Penguin, 1979; rpr. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 1992). Translated by D.C. Lau.
* &quot;The Analects of Confucius (Lun Yu)&quot; (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1997). Translated by Chichung Huang.
* &quot;The Analects of Confucius&quot; (New York: W.W. Norton, 1997). Translated by Simon Leys.
* &quot;Analects: With Selections from Traditional Commentaries&quot; (Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2003). Translated by Edward Slingerland.

==External links==
* 
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Entry: Confucius
* Interfaith Online: Confucianism
* Confucian Documents at the Internet Sacred Texts Archive.

Institutional
* China Confucian Philosophy
* China Confucian Religion
* China Kongzi Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="0" end="12" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="28" end="33" title="Confucianism" label="Ruism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="37" end="50" title="Confucianism" label="Ru classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="103" end="116" title="ancient China" label="ancient China"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="173" end="183" title="Humanism" label="humanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="187" end="200" title="Rationalism" label="rationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10889441" start="203" end="211" title="Religious Confucianism" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="296" end="315" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="316" end="325" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="388" end="414" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="Hundred Schools of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="501" end="504" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="524" end="529" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069609" start="553" end="565" title="Western Zhou" label="Western Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="633" end="641" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="657" end="668" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="708" end="719" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282973" start="799" end="808" title="Huang–Lao" label="Huang–Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="956" end="969" title="Four Books and Five Classics" label="Five Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1112" end="1124" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1231" end="1239" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="1244" end="1250" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="1275" end="1291" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="1349" end="1363" title="imperial exams" label="imperial exams"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="1395" end="1417" title="scholar-officials" label="scholar-official class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1425" end="1437" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="1564" end="1584" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909446" start="1640" end="1663" title="Century of humiliation" label="China&amp;#x27;s weaknesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="1776" end="1806" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="1843" end="1860" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="1871" end="1877" title="Maoism" label="Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1888" end="1919" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q3426207" start="1966" end="1976" title="work ethic" label="work ethic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333668" start="2016" end="2034" title="Economy of East Asia" label="East Asian economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q553270" start="2098" end="2112" title="Group cohesiveness" label="social harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="2201" end="2211" title="humanism" label="humanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734078" start="2247" end="2265" title="Herbert Fingarette" label="Herbert Fingarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q15303501" start="2357" end="2364" title="secularity" label="secular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151419" start="2368" end="2374" title="sacred" label="sacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="2682" end="2686" title="tian" label="tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="2829" end="2847" title="absolute (philosophy)" label="absolute principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="2863" end="2866" title="tao" label="tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="2886" end="2893" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800296" start="3368" end="3384" title="self-cultivation" label="self-cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="3562" end="3565" title="Ren (philosophy)" label="ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053433" start="3579" end="3581" title="Yi (philosophy)" label="yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="3595" end="3597" title="Li (Confucianism)" label="li"/>
<link wikidata="Q799" start="3615" end="3618" title="Wisdom" label="zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="4304" end="4327" title="Sinosphere" label="Chinese cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="4379" end="4384" title="culture of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q707465" start="4386" end="4392" title="culture of Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q599979" start="4394" end="4399" title="culture of Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q831454" start="4401" end="4406" title="culture of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791615" start="4412" end="4419" title="culture of Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="4477" end="4495" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661018" start="4505" end="4514" title="culture of Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="4556" end="4565" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="4581" end="4609" title="Overseas Chinese" label="overseas Chinese communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="4731" end="4735" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="4832" end="4840" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q82821" start="4873" end="4882" title="tradition" label="tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18111357" start="5098" end="5116" title="Confucian churches" label="Confucian churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984148" start="5193" end="5209" title="Kongshenghui" label="Confucian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="5631" end="5642" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="6227" end="6247" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="6256" end="6275" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q591407" start="7079" end="7092" title="Zhou Youguang" label="Zhou Youguang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="7391" end="7398" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q132780" start="7630" end="7649" title="Radical 85" label="character for water"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="7752" end="7763" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="five phases"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="7828" end="7839" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="7997" end="8010" title="Four Books and Five Classics" label="Five Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q453449" start="8140" end="8147" title="Liu Xin (scholar)" label="Liu Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044695" start="8161" end="8173" title="Xinzhong Yao" label="Yao Xinzhong"/>
<link wikidata="Q465108" start="8422" end="8439" title="Classic of Poetry" label="Classic of Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976613" start="8448" end="8464" title="Classic of Music" label="Classic of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="8489" end="8500" title="Han Dynasty" label="Han Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q710092" start="8884" end="8894" title="Tu Weiming" label="Tu Weiming"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="9013" end="9020" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q465108" start="9398" end="9415" title="Classic of Poetry" label="Classic of Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069928" start="9480" end="9493" title="Chinese poetry" label="Chinese poems"/>
<link wikidata="Q875313" start="9687" end="9704" title="Book of Documents" label="Book of Documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q862758" start="10240" end="10253" title="Book of Rites" label="Book of Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328489" start="10611" end="10638" title="Four occupations" label="four functional occupations"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="10701" end="10725" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="10782" end="10806" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q736936" start="10876" end="10878" title="Lu (state)" label="Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="11164" end="11168" title="tian" label="tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875698" start="11323" end="11325" title="Li (Neo-Confucianism)" label="li"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="11346" end="11349" title="tao" label="tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="11466" end="11474" title="monism" label="monistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q206935" start="11785" end="11799" title="civil religion" label="civil religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q24700964" start="12026" end="12044" title="Stephan Feuchtwang" label="Stephan Feuchtwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="12117" end="12134" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375695" start="12225" end="12231" title="hundun" label="hundun"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="12248" end="12250" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="12300" end="12312" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139338" start="12422" end="12443" title="creatio ex nihilo" label="&amp;quot;ex nihilo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800296" start="12978" end="12994" title="self-cultivation" label="self-cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="13104" end="13107" title="Ren (philosophy)" label="Ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q860434" start="13615" end="13627" title="Jade Emperor" label="Jade Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589492" start="13664" end="13677" title="King of the gods" label="supreme deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q132987" start="13689" end="13706" title="anthropomorphized" label="anthropomorphized"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119" start="13917" end="13945" title="celestial pole" label="northern culmen of the skies"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="14311" end="14319" title="Analects" label="Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="14898" end="14905" title="Taoists" label="Taoists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248453" start="15082" end="15088" title="physis" label="physis"/>
<link wikidata="Q746990" start="15236" end="15243" title="Brahman" label="Brahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="15253" end="15258" title="Hinduism" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="15263" end="15268" title="Veda" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039504" start="15806" end="15815" title="Duanmu Ci" label="Duanmu Ci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179705" start="16063" end="16065" title="De (Chinese)" label="de"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959372" start="16189" end="16193" title="shen (Chinese religion)" label="shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053433" start="16349" end="16351" title="Yi (philosophy)" label="yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="16432" end="16434" title="Li (Confucianism)" label="li"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="16524" end="16535" title="sacrifice" label="sacrificial"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="17289" end="17297" title="ancestor" label="ancestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="17449" end="17452" title="tao" label="tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="17477" end="17498" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="17670" end="17676" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620805" start="17730" end="17738" title="theism" label="theistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q878084" start="18336" end="18342" title="wu wei" label="wu wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q42115454" start="18446" end="18463" title="Kelly James Clark" label="Kelly James Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q249027" start="19092" end="19109" title="ancestral shrines" label="ancestral shrines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="19393" end="19404" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="19438" end="19441" title="Ren (Confucianism)" label="Ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8053433" start="19482" end="19484" title="Yi (philosophy)" label="Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="19524" end="19526" title="Li (Confucianism)" label="Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264335" start="19600" end="19603" title="Xin (virtue)" label="Xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132131" start="19797" end="19804" title="Loyalty" label="Loyalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="19810" end="19822" title="Filial piety" label="Filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="20040" end="20050" title="altruistic" label="altruistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155960" start="20445" end="20452" title="Yan Hui (disciple of Confucius)" label="Yan Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="21261" end="21270" title="Confucian" label="Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="21290" end="21308" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="21316" end="21318" title="Li (Confucianism)" label="Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="21358" end="21362" title="Ritual" label="rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="21378" end="21384" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="21431" end="21436" title="Veda" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059081" start="21498" end="21504" title="cosmos" label="cosmic"/>
<link wikidata="Q367293" start="21626" end="21633" title="convention (norm)" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q216072" start="22585" end="22590" title="Xunzi (philosopher)" label="Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="23992" end="23999" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q378462" start="25191" end="25204" title="Wang Yangming" label="Wang Yangming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427966" start="25657" end="25677" title="Transition from Ming to Qing" label="Ming-Qing transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368044" start="25896" end="25904" title="Classic of Filial Piety" label="Xiaojing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207671" start="26146" end="26155" title="Zeng Shen" label="Zeng Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="27105" end="27114" title="sacrifice" label="sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851166" start="27313" end="27345" title="The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars" label="The Twenty-four Filial Exemplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q709736" start="28004" end="28019" title="Duke Jing of Qi" label="Duke Jing of Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="29467" end="29488" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q749212" start="29520" end="29529" title="gentleman" label="gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="29583" end="29592" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397" start="29866" end="29872" title="Zhu Xi" label="Zhu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q122699585" start="30766" end="30775" title="egotistic" label="egotistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722310" start="33205" end="33210" title="Xunzi (book)" label="Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q249253" start="33495" end="33509" title="harmonious society" label="social harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8969626" start="33727" end="33737" title="He Guanghu" label="He Guanghu"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="33795" end="33800" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="33801" end="33805" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714875" start="34001" end="34008" title="Shangdi" label="Shangdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="34084" end="34088" title="Tian" label="Tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384963" start="34419" end="34433" title="Wufang Shangdi" label="Wufang Shangdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="34779" end="34796" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="35178" end="35196" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="35527" end="35537" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q10478" start="35543" end="35553" title="Ursa Minor" label="Ursa Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q215605" start="35790" end="35796" title="Chinese dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="35831" end="35833" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="35894" end="35906" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8675" start="35949" end="35954" title="Draco (constellation)" label="Draco"/>
<link wikidata="Q392457" start="35984" end="35997" title="orbital pole" label="ecliptic pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167876" start="36218" end="36232" title="Chinese ritual bronzes" label="ritual vessels"/>
<link wikidata="Q836688" start="36334" end="36345" title="Ancient Chinese states" label="Zhou states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069609" start="36905" end="36917" title="Western Zhou" label="Western Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="37089" end="37095" title="Yijing" label="Yijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="37193" end="37219" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="Hundred Schools of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="37315" end="37324" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q85800296" start="37530" end="37546" title="self-cultivation" label="self-cultivation"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="38705" end="38720" title="Chinese classics" label="classical books"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="38797" end="38821" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="38875" end="38896" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="39026" end="39034" title="Analects" label="Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q445626" start="39710" end="39723" title="Dong Zhongshu" label="Dong Zhongshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="39778" end="39790" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="39802" end="39808" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="wuxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195540" start="39886" end="39907" title="School of Naturalists" label="School of Naturalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q235473" start="39917" end="39921" title="460s" label="460s"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="39950" end="39966" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Chinese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="40153" end="40165" title="Philosophy" label="philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270414" start="40267" end="40272" title="Gwageo" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="40285" end="40290" title="imperial examination" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573000" start="40307" end="40314" title="Confucian court examination system in Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q221284" start="40340" end="40350" title="conformity" label="conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="41306" end="41318" title="state church" label="state church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191559" start="41322" end="41332" title="Jiang Qing (Confucian)" label="Jiang Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q269915" start="41418" end="41424" title="guoxue" label="guoxue"/>
<link wikidata="Q18111357" start="41810" end="41826" title="Confucian church" label="Confucian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="41840" end="41854" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q360135" start="41892" end="41903" title="Kang Youwei" label="Kang Youwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="42079" end="42091" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058015" start="42499" end="42529" title="Academies of Classical Learning" label="Confucian schools or academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10917780" start="42549" end="42564" title="Confucian rites" label="Confucian rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q840178" start="42725" end="42741" title="lineage churches" label="lineage churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q249027" start="42752" end="42769" title="ancestral temples" label="ancestral temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q10874708" start="42942" end="42979" title="Chinese salvationist religion" label="salvationist folk religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q18111357" start="43027" end="43045" title="Confucian churches" label="Confucian churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="43066" end="43073" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="43082" end="43090" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984216" start="43092" end="43109" title="Confucian Shenism" label="Confucian Shenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="43200" end="43206" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q249027" start="43273" end="43290" title="ancestral temples" label="ancestral temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q15174" start="43812" end="43820" title="Shenzhen" label="Shenzhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q210287" start="43877" end="43881" title="Qufu" label="Qufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984148" start="44003" end="44024" title="Holy Confucian Church" label="Holy Confucian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191559" start="44082" end="44092" title="Jiang Qing (Confucian)" label="Jiang Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192271" start="44177" end="44184" title="Guiyang" label="Guiyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="44186" end="44193" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="44726" end="44737" title="Proselytism" label="proselytize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179705" start="45403" end="45405" title="De (Chinese)" label="de"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069886" start="45504" end="45518" title="Great Learning" label="Great Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="45550" end="45556" title="Taoism" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q878084" start="45574" end="45580" title="wu wei" label="wu wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="45956" end="45973" title="emperors of China" label="emperors of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="46025" end="46042" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="46679" end="46682" title="ren (Confucianism)" label="ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q216072" start="46755" end="46760" title="Xunzi (philosopher)" label="Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q112079417" start="46788" end="46807" title="right of revolution" label="right of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="" start="46946" end="46970" title=":zh:s:論語/述而第七#七之一" label="&amp;quot;Analects&amp;quot; 7.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="47055" end="47063" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q352653" start="47068" end="47084" title="Herrlee G. Creel" label="Herrlee G. Creel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208000" start="47179" end="47184" title="Junzi" label="Junzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="47785" end="47796" title="meritocracy" label="meritocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="47829" end="47849" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="48075" end="48086" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q19818637" start="48469" end="48480" title="Daniel A. Bell" label="Daniel Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6191559" start="48515" end="48525" title="Jiang Qing (Confucian)" label="Jiang Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q102036018" start="49675" end="49701" title="Against Political Equality" label="Against Political Equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="49843" end="49862" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="60054" end="60092" title="Jesuit China missions" label="Jesuit missionaries stationed in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="60094" end="60106" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924133" start="60186" end="60205" title="Prospero Intorcetta" label="Prospero Intorcetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="60253" end="60258" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="60368" end="60374" title="Deism" label="Deists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="60413" end="60426" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="60510" end="60530" title="Western culture" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="60580" end="60605" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741122" start="60807" end="60830" title="Pre-established harmony" label="Pre-established harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="60918" end="60926" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126641" start="61293" end="61302" title="Han Kitab" label="Han Kitab"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="61325" end="61336" title="Hui people" label="Hui Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="61358" end="61363" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424361" start="61417" end="61424" title="Liu Zhi (scholar)" label="Liu Zhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="61531" end="61537" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q715098" start="61785" end="61795" title="Ma Fuxiang" label="Ma Fuxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q834815" start="61801" end="61818" title="New Life Movement" label="New Life Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="62463" end="62472" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="62474" end="62482" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="62484" end="62493" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="62495" end="62501" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="62503" end="62508" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="62510" end="62521" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="62531" end="62536" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="62580" end="62591" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q267605" start="62767" end="62778" title="Herman Kahn" label="Herman Kahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q105984610" start="63118" end="63132" title="state capacity" label="state capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q981411" start="64060" end="64070" title="Sun Lutang" label="Sun Lutang"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="64257" end="64265" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="64270" end="64276" title="Daoism" label="Daoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="64374" end="64379" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="64402" end="64406" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28959" start="64446" end="64453" title="Han Fei" label="Han Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="64708" end="64725" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="64774" end="64780" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="64785" end="64793" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="64856" end="64876" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23114" start="64878" end="64884" title="Lu Xun" label="Lu Xun"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="64984" end="64996" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q967831" start="65060" end="65077" title="Diary of a Madman (Lu Xun)" label="Diary of a Madman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="65457" end="65476" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="65550" end="65561" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="65883" end="65895" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="66165" end="66176" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859833" start="66226" end="66259" title="Three Obediences and Four Virtues" label="Three Obediences and Four Virtues"/>
<link wikidata="Q558380" start="66749" end="66757" title="Cheng Yi (philosopher)" label="Cheng Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="67051" end="67055" title="Ming Dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="67060" end="67064" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637643" start="67177" end="67193" title="Cult of widow chastity" label="cult of chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397" start="68565" end="68571" title="Zhu Xi" label="Zhu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33566" start="68678" end="68688" title="Sima Guang" label="Sima Guang"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="68882" end="68890" title="Analects" label="Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531743" start="69411" end="69428" title="Lessons for Women" label="Lessons for Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q177081" start="69450" end="69458" title="Ban Zhao" label="Ban Zhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q445626" start="70431" end="70444" title="Dong Zhongshu" label="Dong Zhongshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706447" start="70458" end="70503" title="Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Luxuriant Dew of the Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="70984" end="70991" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="71128" end="71140" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="71330" end="71340" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="71345" end="71356" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="71396" end="71405" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752556" start="71502" end="71527" title="Chinese ancestral worship" label="Chinese ancestral worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q126711" start="71633" end="71650" title="Pope Benedict XIV" label="Pope Benedict XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="71746" end="71759" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="71898" end="71909" title="pantheism" label="pantheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q871396" start="71914" end="71925" title="nontheism" label="nontheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="72380" end="72396" title="ancestor worship" label="ancestor worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q189819" start="72398" end="72404" title="ritual" label="ritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q179723" start="72410" end="72419" title="sacrifice" label="sacrifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="72531" end="72552" title="Chinese folk religion" label="Chinese folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q97067486" start="72788" end="72804" title="Frederick Streng" label="Frederick Streng"/>
<link wikidata="Q449695" start="73749" end="73772" title="William Edward Soothill" label="William Edward Soothill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203530" start="74052" end="74060" title="D.C. Lau" label="D.C. Lau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5822" wikidata="Q184663" url="?curid=5822" title="Chinese philosophy">
<text>Chinese philosophy originates in the Spring and Autumn period and Warring States period, during a period known as the &quot;Hundred Schools of Thought&quot;, which was characterized by significant intellectual and cultural developments. Although much of Chinese philosophy begun in the Warring States period (475–221 BCE), elements of Chinese philosophy have existed for several thousand years. Some can be found in the &quot;I Ching&quot; (the &quot;Book of Changes&quot;), an ancient compendium of divination, which dates back to at least 672 BCE.

The Han dynasty &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; by Sima Tan looked back on the Warring States era and grouped the thinkers into the major philosophical schools, Confucianism, Legalism, and Taoism, along with philosophies that later fell into obscurity, like Agriculturalism, Mohism, Chinese Naturalism, and the Logicians. Even in modern society, Confucianism is still the creed of social behaviour.

==Chinese philosophy as a philosophy==

The debate over whether the &quot;thought&quot; of ancient Chinese masters should be called philosophy has been discussed since the introduction of this academic discipline into China. See Legitimacy of Chinese philosophy for details.

==Early beliefs==
Early Shang dynasty thought was based on cycles like the 10 stems and 12 earthly branches. This notion stems from what the people of the Shang dynasty could observe around them: day and night cycles, the seasons progressed again and again, and even the moon waxed and waned until it waxed again. Thus, this notion, which remained relevant throughout Chinese history, reflects the order of nature. In juxtaposition, it also marks a fundamental distinction from western philosophy, in which the dominant view of time is a linear progression. During the Shang, Ancestor worship was present and universally recognized.

When the Shang were overthrown by the Zhou a new political, religious and philosophical concept was introduced called the Mandate of Heaven. This mandate was said to be taken when rulers became unworthy of their position and provided a justification for Zhou rule it is said that the Duke of Zhou made the early solar terms by measuring with a gnomon that was added to make the complete solar terms. He is also said to have used try squares and wrote the &quot;Zhoubi Suanjing&quot; with his astrologer. Several early beliefs might be found in the &quot;Guicang&quot; and perhaps the earliest Chinese book, the small calendar of the Xia in Da Dai Liji, though debated to exist the Xia dynasty is said to be its origin.

==Overview==
Confucianism developed during the Spring and Autumn period from the teachings of the Chinese philosopher Confucius (551–479 BCE), who considered himself a retransmitter of Zhou values. His philosophy concerns the fields of ethics and politics, emphasizing personal and governmental morality, correctness of social relationships, justice, traditionalism, and sincerity. The Analects stress the importance of ritual, but also the importance of &quot;ren&quot;, which loosely translates as &quot;human-heartedness&quot;, Confucianism, along with Legalism, is responsible for creating one of the world&#x27;s first meritocracies, which holds that one&#x27;s status should be determined by education and character rather than ancestry, wealth, or friendship. Confucianism was and continues to be a major influence in Chinese culture, the state of China and the surrounding areas of East Asia.

Before the Han dynasty the largest rivals to Confucianism were Chinese Legalism, and Mohism. Confucianism largely became the dominant philosophical school of China during the early Han dynasty following the replacement of its contemporary, the more Taoist Huang-Lao. Legalism as a coherent philosophy disappeared largely due to its relationship with the unpopular authoritarian rule of Qin Shi Huang, however, many of its ideas and institutions would continue to influence Chinese philosophy throughout the Han dynasty and after.

Mohism, though initially popular due to its emphasis on brotherly love versus harsh Legalism, fell out of favour during the Han dynasty due to the efforts of Confucians in establishing their views as political orthodoxy. The Six Dynasties era saw the rise of the Xuanxue philosophical school and the maturation of Chinese Buddhism, which had entered China from India during the Late Han dynasties. By the time of the Tang dynasty five-hundred years after Buddhism&#x27;s arrival into China, it had transformed into a thoroughly Chinese religious philosophy dominated by the school of Zen Buddhism. Neo-Confucianism became highly popular during the Song dynasty and Ming dynasty due in large part to the eventual combination of Confucian and Buddhist and even Taoist Philosophy.

During the 19th and 20th centuries, Chinese philosophy integrated concepts from Western philosophy. Anti-Qing dynasty revolutionaries, involved in the Xinhai Revolution, saw Western philosophy as an alternative to traditional philosophical schools; students in the May Fourth Movement called for completely abolishing the old imperial institutions and practices of China. During this era, Chinese scholars attempted to incorporate Western philosophical ideologies such as democracy, Marxism, socialism, liberalism, republicanism, anarchism and nationalism into Chinese philosophy. The most notable examples are Sun Yat-sen&#x27;s Three Principles of the People ideology and Mao Zedong&#x27;s Maoism, a variant of Marxism–Leninism. In the modern People&#x27;s Republic of China, the official ideology is Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s &quot;market economy socialism&quot;.

Although the People&#x27;s Republic of China has been historically hostile to the philosophy of ancient China, the influences of past are still deeply ingrained in the Chinese culture. In the post-Chinese economic reform era, modern Chinese philosophy has reappeared in forms such as &quot;New Confucianism&quot;. As in Japan, philosophy in China has become a melting pot of ideas. It accepts new concepts, while attempting also to accord old beliefs their due. Chinese philosophy still carries profound influence amongst the people of East Asia, and even Southeast Asia.

==Ancient philosophy==

=== Spring and Autumn period ===
Around 500 BCE, after the Zhou state weakened and China moved into the Spring and Autumn period, the classic period of Chinese philosophy began. This is known as the Hundred Schools of Thought (; &quot;zhūzǐ bǎijiā&quot;; &quot;various scholars, hundred schools&quot;). This period is considered the golden age of Chinese philosophy. Of the many schools founded at this time and during the subsequent Warring States period, the four most influential ones were Confucianism, Daoism (often spelled &quot;Taoism&quot;), Mohism and Legalism.

==== Confucianism ====

Confucianism is a philosophical school developed from the teachings of Confucius collected and written by his disciples after his death in &quot;The Analects&quot;, and in the Warring States period, Mencius in &quot;The Mencius&quot; and Xunzi in &quot;The Xunzi&quot;. It is a system of moral, social, political, and religious thought that has had tremendous influence on Chinese history, thought, and culture down to the 20th century. Some Westerners have considered it to have been the &quot;state religion&quot; of imperial China because of its lasting influence on Asian culture. Its influence also spread to Korea, Japan, Vietnam and many other Asian countries.

Confucianism reached its peak of influence during the Tang and Song dynasties under a rebranded Confucianism called Neo-Confucianism. Confucius expanded on the already present ideas of Chinese religion and culture to reflect the time period and environment of political chaos during the Warring States period. Because Confucius embedded the Chinese culture so heavily into his philosophy it was able to resonate with the people of China. This high approval of Confucianism can be seen through the reverence of Confucius in modern-day China.

The major Confucian concepts include filial piety, loyalty (), &quot;li&quot; (ritual), &quot;ren&quot; (humanity or humaneness), the rectification of names (i.e., to ensure everything is what its name implies it should be). Confucius taught both positive and negative versions of the Golden Rule. The concepts yin and yang represent two opposing forces that are permanently in conflict with each other, leading to perpetual contradiction and change. The Confucian idea of &quot;Rid of the two ends, take the middle&quot; is a Chinese equivalent of the idea of &quot;thesis, antithesis, and synthesis&quot;, often attributed to Hegel, which is a way of reconciling opposites, arriving at some middle ground combining the best of both.

Confucius heavily emphasized the idea of microcosms in society (subunits of family and community) success&#x27;s were the foundations for a successful state or country. Confucius believed in the use of education to further knowledge the people in ethics, societal behavior, and reverence in other humans. With the combination of education, successful family, and his ethical teachings he believed he could govern a well established society in China.

==== Taoism ====

Taoism arose as a philosophy and later also developed into a religion based on the texts the &quot;Tao Te Ching&quot; (ascribed to Laozi) and the &quot;Zhuangzi&quot; (partly ascribed to Zhuang Zhou). The word &quot;Tao&quot; (; also transliterated as &quot;Dao&quot;) literally means &#x27;path&#x27; or &#x27;way&#x27;. However, in Taoism it refers more often to a meta-physical force that encompasses the entire universe but which cannot be described nor felt.

All major Chinese philosophical schools have investigated the correct &quot;Way&quot; to go about a moral life, but in Taoism it takes on the most abstract meanings, leading this school to be named after it. It advocated nonaction (&quot;wu wei&quot;), the strength of softness, spontaneity, and relativism. Although it serves as a rival to Confucianism, a school of active morality, this rivalry is compromised and given perspective by the idiom &quot;practice Confucianism on the outside, Taoism on the inside.&quot;

Most of Taoism&#x27;s focus is on the notion that human attempts to make the world better actually make the world worse. Therefore, it is better to strive for harmony, minimising potentially harmful interference with nature or in human affairs.

=== Warring States period ===

==== Legalism ====

Philosopher Han Fei synthesized together earlier the methods of his predecessors, which famous historian Sima Tan posthumously termed Legalism. With an essential principle like &quot;when the epoch changed, the ways changed&quot;, late pre-Han dynasty reformers emphasized rule by law.

In Han Fei&#x27;s philosophy, a ruler should govern his subjects by the following trinity:
#&quot;Fa&quot; (): law or principle.
#&quot;Shu&quot; (): method, tactic, art, or statecraft.
#&quot;Shi&quot; (): legitimacy, power, or charisma.

What has been termed by some as the intrastate Realpolitik of the Warring States period was highly progressive, and extremely critical of the Confucian and Mohist schools. But that of the Qin dynasty would be blamed for creating a totalitarian society, thereby experiencing decline. Its main motto is: &quot;Set clear strict laws, or deliver harsh punishment&quot;. In Han Fei&#x27;s philosophy the ruler possessed authority regarding reward and penalty, enacted through law. Shang Yang and Han Fei promoted absolute adherence to the law, regardless of the circumstances or the person. Ministers were only to be rewarded if their words were accurate to the results of their proposals. Legalism, in accordance with Shang Yang&#x27;s interpretation, could encourage the state to be a militaristic autarky.

====Naturalists====
The School of Naturalists or the School of Yin-yang () was a Warring States era philosophy that synthesized the concepts of yin-yang and the &quot;wuxing&quot;; Zou Yan is considered the founder of this school. His theory attempted to explain the universe in terms of basic forces in nature: the complementary agents of yin (dark, cold, female, negative) and yang (light, hot, male, positive) and the Five Elements or Five Phases (water, fire, wood, metal, and earth).

In its early days, this theory was most strongly associated with the states of Yan and Qi. In later periods, these epistemological theories came to hold significance in both philosophy and popular belief. This school was absorbed into Taoism&#x27;s alchemic and magical dimensions as well as into the Chinese medical framework. The earliest surviving recordings of this are in the Mawangdui texts and &quot;Huangdi Neijing&quot;.

==== Mohism ====
Mohism (Moism), founded by Mozi, promotes universal love with the aim of mutual benefit. Everyone must love each other equally and impartially to avoid conflict and war. Mozi was strongly against Confucian ritual, instead emphasizing pragmatic survival through farming, fortification, and statecraft. Tradition is inconsistent, and human beings need an extra-traditional guide to identify which traditions are acceptable. The moral guide must then promote and encourage social behaviors that maximize general benefit. As motivation for his theory, Mozi brought in the &quot;Will of Heaven&quot;, but rather than being religious his philosophy parallels utilitarianism.

==== Logicians ====
The logicians (School of Names) were concerned with logic, paradoxes, names and actuality (similar to Confucian rectification of names). The logician Hui Shi was a friendly rival to Zhuangzi, arguing against Taoism in a light-hearted and humorous manner. Another logician, Gongsun Long, originated the famous When a White Horse is Not a Horse dialogue.

==== Agriculturalists ====
Agriculturalism was an early agrarian social and political philosophy that advocated peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism. The philosophy is founded on the notion that human society originates with the development of agriculture, and societies are based upon &quot;people&#x27;s natural propensity to farm.&quot;

The Agriculturalists believed that the ideal government, modeled after the semi-mythical governance of Shennong, is led by a benevolent king, one who works alongside the people in tilling the fields. The Agriculturalist king is not paid by the government through its treasuries; his livelihood is derived from the profits he earns working in the fields, not his leadership. Unlike the Confucians, the Agriculturalists did not believe in the division of labour, arguing instead that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon an egalitarian self sufficiency. The Agriculturalists supported the fixing of prices, in which all similar goods, regardless of differences in quality and demand, are set at exactly the same, unchanging price.

==Early imperial era philosophy==

===History===

==== Qin and Han dynasties ====

The short founder Qin dynasty, where Legalism was the official philosophy, quashed Mohist and Confucianist schools. Legalism remained influential during the early Han dynasty under the Taoist-Realist ideology Huang-Lao until Emperor Wu of Han adopted Confucianism as official doctrine. Confucianism and Taoism became the determining forces of Chinese thought until the introduction of Buddhism.

Confucianism was particularly strong during the Han dynasty, whose greatest thinker was Dong Zhongshu, who integrated Confucianism with the thoughts of the Zhongshu School and the theory of the Five Elements. He also was a promoter of the New Text school, which considered Confucius as a divine figure and a spiritual ruler of China, who foresaw and started the evolution of the world towards the Universal Peace.

In contrast, there was an Old Text school that advocated the use of Confucian works written in ancient language (from this comes the denomination &quot;Old Text&quot;) that were so much more reliable. In particular, they refuted the assumption of Confucius as a godlike figure and considered him as the greatest sage, but simply a human and mortal

==== Six Dynasties ====
The 3rd and 4th centuries saw the rise of the &quot;Xuanxue&quot; (mysterious learning), also called &quot;Neo-Taoism&quot;.

Buddhism arrived in China around the 1st century AD, but it was not until the Northern and Southern, Sui and Tang dynasties that it gained considerable influence and acknowledgement. At the beginning, it was considered a sort of Taoist sect. Mahayana Buddhism was far more successful in China than its rival Hinayana, and both Indian schools and local Chinese sects arose from the 5th century. Two chiefly important monk philosophers were Sengzhao and Daosheng. But probably the most influential and original of these schools was the Chan sect, which had an even stronger impact in Japan as the Zen sect.

In the mid-Tang Buddhism reached its peak, and reportedly there were 4,600 monasteries, 40,000 hermitages and 260,500 monks and nuns. The power of the Buddhist clergy was so great and the wealth of the monasteries so impressive, that it instigated criticism from Confucian scholars, who considered Buddhism as a foreign religion. In 845 Emperor Wuzong ordered the Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution, confiscating the riches and returning monks and nuns to lay life. From then on, Buddhism lost much of its influence.

===Schools of thought===

====Xuanxue====

Xuanxue was a philosophical school that combined elements of Confucianism and Taoism to reinterpret the I Ching&quot;,&quot;Tao Te Ching&quot;,&quot; and &quot;Zhuangzi.&quot; The most important philosophers of this movement were Wang Bi, Xiang Xiu and Guo Xiang. The main question of this school was whether Being came before Not-Being (in Chinese, &quot;ming&quot; and &quot;wuming&quot;). A peculiar feature of these Taoist thinkers, like the Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove, was the concept of &quot;feng liu&quot; (lit. wind and flow), a sort of romantic spirit which encouraged following the natural and instinctive impulse.

==== Buddhism ====
Buddhism is a religion, a practical philosophy, and arguably a psychology, focusing on the teachings of Gautama Buddha, who lived on the Indian subcontinent most likely from the mid-6th to the early 5th century BCE. When used in a generic sense, a Buddha is generally considered to be someone who discovers the true nature of reality.

Buddhism until the 4th century AD had little impact on China but in the 4th century its teachings hybridized with those of Taoism. Buddhism brought to China the idea of many hells, where sinners went, but the deceased sinners souls could be saved by pious acts. Since Chinese traditional thought focused more on ethics rather than metaphysics, the merging of Buddhist and Taoist concepts developed several schools distinct from the originating Indian schools.

The most prominent examples with philosophical merit are Sanlun, Tiantai, Huayan, and Chan (a.k.a. Zen). They investigate consciousness, levels of truth, whether reality is ultimately empty, and how enlightenment is to be achieved. Buddhism has a spiritual aspect that complements the action of Neo-Confucianism, with prominent Neo-Confucians advocating certain forms of meditation.

==Mid to late imperial era philosophy==

=== History ===
Neo-Confucianism was a revived version of old Confucian principles that appeared around the Song dynasty, with Buddhist, Taoist, and Legalist features. The first philosophers, such as Shao Yong, Zhou Dunyi and Chang Zai, were cosmologists and worked on the &quot;I Ching&quot;. The Cheng brothers, Cheng Yi and Cheng Hao, are considered the founders of the two main schools of thought of Neo-Confucianism: the School of Principle the first, the School of Mind the latter.

The School of Principle gained supremacy during the Song dynasty with the philosophical system elaborated by Zhu Xi, which became mainstream and officially adopted by the government for the imperial examinations under the Yuan dynasty. The School of Mind was developed by Lu Jiuyuan, Zhu Xi&#x27;s main rival, but was soon forgotten. Only during the Ming dynasty was the School of Mind revived by Wang Shouren, whose influence is equal to that of Zhu Xi. This school was particularly important in Japan.

During the Qing dynasty many philosophers objected against Neo-Confucianism and there was a return to the Han dynasty Confucianism, and also the reprise of the controversy between Old Text and New Text. In this period also started the penetration of Western culture, but most Chinese thought that the Westerners were maybe more advanced in technology and warfare, but that China had primacy in moral and intellectual fields.

Chinese culture was highly influential on the traditions of other East Asian states, and its philosophy directly influenced Korean philosophy, Vietnamese philosophy and Japanese philosophy. During later Chinese dynasties like the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), as well as in the Korean Joseon dynasty (1392–1897), a resurgent Neo-Confucianism led by thinkers such as Wang Yangming (1472–1529) became the dominant school of thought and was promoted by the imperial state. In Japan, the Tokugawa shogunate (1603–1867) was also strongly influenced by Confucian philosophy.

===Schools of thought===

==== Neo-Confucianism ====

Despite Confucianism losing popularity to Taoism and Buddhism, Neo-Confucianism combined those ideas into a more metaphysical framework. Its concepts include &quot;li&quot; (principle, akin to Plato&#x27;s forms), &quot;qi&quot; (vital or material force), &quot;taiji&quot; (the Great Ultimate), and &quot;xin&quot; (mind). Song dynasty philosopher Zhou Dunyi (1017–1073) is commonly seen as the first true &quot;pioneer&quot; of Neo-Confucianism, using Daoist metaphysics as a framework for his ethical philosophy.

Neo-Confucianism developed both as a renaissance of traditional Confucian ideas, and as a reaction to the ideas of Buddhism and religious Daoism. Although the Neo-Confucianists denounced Buddhist metaphysics, Neo-Confucianism did borrow Daoist and Buddhist terminology and concepts.
Neo-Confucianist philosophers like Zhu Xi and Wang Yangming are seen as the most important figures of Neo-Confucianism.

== Modern era ==

During the Industrial and Modern Ages, Chinese philosophy had also begun to integrate concepts of Western philosophy, as steps toward modernization. Chinese philosophy never developed the concept of human rights, so that classical Chinese lacked words for them. In 1864, W.A.P. Martin had to invent the word &quot;quanli&quot; () to translate the Western concept of &quot;rights&quot; in the process of translating Henry Wheaton&#x27;s &quot;Elements of International Law&quot; into classical Chinese.

By the time of the Xinhai Revolution in 1911, there were many calls such as the May Fourth Movement to completely abolish the old imperial institutions and practices of China. There have been attempts to incorporate democracy, republicanism, and industrialism into Chinese philosophy, notably by Sun Yat-Sen at the beginning of the 20th century. Mao Zedong added Marxism, Stalinism, Chinese Marxist Philosophy and other communist thought.

When the Chinese Communist Party took over in 1949, previous schools of thought were denounced as backward, and later purged during the Cultural Revolution as part of the campaign against the Four Olds.

During the General secretaryship of Xi Jinping, the Chinese Communist Party has promoted a revival in Chinese philosophy. In 2024, East China Normal University established the Chinese Zhuzi Research Institute to promote the study of Chinese philosophies.

=== New Confucianism ===
== Philosophers ==

* Confucius, seen as the Great Master but sometimes ridiculed by Taoists.
** Mencius, Confucius&#x27; follower having idealist inspiration
** Xun Zi, another Confucius&#x27; follower, closer to realism, teacher of Han Fei and Li Si
** Zhu Xi, founder of Neo-Confucianism
** Wang Yangming, most influential proponent of &quot;state of mind.&quot; (&quot;&quot;)
* Laozi, the semi-mythical founder of Taoist school.
** Zhuang Zhou, said to be the author of the &quot;Zhuangzi&quot;.
** Lie Yukou, said to be the author of the &quot;Liezi&quot;.
* Yang Zhu, proposed ethical egoism and founded Yangism.
* Mozi, the founder of Mohist school.
* Shang Yang, Legalist founder and pivotal Qin reformer
* Han Fei, one of the most notable theoreticians of Legalism
* Li Si, major proponent and practitioner of Legalism

== Concepts ==

Although the individual philosophical schools differ considerably, they nevertheless share a common vocabulary and set of concerns.

Among the terms commonly found in Chinese philosophy are:
* Dao (the Way, or one&#x27;s doctrine)
* De (virtue, power)
* Li (principle, Law)
* Qi (vital energy or material force)
* The &quot;Tai-chi&quot; (&quot;Great Heavenly Axis&quot;) forms a unity of the two complementary polarities, &quot;Yin and Yang&quot;. The word &quot;Yin&quot; originally referred to a hillside facing away from the sun. Philosophically, it stands the dark, passive, feminine principle; whereas &quot;Yang&quot; (the hillside facing the sun) stands for the bright, active, masculine principle. Yin and Yang are not antagonistic, they alternate in inverse proportion to one another—like the rise and fall of a wave and are known by their comparison.

Among the commonalities of Chinese philosophies are:
* The tendency not to view man as separate from nature.
* Questions about the nature and existence of a monotheistic deity, which have profoundly influenced Western philosophy, have not been important in Chinese philosophies or a source of great conflict in Chinese traditional religion.
* The belief that the purpose of philosophy is primarily to serve as an ethical and practical guide.
* The political focus: most scholars of the Hundred Schools were trying to convince the ruler to behave in the way they defended.

== See also ==

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Bo Mou (Editor), &quot;History of Chinese Philosophy&quot;, Routledge, 2009.
* Antonio S. Cua (Editor), &quot;Encyclopedia of Chinese Philosophy&quot;, Routledge, 2003.
* Feng Youlan, &quot;A History of Chinese Philosophy&quot; (Princeton Paperbacks), tr. Derk Bodde, 1983.
* Herrlee Glessner Creel, &quot;Chinese Thought, from Confucius to Mao Zedong&quot;, 1971.
* A. C. Graham, &quot;Disputers of the Tao; Philosophical Argument in Ancient China&quot;, 1989.
* Christoph Harbsmeier, &quot;Logic and Language in Ancient China&quot;, Joseph Needham, &quot;Science and Civilisation in China&quot;, Volume 7, Part I, Cambridge University Press, 1998.
* Philip J. Ivanhoe and Bryan W. Van Norden (Editors), &quot;Readings in Classical Chinese Philosophy&quot;, 2nd edition, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2005.
* Karyn Lai, &quot;Introduction to Chinese Philosophy&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
* Lin Yutang, &quot;The Importance of Living&quot;, William Morrow Paperbacks, 1998.
* Jana S. Rošker, &quot;Searching for the Way: Theory of Knowledge in Pre-modern and Modern Chinese Philosophy&quot; Hong Kong Chinese University Press, 2008.
* Roel Sterckx, &quot;Chinese Thought. From Confucius to Cook Ding.&quot; London: Penguin, 2019.
* Roel Sterckx, &quot;Ways of Heaven. An Introduction to Chinese Thought.&quot; New York: Basic Books, 2019.
* Justin Tiwald and Bryan W. Van Norden (Editors), &quot;Readings in Later Chinese Philosophy: Han Dynasty to the 20th Century&quot;, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2014.
* Bryan W. Van Norden, &quot;Introduction to Classical Chinese Philosophy&quot;, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing, 2011.
* Arthur Waley, &quot;Three Ways of Thought in Ancient China&quot;, 1983.

== External links ==
*
*
*
* 
* Article &quot;The Chinese Concept of Space&quot;
* Article &quot;The Chinese Concept of Time&quot;
* The Hundred Schools of Thought
* Chinese Text Project – Chinese philosophy texts in classical Chinese with English and modern Chinese translations
* Contesting Confucius Henry Zhao, New Left Review 44, March–April 2007
* &quot;Encyclopédie ou Dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers&quot;, 1751–1772, &quot;&quot;Philosophie des Chinois&quot; [in French]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="0" end="18" title="Chinese philosophy" label="Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="37" end="61" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="66" end="87" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="124" end="150" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="Hundred Schools of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="426" end="433" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043197" start="500" end="510" title="divination" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="555" end="566" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="573" end="603" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401828" start="613" end="621" title="Sima Tan" label="Sima Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="723" end="735" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="737" end="745" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="751" end="757" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196535" start="820" end="835" title="Agriculturalism" label="Agriculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="837" end="843" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195540" start="845" end="863" title="School of Naturalists" label="Chinese Naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q61906" start="873" end="882" title="School of Names" label="Logicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518476" start="1191" end="1223" title="Legitimacy of Chinese philosophy" label="Legitimacy of Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="1262" end="1275" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190985" start="1313" end="1321" title="Heavenly Stems" label="10 stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072961" start="1326" end="1345" title="Earthly Branches" label="12 earthly branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="1606" end="1621" title="Chinese history" label="Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="1716" end="1734" title="western philosophy" label="western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q238199" start="1814" end="1830" title="Ancestor worship" label="Ancestor worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="1910" end="1914" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="1994" end="2011" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q468747" start="2156" end="2168" title="Duke of Zhou" label="Duke of Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q236279" start="2216" end="2222" title="gnomon" label="gnomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190993" start="2259" end="2269" title="solar term" label="solar term"/>
<link wikidata="Q569316" start="2301" end="2311" title="try square" label="try square"/>
<link wikidata="Q198052" start="2333" end="2348" title="Zhoubi Suanjing" label="Zhoubi Suanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q11069468" start="2426" end="2433" title="Guicang" label="Guicang"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="2639" end="2663" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="2710" end="2719" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="3148" end="3156" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178079" start="3216" end="3229" title="meritocracy" label="meritocracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q402152" start="3326" end="3334" title="ancestry" label="ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q200535" start="3336" end="3342" title="wealth" label="wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q491" start="3347" end="3357" title="friendship" label="friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="3447" end="3452" title="History of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="3482" end="3491" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="3557" end="3573" title="Chinese Legalism" label="Chinese Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="3579" end="3585" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="3675" end="3686" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282973" start="3750" end="3759" title="Huang-Lao" label="Huang-Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="3880" end="3893" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="4149" end="4160" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197281" start="4250" end="4263" title="Six Dynasties" label="Six Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q599057" start="4288" end="4295" title="Xuanxue" label="Xuanxue"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="4347" end="4355" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="4442" end="4454" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="4609" end="4621" title="Zen" label="Zen Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="4623" end="4639" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="4673" end="4685" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="4690" end="4702" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="4884" end="4902" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4909" end="4921" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="4955" end="4972" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="5069" end="5088" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="5276" end="5285" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="5287" end="5294" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="5296" end="5305" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="5307" end="5317" title="liberalism" label="liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="5319" end="5332" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="5334" end="5343" title="anarchism" label="anarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="5348" end="5359" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="5415" end="5426" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q260998" start="5434" end="5464" title="Three Principles of the People" label="Three Principles of the People"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="5478" end="5488" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="5496" end="5502" title="Maoism" label="Maoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="5517" end="5533" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5575" end="5580" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="5607" end="5620" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q13713793" start="5634" end="5658" title="Socialist market economy" label="market economy socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="5835" end="5850" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="5864" end="5887" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Chinese economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q840873" start="5957" end="5973" title="New Confucianism" label="New Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="5987" end="5992" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="6203" end="6212" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="6223" end="6237" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="6368" end="6392" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="6463" end="6489" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="Hundred Schools of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="6698" end="6719" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="6757" end="6769" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="6771" end="6777" title="Taoism" label="Daoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="6814" end="6820" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="6825" end="6833" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="7005" end="7017" title="The Analects" label="The Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="7036" end="7057" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="7059" end="7066" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195444" start="7076" end="7087" title="The Mencius" label="The Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q216072" start="7098" end="7103" title="Xun Kuang" label="Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722310" start="7113" end="7122" title="Xunzi (book)" label="The Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="7148" end="7153" title="morality" label="moral"/>
<link wikidata="Q180592" start="7155" end="7161" title="social philosophy" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="7163" end="7172" title="politics" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="7178" end="7187" title="religion" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="7355" end="7369" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="7379" end="7393" title="imperial China" label="imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="7583" end="7587" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="7592" end="7596" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="7645" end="7661" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="7816" end="7837" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="8108" end="8120" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="8140" end="8142" title="Li (Confucian)" label="li"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="8165" end="8168" title="Ren (Confucianism)" label="ren"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204213" start="8205" end="8227" title="rectification of names" label="rectification of names"/>
<link wikidata="Q189573" start="8356" end="8367" title="Golden Rule" label="Golden Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="8382" end="8394" title="yin and yang" label="yin and yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="8699" end="8704" title="Hegel" label="Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q134425" start="9375" end="9387" title="Tao Te Ching" label="Tao Te Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="9407" end="9412" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074987" start="9428" end="9436" title="Zhuangzi (book)" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47739" start="9463" end="9474" title="Zhuang Zhou" label="Zhuang Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="9492" end="9495" title="Tao" label="Tao"/>
<link wikidata="Q878084" start="9979" end="9985" title="wu wei" label="wu wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q28959" start="10570" end="10577" title="Han Fei" label="Han Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401828" start="10663" end="10671" title="Sima Tan" label="Sima Tan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="10798" end="10809" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="11273" end="11284" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="11316" end="11328" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="11867" end="11879" title="militarism" label="militaristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q309070" start="11880" end="11887" title="autarky" label="autarky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195540" start="11914" end="11935" title="School of Naturalists" label="School of Naturalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="11971" end="11985" title="Warring States" label="Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="12034" end="12042" title="yin-yang" label="yin-yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="12057" end="12063" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="wuxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q227022" start="12071" end="12078" title="Zou Yan" label="Zou Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055713" start="12459" end="12462" title="Yan (state)" label="Yan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="12467" end="12469" title="Qi (state)" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794358" start="12761" end="12770" title="Mawangdui Silk Texts" label="Mawangdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q428448" start="12787" end="12802" title="Huangdi Neijing" label="Huangdi Neijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="12828" end="12834" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="12855" end="12859" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q126692" start="13062" end="13071" title="pragmatism" label="pragmatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="13098" end="13111" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="13117" end="13127" title="Public administration" label="statecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="13481" end="13495" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q943012" start="13668" end="13675" title="Hui Shi" label="Hui Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47739" start="13700" end="13708" title="Zhuang Zhou" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362266" start="13791" end="13803" title="Gongsun Long" label="Gongsun Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498031" start="13827" end="13860" title="When a White Horse is Not a Horse" label="When a White Horse is Not a Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196535" start="13899" end="13914" title="Agriculturalism" label="Agriculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="13928" end="13936" title="Agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="13992" end="13999" title="utopian" label="utopian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="14016" end="14030" title="egalitarianism" label="egalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="14126" end="14137" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q313336" start="14326" end="14334" title="Shennong" label="Shennong"/>
<link wikidata="Q207449" start="14664" end="14682" title="division of labour" label="division of labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="14777" end="14793" title="self sufficiency" label="self sufficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200230" start="14830" end="14846" title="price fixing" label="fixing of prices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="15074" end="15085" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147887" start="15131" end="15170" title="To burn the classics and to bury the scholars" label="quashed Mohist and Confucianist schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="15219" end="15230" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282973" start="15265" end="15274" title="Huang-Lao" label="Huang-Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="15281" end="15298" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Emperor Wu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="15441" end="15449" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q445626" start="15540" end="15553" title="Dong Zhongshu" label="Dong Zhongshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q599057" start="16292" end="16299" title="Xuanxue" label="Xuanxue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="16444" end="16465" title="Southern and Northern dynasties" label="Northern and Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="16467" end="16470" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="16475" end="16479" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="16608" end="16625" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193814" start="16674" end="16682" title="Hinayana" label="Hinayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q724293" start="16805" end="16813" title="Sengzhao" label="Sengzhao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822759" start="16818" end="16826" title="Daosheng" label="Daosheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q940709" start="16900" end="16904" title="Chan Buddhism" label="Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="16961" end="16964" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9801" start="17317" end="17323" title="Emperor Wuzong of Tang" label="Wuzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598658" start="17336" end="17367" title="Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution" label="Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q599057" start="17530" end="17537" title="Xuanxue" label="Xuanxue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="17591" end="17603" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="17608" end="17614" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="17634" end="17641" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q134425" start="17654" end="17666" title="Tao Te Ching" label="Tao Te Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074987" start="17690" end="17698" title="Zhuangzi (book)" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q459865" start="17760" end="17767" title="Wang Bi" label="Wang Bi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147782" start="17769" end="17778" title="Xiang Xiu" label="Xiang Xiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291953" start="17783" end="17792" title="Guo Xiang" label="Guo Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336646" start="17976" end="18007" title="Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove" label="Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888684" start="18207" end="18227" title="practical philosophy" label="practical philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="18244" end="18254" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="18285" end="18299" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautama Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="18318" end="18337" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q56247062" start="18429" end="18435" title="Buddhahood" label="Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5551108" start="18497" end="18514" title="Reality in Buddhism" label="nature of reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="18848" end="18859" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206580" start="19035" end="19041" title="Sanlun" label="Sanlun"/>
<link wikidata="Q668188" start="19043" end="19050" title="Tiantai" label="Tiantai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198075" start="19052" end="19058" title="Huayan school" label="Huayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q940709" start="19064" end="19068" title="Chan Buddhism" label="Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17029618" start="19100" end="19113" title="higher consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137019" start="19177" end="19190" title="Enlightenment in Buddhism" label="enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="19273" end="19289" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="19419" end="19435" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="19511" end="19523" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="19530" end="19538" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="19540" end="19546" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="19552" end="19560" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q722288" start="19603" end="19612" title="Shao Yong" label="Shao Yong"/>
<link wikidata="Q197962" start="19614" end="19624" title="Zhou Dunyi" label="Zhou Dunyi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19629" end="19638" title="Chang Zai" label="Chang Zai"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="19645" end="19657" title="cosmologists" label="cosmologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="19682" end="19689" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q48880876" start="19701" end="19715" title="Cheng brothers" label="Cheng brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q558380" start="19717" end="19725" title="Cheng Yi (philosopher)" label="Cheng Yi"/>
<link wikidata="Q558192" start="19730" end="19739" title="Cheng Hao" label="Cheng Hao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19829" end="19848" title="School of Principle" label="School of Principle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19864" end="19878" title="School of Mind" label="School of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397" start="20001" end="20007" title="Zhu Xi" label="Zhu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="20114" end="20126" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20128" end="20146" title="The School of Mind" label="The School of Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466384" start="20164" end="20174" title="Lu Jiuyuan" label="Lu Jiuyuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="20242" end="20254" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q378462" start="20289" end="20301" title="Wang Yangming" label="Wang Shouren"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="20408" end="20420" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039392" start="20947" end="20964" title="Korean philosophy" label="Korean philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2791725" start="20966" end="20987" title="Vietnamese philosophy" label="Vietnamese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194146" start="20992" end="21011" title="Japanese philosophy" label="Japanese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="21053" end="21065" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="21104" end="21118" title="Joseon dynasty" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="21144" end="21160" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q378462" start="21185" end="21198" title="Wang Yangming" label="Wang Yangming"/>
<link wikidata="Q205662" start="21303" end="21321" title="Tokugawa shogunate" label="Tokugawa shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="21506" end="21522" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="21556" end="21568" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875698" start="21607" end="21609" title="Li (Neo-Confucianism)" label="li"/>
<link wikidata="Q859" start="21636" end="21641" title="Plato" label="Plato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068658" start="21649" end="21654" title="Theory of forms" label="forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="21663" end="21665" title="qi" label="qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53685" start="21705" end="21710" title="Taiji (philosophy)" label="taiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044471" start="21749" end="21752" title="Xin (heart-mind)" label="xin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="21767" end="21779" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q197962" start="21792" end="21802" title="Zhou Dunyi" label="Zhou Dunyi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397" start="22278" end="22284" title="Zhu Xi" label="Zhu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q378462" start="22289" end="22302" title="Wang Yangming" label="Wang Yangming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="22581" end="22593" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004285" start="22653" end="22666" title="William Alexander Parsons Martin" label="W.A.P. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q879316" start="22797" end="22810" title="Henry Wheaton" label="Henry Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358932" start="22824" end="22853" title="Elements of International Law" label="Elements of International Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="22904" end="22921" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="22965" end="22984" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="23101" end="23110" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="23112" end="23125" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="23131" end="23144" title="industrialism" label="industrialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="23181" end="23192" title="Sun Yat-Sen" label="Sun Yat-Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="23231" end="23241" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="23248" end="23255" title="Marxism" label="Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="23257" end="23266" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160095" start="23268" end="23294" title="Chinese Marxist Philosophy" label="Chinese Marxist Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="23305" end="23314" title="Communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="23334" end="23357" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="23358" end="23367" title="Chinese Civil War" label="took over"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="23461" end="23480" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1713721" start="23517" end="23526" title="Four Olds" label="Four Olds"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161605" start="23540" end="23575" title="General secretaryship of Xi Jinping" label="General secretaryship of Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="23581" end="23604" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034790" start="23660" end="23688" title="East China Normal University" label="East China Normal University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="23832" end="23841" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="23907" end="23914" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q216072" start="23972" end="23978" title="Xun Zi" label="Xun Zi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397" start="24065" end="24071" title="Zhu Xi" label="Zhu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="24084" end="24100" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q378462" start="24104" end="24117" title="Wang Yangming" label="Wang Yangming"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="24193" end="24198" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47739" start="24247" end="24258" title="Zhuang Zhou" label="Zhuang Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074987" start="24295" end="24303" title="Zhuangzi (book)" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984064" start="24314" end="24323" title="Lie Yukou" label="Lie Yukou"/>
<link wikidata="Q434429" start="24360" end="24365" title="Liezi" label="Liezi"/>
<link wikidata="Q469931" start="24375" end="24383" title="Yang Zhu" label="Yang Zhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8048589" start="24421" end="24428" title="Yangism" label="Yangism"/>
<link wikidata="Q272411" start="24432" end="24436" title="Mozi" label="Mozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q351345" start="24470" end="24480" title="Shang Yang" label="Shang Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28959" start="24526" end="24533" title="Han Fei" label="Han Fei"/>
<link wikidata="Q152919" start="24587" end="24592" title="Li Si" label="Li Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q190393" start="24849" end="24852" title="Tao" label="Dao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179705" start="24889" end="24891" title="De (Chinese)" label="De"/>
<link wikidata="Q11875698" start="24910" end="24912" title="Li (Neo-Confucianism)" label="Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135373" start="24925" end="24928" title="Chinese law" label="Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q202742" start="24932" end="24934" title="Qi" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q53685" start="24980" end="24987" title="Taiji (philosophy)" label="Tai-chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62744" start="25085" end="25097" title="Yin and Yang" label="Yin and Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="25478" end="25482" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100947" start="25676" end="25694" title="Chinese names for the God of Abrahamic religions" label="monotheistic deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074275" start="25830" end="25858" title="Chinese traditional religion" label="Chinese traditional religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="26005" end="26020" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="Hundred Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776552" start="26228" end="26242" title="Antonio Cua" label="Antonio S. Cua"/>
<link wikidata="Q557220" start="26320" end="26331" title="Feng Youlan" label="Feng Youlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q373880" start="26405" end="26415" title="Derk Bodde" label="Derk Bodde"/>
<link wikidata="Q352653" start="26425" end="26447" title="Herrlee Glessner Creel" label="Herrlee Glessner Creel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183820" start="26801" end="26818" title="Philip J. Ivanhoe" label="Philip J. Ivanhoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033817" start="26823" end="26842" title="Bryan W. Van Norden" label="Bryan W. Van Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q334086" start="27058" end="27068" title="Lin Yutang" label="Lin Yutang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6150578" start="27143" end="27157" title="Jana S. Rošker" label="Jana S. Rošker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957972" start="27302" end="27314" title="Roel Sterckx" label="Roel Sterckx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957972" start="27399" end="27411" title="Roel Sterckx" label="Roel Sterckx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27508" end="27521" title="Justin Tiwald" label="Justin Tiwald"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033817" start="27526" end="27545" title="Bryan W. Van Norden" label="Bryan W. Van Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033817" start="27682" end="27701" title="Bryan W. Van Norden" label="Bryan W. Van Norden"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="27803" end="27815" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5823" wikidata="Q4604" url="?curid=5823" title="Confucius">
<text>Confucius (; pinyin: ; ; ), born Kong Qiu (), was a Chinese philosopher of the Spring and Autumn period who is traditionally considered the paragon of Chinese sages. Much of the shared cultural heritage of the Sinosphere originates in the philosophy and teachings of Confucius. His philosophical teachings, called Confucianism, emphasized personal and governmental morality, harmonious social relationships, righteousness, kindness, sincerity, and a ruler&#x27;s responsibilities to lead by virtue.

Confucius considered himself a transmitter for the values of earlier periods which he claimed had been abandoned in his time. He advocated for filial piety, endorsing strong family loyalty, ancestor veneration, the respect of elders by their children and of husbands by their wives. Confucius recommended a robust family unit as the cornerstone for an ideal government. He championed the Silver Rule, or a negative form of the Golden Rule, advising, &quot;Do not do unto others what you do not want done to yourself.&quot;

The time of Confucius&#x27;s life saw a rich diversity of thought, and was a formative period in China&#x27;s intellectual history. His ideas gained in prominence during the Warring States period, but experienced setback immediately following the Qin conquest. Under Emperor Wu of Han, Confucius&#x27;s ideas received official sanction, with affiliated works becoming mandatory readings for career paths leading to officialdom. During the Tang and Song dynasties, Confucianism developed into a system known in the West as Neo-Confucianism, and later as New Confucianism. From ancient dynasties to the modern era, Confucianism has integrated into the Chinese social fabric and way of life.

Traditionally, Confucius is credited with having authored or edited many of the ancient texts including all of the Five Classics. However, modern scholars exercise caution in attributing specific assertions to Confucius himself, for at least some of the texts and philosophy associated with him were of a more ancient origin. Aphorisms concerning his teachings were compiled in the &quot;Analects&quot;, but not until many years after his death.

==Name==

The name &quot;Confucius&quot; is a Latinized form of the Mandarin Chinese (, &quot;Master Kong&quot;), and was coined in the late 16th century by early Jesuit missionaries to China. Confucius&#x27;s family name was Kong () and his given name was Qiu (). His courtesy name, a capping (&quot;guan&quot;: ) given at his coming of age ceremony, and by which he would have been known to all but his older family members, was Zhongni (), the &quot;Zhòng&quot; indicating that he was the second son in his family.

==Life==

===Early life===
It is thought that Confucius was born on 28 September 551 BCE, in Zou (, in modern Shandong). The area was notionally controlled by the kings of Zhou but effectively independent under the local lords of Lu, who ruled from the nearby city of Qufu. His father Kong He (or Shuliang He) was an elderly commandant of the local Lu garrison. His ancestry traced back through the dukes of Song to the Shang dynasty which had preceded the Zhou. Traditional accounts of Confucius&#x27;s life relate that Kong He&#x27;s grandfather had migrated the family from Song to Lu. Not all modern scholars accept Confucius&#x27;s descent from Song nobility.

Kong He died when Confucius was three years old, and Confucius was raised by his mother Yan Zhengzai () in poverty. His mother later died at less than 40 years of age. At age 19, he married Lady Qiguan (), and a year later the couple had their first child, their son Kong Li (). Qiguan and Confucius later had two daughters together, one of whom is thought to have died as a child and one was named Kong Jiao ().

Confucius was educated at schools for commoners, where he studied and learned the Six Arts.

Confucius was born into the class of &quot;shi&quot; (), between the aristocracy and the common people. He is said to have worked in various government jobs during his early 20s, and as a bookkeeper and a caretaker of sheep and horses, using the proceeds to give his mother a proper burial. When his mother died, Confucius (aged 23) is said to have mourned for three years, as was the tradition.

===Political career===
In Confucius&#x27;s time, the state of Lu was headed by a ruling ducal house. Under the duke were three aristocratic families, whose heads bore the title of viscount and held hereditary positions in the Lu bureaucracy. The Ji family held the position &quot;Minister over the Masses&quot;, who was also the &quot;Prime Minister&quot;; the Meng family held the position &quot;Minister of Works&quot;; and the Shu family held the position &quot;Minister of War&quot;. In the winter of , Yang Hu—a retainer of the Ji family—rose up in rebellion and seized power from the Ji family. However, by the summer of , the three hereditary families had succeeded in expelling Yang Hu from Lu. By then, Confucius had built up a considerable reputation through his teachings, while the families came to see the value of proper conduct and righteousness, so they could achieve loyalty to a legitimate government. Thus, that year (), Confucius came to be appointed to the minor position of governor of a town. Eventually, he rose to the position of Minister of Crime. The &quot;Xunzi&quot; says that once assuming the post, Confucius ordered the execution of Shaozheng Mao, another Lu state official and scholar whose lectures attracted the three thousand disciples several times except Yan Hui. Shaozheng Mao was accused of &#x27;five crimes&#x27;, each worth execution, including &#x27;concealed evilness, stubborn abnormality, eloquent duplicity, erudition in bizarre facts and generosity to evildoers&#x27;.

Confucius desired to return the authority of the state to the duke by dismantling the fortifications of the city—strongholds belonging to the three families. This way, he could establish a centralized government. However, Confucius relied solely on diplomacy as he had no military authority himself. In , Hou Fan—the governor of Hou—revolted against his lord of the Shu family. Although the Meng and Shu families unsuccessfully besieged Hou, a loyalist official rose up with the people of Hou and forced Hou Fan to flee to the state of Qi. The situation may have been in favor for Confucius as this likely made it possible for Confucius and his disciples to convince the aristocratic families to dismantle the fortifications of their cities. Eventually, after a year and a half, Confucius and his disciples succeeded in convincing the Shu family to raze the walls of Hou, the Ji family in razing the walls of Bi, and the Meng family in razing the walls of Cheng. First, the Shu family led an army towards their city Hou and tore down its walls in .
Soon thereafter, Gongshan Furao, a retainer of the Ji family, revolted and took control of the forces at Bi. He immediately launched an attack and entered the capital Lu. Earlier, Gongshan had approached Confucius to join him, which Confucius considered as he wanted the opportunity to put his principles into practice but he gave up on the idea in the end. Confucius disapproved the use of a violent revolution by principle, even though the Ji family dominated the Lu state by force for generations and had exiled the previous duke. Creel states that, unlike the rebel Yang Hu before him, Gongshan may have sought to destroy the three hereditary families and restore the power of the duke. However, Dubs is of the view that Gongshan was encouraged by Viscount Ji Huan to invade the Lu capital in an attempt to avoid dismantling the Bi fortified walls. Whatever the situation may have been, Gongshan was considered an upright man who continued to defend the state of Lu, even after he was forced to flee.

During the revolt by Gongshan, Zhong You had managed to keep the duke and the three viscounts together at the court. Zhong You was one of the disciples of Confucius and Confucius had arranged for him to be given the position of governor by the Ji family. When Confucius heard of the raid, he requested that Viscount Ji Huan allow the duke and his court to retreat to a stronghold on his palace grounds. Thereafter, the heads of the three families and the duke retreated to the Ji&#x27;s palace complex and ascended the Wuzi Terrace. Confucius ordered two officers to lead an assault against the rebels. At least one of the two officers was a retainer of the Ji family, but they were unable to refuse the orders while in the presence of the duke, viscounts, and court. The rebels were pursued and defeated at Gu. Immediately after the revolt was defeated, the Ji family razed the Bi city walls to the ground.

The attackers retreated after realizing that they would have to become rebels against the state and their lord. Through Confucius&#x27; actions, the Bi officials had inadvertently revolted against their own lord, thus forcing Viscount Ji Huan&#x27;s hand in having to dismantle the walls of Bi—as it could have harbored such rebels—or confess to instigating the event by going against proper conduct and righteousness as an official. Dubs suggests that the incident brought to light Confucius&#x27; foresight, practical political ability, and insight into human character.

When it was time to dismantle the city walls of the Meng family, the governor was reluctant to have his city walls torn down and convinced the head of the Meng family not to do so. The &quot;Zuo Zhuan&quot; recalls that the governor advised against razing the walls to the ground as he said that it made Cheng vulnerable to Qi, and cause the destruction of the Meng family. Even though Viscount Meng Yi gave his word not to interfere with an attempt, he went back on his earlier promise to dismantle the walls.

Later in , Duke Ding of Lu personally went with an army to lay siege to Cheng in an attempt to raze its walls to the ground, but he did not succeed. Thus, Confucius could not achieve the idealistic reforms that he wanted including restoration of the legitimate rule of the duke. He had made powerful enemies within the state, especially with Viscount Ji Huan, due to his successes so far. According to accounts in the &quot;Zuo Zhuan&quot; and the &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot;, Confucius departed his homeland in after his support for the failed attempt of dismantling the fortified city walls of the powerful Ji, Meng, and Shu families. He left the state of Lu without resigning, remaining in self-exile and unable to return as long as Viscount Ji Huan was alive.

===Exile===

The &quot;Shiji&quot; stated that the neighboring Qi state was worried that Lu was becoming too powerful while Confucius was involved in the government of the Lu state. According to this account, Qi decided to sabotage Lu&#x27;s reforms by sending 100 good horses and 80 beautiful dancing girls to the duke of Lu. The duke indulged himself in pleasure and did not attend to official duties for three days. Confucius was disappointed and resolved to leave Lu and seek better opportunities, yet to leave at once would expose the misbehavior of the duke and therefore bring public humiliation to the ruler Confucius was serving. Confucius therefore waited for the duke to make a lesser mistake. Soon after, the duke neglected to send to Confucius a portion of the sacrificial meat that was his due according to custom, and Confucius seized upon this pretext to leave both his post and the Lu state.

After Confucius&#x27;s resignation, he travelled around the principality states of north-east and central China including Wey, Song, Zheng, Cao, Chu, Qi, Chen, and Cai (and a failed attempt to go to Jin). At the courts of these states, he expounded his political beliefs but did not see them implemented.

===Return home===
According to the &quot;Zuozhuan&quot;, Confucius returned home to his native Lu when he was 68, after he was invited to do so by Ji Kangzi, the chief minister of Lu. The &quot;Shiji&quot; depicts him spending his last years teaching 3000 pupils, with 72 or 77 accomplished disciples that mastered the Six Arts. Meanwhile, Confucius dedicated himself in transmitting the old wisdom by writing or editing the Five Classics.

During his return, Confucius sometimes acted as an advisor to several government officials in Lu, including Ji Kangzi, on matters including governance and crime.

Burdened by the loss of both his son and his favorite disciples, he died at the age of 71 or 72 from natural causes. Confucius was buried on the bank of the Sishui River, to the north of Qufu City in Shandong Province. Starting as a humble tomb, the cemetery of Confucius had been expanded by emperors since the Han Dynasty. To date, the Cemetery of Confucius (孔林) covers an area of 183 hectares with more than 100,000 graves of the Kong descendants, it is included in the World Heritage List for its cultural and architectural value.

==Philosophy==

In the &quot;Analects&quot;, Confucius presents himself as a &quot;transmitter who invented nothing&quot;. He puts the greatest emphasis on the importance of study, and it is the Chinese character for study (學) that opens the text. Far from trying to build a systematic or formalist theory, he wanted his disciples to master and internalize older classics, so that they can capture the ancient wisdoms that promotes &quot;harmony and order&quot;, to aid their self-cultivation to become a perfect man. For example, the &quot;Annals&quot; would allow them to relate the moral problems of the present to past political events; the &quot;Book of Odes&quot; reflects the &quot;mood and concerns&quot; of the commoners and their view on government; while the &quot;Book of Changes&quot; encompasses the key theory and practice of divination.

Although some Chinese people follow Confucianism in a religious manner, many argue that its values are secular and that it is less a religion than a secular morality. Proponents of religious Confucianism argue that despite the secular nature of Confucianism&#x27;s teachings, it is based on a worldview that is religious. Confucius was considered more of a humanist than a spiritualist, his discussions on afterlife and views concerning Heaven remained indeterminate, and he is largely unconcerned with spiritual matters often considered essential to religious thought, such as the nature of souls.

===Ethics===
One of the deepest teachings of Confucius may have been the superiority of personal exemplification over explicit rules of behavior. His moral teachings emphasized self-cultivation, emulation of moral exemplars, and the attainment of skilled judgment rather than knowledge of rules. Confucian ethics may, therefore, be considered a type of virtue ethics. His teachings rarely rely on reasoned argument, and ethical ideals and methods are conveyed indirectly, through allusion, innuendo, and even tautology. His teachings require examination and context to be understood. A good example is found in this famous anecdote:

This remark was considered a strong manifestation of Confucius&#x27; advocacy in humanism.

One of his teachings was a variant of the Golden Rule, sometimes called the &quot;Silver Rule&quot; owing to its negative form:

Often overlooked in Confucian ethics are the virtues to the self: sincerity and the cultivation of knowledge. Virtuous action towards others begins with virtuous and sincere thought, which begins with knowledge. A virtuous disposition without knowledge is susceptible to corruption, and virtuous action without sincerity is not true righteousness. Cultivating knowledge and sincerity is also important for one&#x27;s own sake; the superior person loves learning for the sake of learning and righteousness for the sake of righteousness.

The Confucian theory of ethics as exemplified in &quot;lǐ&quot; () is based on three important conceptual aspects of life: (a) ceremonies associated with sacrifice to ancestors and deities of various types, (b) social and political institutions, and (c) the etiquette of daily behavior. Some believed that &quot;lǐ&quot; originated from the heavens, but Confucius stressed the development of &quot;lǐ&quot; through the actions of sage leaders in human history. His discussions of &quot;lǐ&quot; seem to redefine the term to refer to all actions committed by a person to build the ideal society, rather than those conforming with canonical standards of ceremony.

In the early Confucian tradition, &quot;lǐ&quot; was doing the proper thing at the proper time; balancing between maintaining existing norms to perpetuate an ethical social fabric, and violating them in order to accomplish ethical good. Training in the &quot;lǐ&quot; of past sages, cultivates virtues in people that include ethical judgment about when &quot;lǐ&quot; must be adapted in light of situational contexts.

In Confucianism, the concept of &quot;li&quot; is closely related to &quot;yì&quot; (), which is based upon the idea of reciprocity. &quot;Yì&quot; can be translated as righteousness, though it may mean what is ethically best to do in a certain context. The term contrasts with action done out of self-interest or profitableness (). While pursuing one&#x27;s own self-interest is not necessarily bad, one would be a better, more righteous person if one&#x27;s life was based upon following a path designed to enhance the greater good. Thus an outcome of &quot;yì&quot; is doing the right thing for its own sake, without regarding the material gains.

Just as action according to &quot;lǐ&quot; should be adapted to conform to the aspiration of adhering to &quot;yì&quot;, so &quot;yì&quot; is linked to the core value of &quot;rén&quot; (). &quot;Rén&quot; consists of five basic virtues: seriousness, generosity, sincerity, diligence, and kindness. &quot;Rén&quot; is the virtue of perfectly fulfilling one&#x27;s responsibilities toward others, most often translated as &quot;benevolence&quot;, &quot;humaneness&quot;, or &quot;empathy&quot;; translator Arthur Waley calls it &quot;Goodness&quot; (with a capital &quot;G&quot;), and other translations that have been put forth include &quot;authoritativeness&quot; and &quot;selflessness&quot;. Confucius&#x27;s moral system was based upon empathy and understanding others, rather than divinely ordained rules. To develop one&#x27;s spontaneous responses of &quot;rén&quot; so that these could guide action intuitively was even better than living by the rules of &quot;yì&quot;. Confucius asserts that virtue is a mean between extremes. For example, the properly generous person gives the right amount – not too much and not too little.

===Politics===
Confucius&#x27;s political thought is based upon his ethical thought. He argued that the best government is one that rules through &quot;rites&quot; (&quot;lǐ&quot;) and morality, and &quot;not&quot; by using incentives and coercion. He explained that this is one of the most important analects: &quot;If the people be led by laws, and uniformity sought to be given them by punishments, they will try to avoid the punishment, but have no sense of shame. If they be led by virtue, and uniformity sought to be given them by the rules of propriety, they will have the sense of the shame, and moreover will become good.&quot; (&quot;Analects&quot; 2.3, tr. Legge). This &quot;sense of shame&quot; is an internalization of duty. Confucianism prioritizes creating a harmonious society over the ruler&#x27;s interests, opposes material incentives and harsh punishments, and downplays the role of institutions in guiding behavior as in Legalism, emphasizing moral virtues instead.

Confucius looked nostalgically upon earlier days, and urged the Chinese, particularly those with political power, to model themselves on earlier examples. In times of division, chaos, and endless wars between feudal states, he wanted to restore the Mandate of Heaven () that could unify the &quot;world&quot; (, &quot;all under Heaven&quot;) and bestow peace and prosperity on the people. Because his vision of personal and social perfections was framed as a revival of the ordered society of earlier times, Confucius is often considered a great proponent of conservatism, but a closer look at what he proposes often shows that he used (and perhaps twisted) past institutions and rites to push a new political agenda of his own: a revival of a unified royal state, whose rulers would succeed to power on the basis of their moral merits instead of lineage. These would be rulers devoted to their people, striving for personal and social perfection, and such a ruler would spread his own virtues to the people instead of imposing proper behavior with laws and rules.

While Confucius supported the idea of government ruling by a virtuous king, his ideas contained a number of elements to limit the power of rulers. He argued for representing truth in language, and honesty was of paramount importance. Even in facial expression, truth must always be represented. Confucius believed that if a ruler is to lead correctly, by action, that orders would be unnecessary in that others will follow the proper actions of their ruler. In discussing the relationship between a king and his subject (or a father and his son), he underlined the need to give due respect to superiors. This demanded that the subordinates must advise their superiors if the superiors are considered to be taking a course of action that is wrong. Confucius believed in ruling by example, if you lead correctly, orders by force or punishment are not necessary.

===Music and poetry===
Music was one of the six arts that students needed to master, together with archery, charioteering, mathematics, calligraphy, and a partner to music, the purpose of rituals. Confucius heavily promoted the use of music with rituals or the rites order. Unlike other philosophers around the world, Confucius viewed music and music theory beyond a mere art form or curriculum subject, and stated that it was intrinsically intertwined with rites in structuring man. &quot;Music is that which moves man from the internal; rites are that which affects man
on the external. Music brings about harmony. Rites ensure obedience.&quot; To Confucius, music created the focus necessary to unite and harmonize man. Thus, music and rites together were more than beneficial but were to make people act in a manner compatible with heaven and earth. The scholar Li Zehou argued that Confucianism is based on the idea of rites. Rites serve as the starting point for each individual and that these sacred social functions allow each person&#x27;s human nature to be harmonious with reality. Given this, Confucius believed that &quot;music is the harmonization of heaven and earth; the rites is the order of heaven and earth.&quot; Therefore, the application of music in rites creates the order that makes it possible for society to prosper.

The Confucian approach to music was heavily inspired by the and the , which was said to be the sixth Confucian classic until it was lost during the Han dynasty. The serves as one of the current Confucian classics and is a book on poetry that contains a diversified variety of poems as well as poems meant for folk songs. Confucius is traditionally ascribed with compiling these classics within his school. In the Analects, Confucius described the importance of poetry in the intellectual and moral development of an individual:
Confucians in later generations had conservative and mixed views on international musical influences encroaching on China, in particular those with varying styles that did not traditionally accompany rites, and some preached against sentimental tendencies from the Persians, the Greco-Bactrians, and the Mongols.

==Legacy==

Confucius&#x27;s teachings were later turned into an elaborate set of rules and practices by his numerous disciples and followers, who organized his teachings into the &quot;Analects&quot;. Confucius&#x27;s disciples and his only grandson, Zisi, continued his philosophical school after his death. These efforts spread Confucian ideals to students who then became officials in many of the royal courts in China, thereby giving Confucianism the first wide-scale test of its dogma.

Two of Confucius&#x27;s most famous later followers emphasized radically different aspects of his teachings. In the centuries after his death, Mencius () and Xunzi () both composed important teachings elaborating in different ways on the fundamental ideas associated with Confucius. Mencius () articulated the innate goodness in human beings as a source of the ethical intuitions that guide people towards &quot;rén&quot;, &quot;yì&quot;, and &quot;lǐ&quot;, while Xunzi () underscored the realistic and materialistic aspects of Confucian thought, stressing that morality was inculcated in society through tradition and in individuals through training. In time, their writings, together with the &quot;Analects&quot; and other core texts came to constitute the philosophical corpus of Confucianism.

This realignment in Confucian thought was parallel to the development of Legalism, which held that humanity and righteousness were not sufficient in government, and that rulers should instead rely on statecrafts, punishments, and law. A disagreement between these two political philosophies came to a head in when the Qin state conquered all of China. Li Si, Prime Minister of the Qin dynasty, convinced Qin Shi Huang to abandon the Confucians&#x27; recommendation of awarding fiefs akin to the Zhou dynasty before them which he saw as being against to the Legalist idea of centralizing the state around the ruler. 

Under the succeeding Han and Tang dynasties, Confucian ideas gained even more widespread prominence. Under Emperor Wu of Han, the works attributed to Confucius were made the official imperial philosophy and required reading for civil service examinations in which was continued nearly unbroken until the end of the 19th century. As Mohism lost support by the time of the Han, the main philosophical contenders were Legalism, which Confucian thought somewhat absorbed, the teachings of Laozi, whose focus on more spiritual ideas kept it from direct conflict with Confucianism, and the new Buddhist religion, which gained acceptance during the Southern and Northern Dynasties era. Both Confucian ideas and Confucian-trained officials were relied upon in the Ming dynasty and even the Yuan dynasty, although Kublai Khan distrusted handing over provincial control to them.

During the Song dynasty, Confucianism was revitalized in a movement known as Neo-Confucianism. Neo-Confucianism was a revival of Confucianism that expanded on classical theories by incorporating metaphysics and new approaches to self-cultivation and enlightenment, influenced by Buddhism and Daoism. The most renowned scholar of this period was Zhu Xi (1130-1200CE). There are clear Buddhist and Daoist influences in the Neo-Confucian advocacy of &quot;quiet sitting&quot; (meditation) as a technique of self-cultivation that leads to transformative experiences of insight.&quot; In his life, Zhu Xi was largely ignored, but not long after his death, his ideas became the new orthodox view of what Confucian texts actually meant. Modern historians view Zhu Xi as having created something rather different and call his way of thinking &quot;Neo-Confucianism&quot;. Neo-Confucianism held sway in China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam until the 19th century.
The works of Confucius were first translated into European languages by Jesuit missionaries in the 16th century during the late Ming dynasty. The first known effort was by Michele Ruggieri, who returned to Italy in 1588 and carried on his translations while residing in Salerno. Matteo Ricci started to report on the thoughts of Confucius, and a team of Jesuits—Prospero Intorcetta, Philippe Couplet, and two others—published a translation of several Confucian works and an overview of Chinese history in Paris in 1687. François Noël, after failing to persuade ClementXI that Chinese veneration of ancestors and Confucius did not constitute idolatry, completed the Confucian canon at Prague in 1711, with more scholarly treatments of the other works and the first translation of the collected works of Mencius. It is thought that such works had considerable importance on European thinkers of the period, particularly among the Deists and other philosophical groups of the Enlightenment who were interested by the integration of the system of morality of Confucius into Western civilization.

In the modern era Confucian movements, such as New Confucianism, still exist, but during the Cultural Revolution, Confucianism was frequently attacked by leading figures in the Chinese Communist Party. This was partially a continuation of the condemnations of Confucianism by intellectuals and activists in the early 20th century as a cause of the ethnocentric close-mindedness and refusal of the Qing dynasty to modernize that led to the tragedies that befell China in the 19th century.

Confucius&#x27;s works are studied by scholars in many other Asian countries, particularly those in the Chinese cultural sphere, such as Korea, Japan, and Vietnam. Many of those countries still hold the traditional memorial ceremony every year.

Among Tibetans, Confucius is often worshipped as a holy king and master of magic, divination and astrology. Tibetan Buddhists see him as learning divination from the Buddha Manjushri (and that knowledge subsequently reaching Tibet through Princess Wencheng), while Bon practitioners see him as being a reincarnation of Tonpa Shenrab Miwoche, the legendary founder of Bon.

The Ahmadiyya believes Confucius was a Divine Prophet of God, as were Lao-Tzu and other eminent Chinese personages.

According to the Siddhar tradition of Tamil Nadu, Confucius is one of the 18 esteemed Siddhars of yore, and is better known as Kalangi Nathar or Kamalamuni. The Thyagaraja Temple in Thiruvarur, Tamil Nadu is home to his Jeeva Samadhi.

In modern times, Asteroid 7853, &quot;Confucius&quot;, was named after the Chinese thinker.

===Teaching and Disciples===
Confucius was regarded as the first teacher who advocated for public welfare and the spread of education in China. Confucius devoted his entire life, from a relatively young age, to teaching. He pioneered private education adopting a curriculum known as the Six Arts, aimed at making education accessible to all social classes, and believed in its power to cultivate character rather than merely vocational skills. Confucius not only made teaching his profession but also contributed to the development of a distinct class of professionals in ancient China—the gentlemen who were neither farmers, artisans, merchants, nor officials but instead dedicated themselves to teaching and potential government service.

Confucius began teaching after he turned 30, and taught more than 3,000 students in his life, about 70 of whom were considered outstanding. His disciples and the early Confucian community they formed became the most influential intellectual force in the Warring States period. The Han dynasty historian Sima Qian dedicated a chapter in his &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; to the biographies of Confucius&#x27;s disciples, accounting for the influence they exerted in their time and afterward. Sima Qian recorded the names of 77 disciples in his collective biography, while &quot;Kongzi Jiayu&quot;, another early source, records 76, not completely overlapping. The two sources together yield the names of 96 disciples. Twenty-two of them are mentioned in the &quot;Analects&quot;, while the &quot;Mencius&quot; records 24.

Confucius did not charge any tuition, and only requested a symbolic gift of a bundle of dried meat from any prospective student. According to his disciple Zigong, his master treated students like doctors treated patients and did not turn anybody away. Most of them came from Lu, Confucius&#x27;s home state, with 43 recorded, but he accepted students from all over China, with six from the state of Wey (such as Zigong), three from Qin, two each from Chen and Qi, and one each from Cai, Chu, and Song. Confucius considered his students&#x27; personal background irrelevant, and accepted noblemen, commoners, and even former criminals such as Yan Zhuoju and Gongye Chang. His disciples from richer families would pay a sum commensurate with their wealth which was considered a ritual donation.

Confucius&#x27;s favorite disciple was Yan Hui, most probably one of the most impoverished of them all. Sima Niu, in contrast to Yan Hui, was from a hereditary noble family hailing from the Song state. Under Confucius&#x27;s teachings, the disciples became well learned in the principles and methods of government. He often engaged in discussion and debate with his students and gave high importance to their studies in history, poetry, and ritual. Confucius advocated loyalty to principle rather than to individual acumen, in which reform was to be achieved by persuasion rather than violence. Even though Confucius denounced them for their practices, the aristocracy was likely attracted to the idea of having trustworthy officials who were studied in morals as the circumstances of the time made it desirable. In fact, the disciple Zilu even died defending his ruler in Wey.

Yang Hu, who was a subordinate of the Ji family, had dominated the Lu government from 505 to 502 and even attempted a coup, which narrowly failed. As a likely consequence, it was after this that the first disciples of Confucius were appointed to government positions. A few of Confucius&#x27;s disciples went on to attain official positions of some importance, some of which were arranged by Confucius. By the time Confucius was 50 years old, the Ji family had consolidated their power in the Lu state over the ruling ducal house. Even though the Ji family had practices with which Confucius disagreed and disapproved, they nonetheless gave Confucius&#x27;s disciples many opportunities for employment. Confucius continued to remind his disciples to stay true to their principles and renounced those who did not, all the while being openly critical of the Ji family.

===In the West===
The influence of Confucius has been observed on multiple Western thinkers, including Niels Bohr, Benjamin Franklin, Allen Ginsberg, Thomas Jefferson, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, Robert Cummings Neville, Alexander Pope, Ezra Pound, François Quesnay, Friedrich Schiller, Voltaire, and Christian Wolff.

===Visual portraits===
No contemporary painting or sculpture of Confucius survives, and it was only during the Han dynasty that he was portrayed visually. Carvings often depict his legendary meeting with Laozi. Since that time there have been many portraits of Confucius as the ideal philosopher. An early verbal portrayal of Confucius is found in the chapter &quot;External Things&quot; () of the book &quot;Zhuangzi&quot; (), finished in about 3rd BCE, long after Confucius&#x27;s death. The oldest known portrait of Confucius has been unearthed in the tomb of the Han dynasty ruler Marquis of Haihun (died ). The picture was painted on the wooden frame to a polished bronze mirror.

In former times, it was customary to have a portrait in Confucius Temples; however, during the reign of Hongwu Emperor (Taizu) of the Ming dynasty, it was decided that the only proper portrait of Confucius should be in the temple in his home town, Qufu in Shandong. In other temples, Confucius is represented by a memorial tablet. In 2006, the China Confucius Foundation commissioned a standard portrait of Confucius based on the Tang dynasty portrait by Wu Daozi.

The South Wall Frieze in the courtroom of the Supreme Court of the United States depicts Confucius as a teacher of harmony, learning, and virtue.

===Fictional portrayals===
There have been two film adaptations of Confucius&#x27; life: the 1940 film &quot;Confucius&quot; starring Tang Huaiqiu, and the 2010 film &quot;Confucius&quot; starring Chow Yun-fat.

Confucius appears as a leader in &quot;Civilization VII&quot;, leading China.

===Memorials===

Soon after Confucius&#x27;s death, Qufu, his home town, became a place of devotion and remembrance. The Han dynasty &quot;Records of the Grand Historian&quot; records that it had already become a place of pilgrimage for ministers. It is still a major destination for cultural tourism, and many people visit his grave and the surrounding temples. There are also numerous temples dedicated to Confucius and distinguished Confucian scholars. These temples have been used for ceremonies paying tribute to Confucius as a revered Master, honoring his guiding principles that have shaped Chinese society.

Followers of Confucianism have a tradition of holding spectacular memorial ceremonies of Confucius () every year, using ceremonies that supposedly derived from Zhou Li () as recorded by Confucius, on the date of Confucius&#x27;s birth. In the 20th century, this tradition was interrupted for several decades in mainland China, where the official stance of the Communist Party and the State was that Confucius and Confucianism represented reactionary feudalist beliefs which held that the subservience of the people to the aristocracy is a part of the natural order. All such ceremonies and rites were therefore banned. Only after the 1990s did the ceremony resume. As it is now considered a veneration of Chinese history and tradition, even Communist Party members may be found in attendance.

In Taiwan, where the Nationalist Party (Kuomintang) strongly promoted Confucian beliefs in ethics and behavior, the tradition of the memorial ceremony of Confucius () is supported by the government and has continued without interruption. While not a national holiday, it does appear on all printed calendars, much as Father&#x27;s Day or Christmas Day do in the Western world.

In South Korea, a grand-scale memorial ceremony called Seokjeon Daeje is held twice a year on Confucius&#x27;s birthday and the anniversary of his death, at Confucian academies across the country and Sungkyunkwan in Seoul.

===Descendants===
Confucius&#x27;s descendants were repeatedly identified and honored by successive imperial governments with titles of nobility and official posts. They were honored with the rank of a marquis 35 times since Gaozu of the Han dynasty, and they were promoted to the rank of duke 42 times from the Tang dynasty to the Qing dynasty. Emperor Xuanzong of Tang first bestowed the title of &quot;Duke Wenxuan&quot; on Kong Suizhi of the 35th generation. In 1055, Emperor Renzong of Song first bestowed the title of &quot;Duke Yansheng&quot; on Kong Zongyuan of the 46th generation.

During the Southern Song dynasty, the Duke Yansheng Kong Duanyou fled south with the Song Emperor to Quzhou in Zhejiang, while the newly established Jin dynasty (1115–1234) in the north appointed Kong Duanyou&#x27;s brother Kong Duancao who remained in Qufu as Duke Yansheng. From that time up until the Yuan dynasty, there were two Duke Yanshengs, one in the north in Qufu and the other in the south at Quzhou. An invitation to come back to Qufu was extended to the southern Duke Yansheng Kong Zhu by the Yuan-dynasty Emperor Kublai Khan. The title was taken away from the southern branch after Kong Zhu rejected the invitation, so the northern branch of the family kept the title of Duke Yansheng. The southern branch remained in Quzhou where they live to this day. Confucius&#x27;s descendants in Quzhou alone number 30,000. The Hanlin Academy rank of Wujing boshi was awarded to the southern branch at Quzhou by a Ming Emperor while the northern branch at Qufu held the title Duke Yansheng. The leader of the southern branch was 孔祥楷 Kong Xiangkai.

In 1351, during the reign of Emperor Toghon Temür of the Yuan dynasty, 54th-generation Kong Shao () moved from China to Korea during the Goryeo dynasty, and was received courteously by Princess Noguk (the Mongolian-born queen consort of the future king Gongmin). After being naturalized as a subject of Goryeo, he changed the hanja of his name from &quot;昭&quot; to &quot;紹&quot; (both pronounced &quot;so&quot; in Korean), married a Korean woman and bore a son (Gong Yeo (), 1329–1397), therefore establishing the Changwon Gong clan (), whose ancestral seat was located in Changwon, South Gyeongsang Province. In 1794, during the reign of King Jeongjo, the clan then changed its name to Gokbu Gong clan () in honor of Confucius&#x27;s birthplace Qufu ().

Famous descendants include actors such as Gong Yoo (real name Gong Ji-cheol (공지철)) and Gong Hyo-jin (공효진); and artists such as male idol group B1A4 member Gongchan (real name Gong Chan-sik (공찬식)), singer-songwriter Minzy (real name Gong Min-ji (공민지)), as well as her great aunt, traditional folk dancer (공옥진).

Despite repeated dynastic change in China, the title of Duke Yansheng was bestowed upon successive generations of descendants until it was abolished by the Nationalist government in 1935. The last holder of the title, Kung Te-cheng of the 77th generation, was appointed Sacrificial Official to Confucius. Kung Te-cheng died in October 2008, and his son, Kung Wei-yi, the 78th lineal descendant, died in 1989. Kung Te-cheng&#x27;s grandson, Kung Tsui-chang, the 79th lineal descendant, was born in 1975; his great-grandson, Kung Yu-jen, the 80th lineal descendant, was born in Taipei on 1 January 2006. Te-cheng&#x27;s sister, Kong Demao, lives in mainland China and has written a book about her experiences growing up at the family estate in Qufu. Another sister, Kong Deqi, died as a young woman. Many descendants of Confucius still live in Qufu today.

A descendant of Confucius, H. H. Kung, was the Premier of the Republic of China. One of his sons, (孔令傑), married Debra Paget who gave birth to Gregory Kung ().

Confucius&#x27;s family, the Kongs, have the longest recorded extant pedigree in the world today. The father-to-son family tree, now in its 83rd generation, has been recorded since the death of Confucius. According to the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee (CGCC), he has two million known and registered descendants, and there are an estimated three million in all. Of these, several tens of thousands live outside of China. In the 14th century, a Kong descendant went to Korea, where an estimated 34,000 descendants of Confucius live today. One of the main lineages fled from the Kong ancestral home in Qufu during the Chinese Civil War in the 1940s and eventually settled in Taiwan. There are also branches of the Kong family who have converted to Islam after marrying Muslim women, in Dachuan in Gansu province in the 1800s, and in 1715 in Xuanwei in Yunnan province. Many of the Muslim Confucius descendants are descended from the marriage of Ma Jiaga (), a Muslim woman, and Kong Yanrong (), 59th generation descendant of Confucius in the year 1480, and are found among the Hui and Dongxiang peoples. The new genealogy includes the Muslims. Kong Dejun () is a prominent Islamic scholar and Arabist from Qinghai province and a 77th generation descendant of Confucius.

Because of the huge interest in the Confucius family tree, there was a project in China to test the DNA of known family members of the collateral branches in mainland China. Among other things, this would allow scientists to identify a common Y chromosome in male descendants of Confucius. If the descent were truly unbroken, father-to-son, since Confucius&#x27;s lifetime, the males in the family would all have the same Y chromosome as their direct male ancestor, with slight mutations due to the passage of time. The aim of the genetic test was to help members of collateral branches in China who lost their genealogical records to prove their descent. However, in 2009, many of the collateral branches decided not to agree to DNA testing. Bryan Sykes, professor of genetics at Oxford University, understands this decision: &quot;The Confucius family tree has an enormous cultural significance ... It&#x27;s not just a scientific question.&quot; The DNA testing was originally proposed to add new members, many of whose family record books were lost during 20th century upheavals, to the Confucian family tree. The main branch of the family which fled to Taiwan was never involved in the proposed DNA test at all.

In 2013, a DNA test performed on multiple different families who claimed descent from Confucius found that they shared the same Y chromosome as reported by Fudan University.

The fifth and most recent edition of the Confucius genealogy was printed by the CGCC. It was unveiled in a ceremony at Qufu on 24 September 2009. Women are now included for the first time.

==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
&quot;See and for extensive bibliographies&quot;

* Clements, Jonathan (2008). &quot;Confucius: A Biography&quot;. Stroud, Gloucestershire, England: Sutton Publishing. .
* Confucius (1997). &quot;Lun yu&quot;, (in English &quot;The Analects of Confucius&quot;). Translation and notes by Simon Leys. New York: W.W. Norton. .
* Confucius (2003). &quot;Confucius: Analects – With Selections from Traditional Commentaries&quot;. Translated by E. Slingerland. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing. (Original work published c. ) .
* Creel, Herrlee Glessner (1949). &quot;Confucius and the Chinese Way&quot;. New York: Harper.
* Csikszentmihalyi, M. (2005). &quot;Confucianism: An Overview&quot;. In Encyclopedia&quot; of Religion&quot; (Vol. C, pp. 1890–1905). Detroit: MacMillan Reference
* 
* . 
* Sterckx, Roel. &quot;Chinese Thought. From Confucius to Cook Ding.&quot; London: Penguin, 2019.
* Van Norden, B.W., ed. (2001). &quot;Confucius and the Analects: New Essays&quot;. New York: Oxford University Press. .
==External links==
* 
* Multilingual web site on Confucius and the Analects
* The Dao of Kongzi, introduction to the thought of Confucius.
* 
* Confucian Analects (Project Gutenberg release of James Legge&#x27;s Translation)
* Core philosophical passages in the &quot;Analects of Confucius&quot;.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="0" end="9" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="33" end="41" title="Confucius" label="Kong Qiu"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="52" end="71" title="Chinese philosopher" label="Chinese philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="79" end="103" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="210" end="220" title="Sinosphere" label="Sinosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="314" end="326" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="386" end="401" title="social relation" label="social relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="561" end="576" title="Ancient China" label="earlier periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q614263" start="643" end="655" title="filial piety" label="filial piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752556" start="690" end="709" title="Ancestor veneration in China" label="ancestor veneration"/>
<link wikidata="Q189573" start="888" end="899" title="Silver Rule" label="Silver Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q189573" start="927" end="938" title="Golden Rule" label="Golden Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="1064" end="1089" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="rich diversity of thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="1198" end="1219" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147887" start="1225" end="1244" title="Burning of books and burying of scholars" label="experienced setback"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="1271" end="1283" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="1291" end="1308" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Emperor Wu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="1463" end="1467" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="1472" end="1476" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="1546" end="1562" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q840873" start="1577" end="1593" title="New Confucianism" label="New Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="1829" end="1842" title="Five Classics" label="Five Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="2040" end="2048" title="Aphorism" label="Aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="2102" end="2110" title="Analects" label="Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="2207" end="2216" title="Latinisation of names" label="Latinized"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="2229" end="2245" title="Standard Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="2324" end="2352" title="Jesuit China missions" label="Jesuit missionaries to China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2371" end="2382" title="Chinese surname#Shi" label="family name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075910" start="2430" end="2443" title="courtesy name" label="courtesy name"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="2485" end="2511" title="Coming of age" label="his coming of age ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="2790" end="2798" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="2843" end="2848" title="list of Zhou kings" label="kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="2852" end="2856" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q736936" start="2910" end="2912" title="Lu (state)" label="Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q847621" start="2965" end="2972" title="Kong He" label="Kong He"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433401" start="3042" end="3054" title="Family tree of Confucius in the main line of descent" label="His ancestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065073" start="3079" end="3092" title="Song (state)" label="dukes of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="3100" end="3113" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239593" start="3434" end="3446" title="Yan Zhengzai" label="Yan Zhengzai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3536" end="3547" title="Lady Qiguan" label="Lady Qiguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240164" start="3613" end="3620" title="Kong Li" label="Kong Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q831158" start="3842" end="3850" title="Six Arts" label="Six Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328489" start="3896" end="3899" title="Four occupations" label="shi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4202" end="4225" title="Ancestor veneration in China#Mourning" label="mourned for three years"/>
<link wikidata="Q736936" start="4303" end="4314" title="state of Lu" label="state of Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q866168" start="4371" end="4398" title="Three Huan" label="three aristocratic families"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722310" start="5334" end="5339" title="Xunzi (book)" label="Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036649" start="5415" end="5428" title="Shaozheng Mao" label="Shaozheng Mao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155960" start="5543" end="5550" title="Yan Hui" label="Yan Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="6296" end="6307" title="state of Qi" label="state of Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q836861" start="7855" end="7864" title="Zhong You" label="Zhong You"/>
<link wikidata="Q230230" start="9498" end="9507" title="Zuo Zhuan" label="Zuo Zhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q766788" start="9830" end="9845" title="Duke Ding of Lu" label="Duke Ding of Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q230230" start="10243" end="10252" title="Zuo Zhuan" label="Zuo Zhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="10273" end="10303" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="10622" end="10627" title="Shiji" label="Shiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="10662" end="10670" title="Qi (state)" label="Qi state"/>
<link wikidata="Q836688" start="11569" end="11588" title="ancient Chinese states" label="principality states"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147897" start="11631" end="11634" title="Wei (Spring and Autumn period)" label="Wey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065073" start="11636" end="11640" title="Song (state)" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q197598" start="11642" end="11647" title="Zheng (state)" label="Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q284964" start="11649" end="11652" title="Cao (state)" label="Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="11654" end="11657" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="11659" end="11661" title="Qi (state)" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069690" start="11663" end="11667" title="Chen (state)" label="Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025803" start="11673" end="11676" title="Cai (state)" label="Cai"/>
<link wikidata="Q912043" start="11708" end="11711" title="Jin (Chinese state)" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q230230" start="11856" end="11864" title="Zuozhuan" label="Zuozhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="12009" end="12014" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Shiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q831180" start="12106" end="12115" title="disciples of Confucius" label="disciples"/>
<link wikidata="Q831158" start="12134" end="12142" title="Six Arts" label="Six Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="12240" end="12253" title="Five Classics" label="Five Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012627" start="12576" end="12588" title="Si River" label="Sishui River"/>
<link wikidata="Q619258" start="12606" end="12610" title="Cemetery of Confucius" label="Qufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q619258" start="12757" end="12778" title="Cemetery of Confucius" label="Cemetery of Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="12984" end="12992" title="Analects" label="Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="13150" end="13167" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q539750" start="13244" end="13253" title="Religious formalism" label="formalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208000" start="13460" end="13471" title="Junzi" label="perfect man"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="13496" end="13502" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q465108" start="13606" end="13618" title="Shi Jing" label="Book of Odes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="13731" end="13746" title="I Ching" label="Book of Changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q623282" start="14215" end="14224" title="afterlife" label="afterlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364799" start="14246" end="14252" title="Tian" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059771" start="14401" end="14406" title="Chinese soul" label="souls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086395" start="14762" end="14775" title="virtue ethics" label="virtue ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="14889" end="14897" title="allusion" label="allusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499811" start="14899" end="14907" title="innuendo" label="innuendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q841606" start="14918" end="14927" title="tautology (rhetoric)" label="tautology"/>
<link wikidata="Q189573" start="15177" end="15188" title="Golden Rule" label="Golden Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q189573" start="15217" end="15228" title="Silver Rule" label="Silver Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="15856" end="15858" title="Li (Confucian)" label="lǐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144825" start="17052" end="17065" title="righteousness" label="righteousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q36381317" start="17180" end="17193" title="selfishness" label="self-interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="17568" end="17570" title="Li (Confucian)" label="lǐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="17730" end="17733" title="Ren (Confucianism)" label="Rén"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="18039" end="18051" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q182263" start="18275" end="18282" title="empathy" label="empathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="19616" end="19624" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="19911" end="19928" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q378701" start="20598" end="20608" title="perfection" label="perfection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949" start="20902" end="20907" title="truth" label="truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q337349" start="20925" end="20932" title="honesty" label="honesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q327968" start="20970" end="20987" title="facial expression" label="facial expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="21612" end="21617" title="Music" label="Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q831158" start="21633" end="21641" title="Six Arts" label="six arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q193544" start="21934" end="21946" title="music theory" label="music theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q708814" start="22455" end="22463" title="Li Zehou" label="Li Zehou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="23081" end="23092" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q484206" start="23726" end="23734" title="Persians" label="Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q488880" start="23740" end="23755" title="Greco-Bactrians" label="Greco-Bactrians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="23765" end="23772" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147803" start="24027" end="24031" title="Zisi" label="Zisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="24260" end="24265" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="24411" end="24418" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q216072" start="24426" end="24431" title="Xun Kuang" label="Xunzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="24551" end="24558" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196421" start="24680" end="24683" title="Ren (philosophy)" label="rén"/>
<link wikidata="Q796873" start="24717" end="24719" title="Li (Confucianism)" label="lǐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="25025" end="25065" title="Four Books and Five Classics" label="the philosophical corpus of Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="25141" end="25149" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="25386" end="25395" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q152919" start="25420" end="25425" title="Li Si" label="Li Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="25449" end="25460" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="25472" end="25485" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="25563" end="25575" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="25706" end="25709" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="25714" end="25718" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="25792" end="25809" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Emperor Wu of Han"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25815" end="25844" title="Four Books and Five Classics#Five Classics" label="works attributed to Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="26017" end="26023" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="26170" end="26175" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="26273" end="26281" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="26327" end="26358" title="Southern and Northern Dynasties" label="Southern and Northern Dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="26441" end="26453" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="26467" end="26479" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="26490" end="26501" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="26566" end="26578" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="27395" end="27411" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335343" start="27578" end="27597" title="Jesuit China missions" label="Jesuit missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="27634" end="27646" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314211" start="27678" end="27694" title="Michele Ruggieri" label="Michele Ruggieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083" start="27776" end="27783" title="Salerno" label="Salerno"/>
<link wikidata="Q233340" start="27785" end="27797" title="Matteo Ricci" label="Matteo Ricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924133" start="27868" end="27887" title="Prospero Intorcetta" label="Prospero Intorcetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q774062" start="27889" end="27905" title="Philippe Couplet" label="Philippe Couplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205532" start="27957" end="27972" title="Confucian canon" label="Confucian works"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="27992" end="28007" title="history of China" label="Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451148" start="28026" end="28039" title="François Noël (missionary)" label="François Noël"/>
<link wikidata="Q129967" start="28067" end="28076" title="Pope Clement XI" label="ClementXI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752556" start="28082" end="28113" title="Chinese ancestral veneration" label="Chinese veneration of ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="28118" end="28127" title="Confucianism" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q525545" start="28128" end="28155" title="Chinese Rites controversy" label="did not constitute idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="28190" end="28196" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195444" start="28289" end="28304" title="Mengzi (book)" label="collected works"/>
<link wikidata="Q188903" start="28308" end="28315" title="Mencius" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q620629" start="28434" end="28440" title="Deists" label="Deists"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="28479" end="28492" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="28576" end="28596" title="western world" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q840873" start="28646" end="28662" title="New Confucianism" label="New Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="28692" end="28711" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="28776" end="28799" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="28996" end="29008" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="29192" end="29215" title="Chinese cultural sphere" label="Chinese cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="29340" end="29348" title="Tibetans" label="Tibetans"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="29442" end="29459" title="Tibetan Buddhists" label="Tibetan Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q471696" start="29507" end="29516" title="Manjushri" label="Manjushri"/>
<link wikidata="Q256555" start="29573" end="29590" title="Princess Wencheng" label="Princess Wencheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q815628" start="29599" end="29602" title="Bon" label="Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q510643" start="29653" end="29674" title="Tonpa Shenrab Miwoche" label="Tonpa Shenrab Miwoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="29711" end="29720" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q168827" start="29746" end="29760" title="Prophets of Islam" label="Divine Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="29777" end="29784" title="Lao-Tzu" label="Lao-Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33834791" start="29841" end="29848" title="Siddhar" label="Siddhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="29862" end="29872" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q33834791" start="29910" end="29917" title="Siddhar" label="Siddhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350576" start="29951" end="29965" title="Kalangi Nathar" label="Kalangi Nathar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799552" start="29985" end="30002" title="Thyagaraja Temple, Tiruvarur" label="Thyagaraja Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025399" start="30006" end="30016" title="Thiruvarur" label="Thiruvarur"/>
<link wikidata="Q282492" start="30044" end="30049" title="Jiva" label="Jeeva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217023" start="30050" end="30057" title="Samadhi" label="Samadhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600420" start="30077" end="30090" title="7853 Confucius" label="Asteroid 7853"/>
<link wikidata="Q831158" start="30440" end="30448" title="Six Arts" label="Six Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="31148" end="31169" title="Warring States period" label="Warring States period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="31175" end="31186" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="31197" end="31206" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="31240" end="31270" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10944269" start="31484" end="31496" title="Kongzi Jiayu" label="Kongzi Jiayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q276015" start="31670" end="31678" title="Analects" label="Analects"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195444" start="31702" end="31709" title="Mencius (book)" label="Mencius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039504" start="31884" end="31890" title="Duanmu Ci" label="Zigong"/>
<link wikidata="Q736936" start="32004" end="32006" title="Lu (state)" label="Lu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147897" start="32128" end="32131" title="Wey (state)" label="Wey"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="32161" end="32164" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069690" start="32180" end="32184" title="Chen (state)" label="Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q837855" start="32189" end="32191" title="Qi (state)" label="Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025803" start="32211" end="32214" title="Cai (state)" label="Cai"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="32216" end="32219" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065073" start="32225" end="32229" title="Song (state)" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q10892620" start="32386" end="32398" title="Gongye Chang" label="Gongye Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155960" start="32562" end="32569" title="Yan Hui" label="Yan Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q836861" start="33358" end="33362" title="Zhong You" label="Zilu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147897" start="33396" end="33399" title="Wey (state)" label="Wey"/>
<link wikidata="Q55267" start="33440" end="33449" title="Ji (Zhou dynasty ancestral surname)" label="Ji family"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="34345" end="34361" title="Western philosophy" label="Western thinkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085" start="34373" end="34383" title="Niels Bohr" label="Niels Bohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="34385" end="34402" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="34404" end="34418" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="34420" end="34436" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="34438" end="34463" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757584" start="34465" end="34488" title="Robert Cummings Neville" label="Robert Cummings Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="34490" end="34504" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="34506" end="34516" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q13575" start="34518" end="34534" title="François Quesnay" label="François Quesnay"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="34536" end="34554" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="34556" end="34564" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q76510" start="34570" end="34585" title="Christian Wolff (philosopher)" label="Christian Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="34699" end="34710" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="34792" end="34797" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074987" start="34997" end="35005" title="Zhuangzi (book)" label="Zhuangzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="35155" end="35166" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228" start="35173" end="35190" title="Marquis of Haihun" label="Marquis of Haihun"/>
<link wikidata="Q618618" start="35330" end="35347" title="Temple of Confucius" label="Confucius Temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="35378" end="35392" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="35408" end="35420" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q339822" start="35497" end="35503" title="Temple of Confucius, Qufu" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q210287" start="35522" end="35526" title="Qufu" label="Qufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="35704" end="35716" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196022" start="35729" end="35737" title="Wu Daozi" label="Wu Daozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183272" start="35755" end="35761" title="Frieze" label="Frieze"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="35786" end="35820" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160301" start="35990" end="36011" title="Confucius (1940 film)" label="&amp;quot;Confucius&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q868745" start="36053" end="36074" title="Confucius (2010 film)" label="&amp;quot;Confucius&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q181425" start="36084" end="36096" title="Chow Yun-fat" label="Chow Yun-fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q126405953" start="36138" end="36154" title="Civilization VII" label="Civilization VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q210287" start="36230" end="36234" title="Qufu" label="Qufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="36299" end="36310" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="36317" end="36347" title="Records of the Grand Historian" label="Records of the Grand Historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q618618" start="36565" end="36572" title="Temple of Confucius" label="temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="37244" end="37253" title="Feudalism" label="feudalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478141" start="37316" end="37327" title="Aristocracy (class)" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="37628" end="37638" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q134847" start="37905" end="37922" title="Father&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Father&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="37969" end="37980" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q11644513" start="38021" end="38035" title="Seokjeon Daeje" label="Seokjeon Daeje"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952771" start="38123" end="38142" title="Hyanggyo" label="Confucian academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q487180" start="38166" end="38178" title="Sungkyunkwan" label="Sungkyunkwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q209726" start="38392" end="38399" title="marquess" label="marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="38415" end="38420" title="Gaozu of Han" label="Gaozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="38428" end="38439" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q166886" start="38479" end="38483" title="duke" label="duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="38502" end="38514" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="38522" end="38534" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="38536" end="38560" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7477" start="38662" end="38685" title="Emperor Renzong of Song" label="Emperor Renzong of Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312919" start="38720" end="38733" title="Duke Yansheng" label="Duke Yansheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="38793" end="38814" title="Southern Song dynasty" label="Southern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q58235" start="38883" end="38889" title="Quzhou" label="Quzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="38931" end="38954" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="39086" end="39098" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q546633" start="39614" end="39628" title="Hanlin Academy" label="Hanlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8666" start="39872" end="39884" title="Toghon Temür" label="Toghon Temür"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="39892" end="39904" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28208" start="39972" end="39986" title="Goryeo" label="Goryeo dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q704201" start="40020" end="40034" title="Princess Noguk" label="Princess Noguk"/>
<link wikidata="Q494074" start="40088" end="40095" title="Gongmin of Goryeo" label="Gongmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="40161" end="40166" title="hanja" label="hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q243327" start="40409" end="40417" title="Changwon" label="Changwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26530" start="40480" end="40487" title="Jeongjo of Joseon" label="Jeongjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228968" start="40523" end="40538" title="Qufu Kong clan" label="Gokbu Gong clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210287" start="40582" end="40586" title="Qufu" label="Qufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q623436" start="40634" end="40642" title="Gong Yoo" label="Gong Yoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q484787" start="40679" end="40691" title="Gong Hyo-jin" label="Gong Hyo-jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q483751" start="40735" end="40739" title="B1A4" label="B1A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q15703559" start="40747" end="40755" title="Gongchan" label="Gongchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483842" start="40807" end="40812" title="Minzy" label="Minzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="41059" end="41081" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q698846" start="41121" end="41134" title="Kung Te-cheng" label="Kung Te-cheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312919" start="41173" end="41206" title="Sacrificial Official to Confucius" label="Sacrificial Official to Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5966226" start="41343" end="41358" title="Kung Tsui-chang" label="Kung Tsui-chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q631416" start="41785" end="41795" title="H. H. Kung" label="H. H. Kung"/>
<link wikidata="Q702650" start="41805" end="41837" title="Premier of the Republic of China" label="Premier of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q239854" start="41871" end="41882" title="Debra Paget" label="Debra Paget"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160302" start="42141" end="42182" title="Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee" label="Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q210287" start="42531" end="42535" title="Qufu" label="Qufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="42547" end="42564" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q373629" start="42770" end="42777" title="Xuanwei" label="Xuanwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="43006" end="43009" title="Hui people" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="43014" end="43023" title="Dongxiang people" label="Dongxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q659747" start="43943" end="43954" title="Bryan Sykes" label="Bryan Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="43981" end="43998" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q495015" start="44574" end="44590" title="Fudan University" label="Fudan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634813" start="44968" end="44986" title="Jonathan Clements" label="Clements, Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q352653" start="45439" end="45462" title="Herrlee Glessner Creel" label="Creel, Herrlee Glessner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5826" wikidata="Q11567" url="?curid=5826" title="Complex number">
<text>In mathematics, a complex number is an element of a number system that extends the real numbers with a specific element denoted , called the imaginary unit and satisfying the equation formula_1; every complex number can be expressed in the form formula_2, where and are real numbers. Because no real number satisfies the above equation, was called an imaginary number by René Descartes. For the complex number is called the &#x27;, and is called the &#x27;. The set of complex numbers is denoted by either of the symbols formula_3 or . Despite the historical nomenclature, &quot;imaginary&quot; complex numbers have a mathematical existence as firm as that of the real numbers, and they are fundamental tools in the scientific description of the natural world.

Complex numbers allow solutions to all polynomial equations, even those that have no solutions in real numbers. More precisely, the fundamental theorem of algebra asserts that every non-constant polynomial equation with real or complex coefficients has a solution which is a complex number. For example, the equation
formula_4
has no real solution, because the square of a real number cannot be negative, but has the two nonreal complex solutions formula_5 and formula_6.

Addition, subtraction and multiplication of complex numbers can be naturally defined by using the rule formula_7 along with the associative, commutative, and distributive laws. Every nonzero complex number has a multiplicative inverse. This makes the complex numbers a field with the real numbers as a subfield. Because of these properties, , and which form is written depends upon convention and style considerations.

The complex numbers also form a real vector space of dimension two, with formula_8 as a standard basis. This standard basis makes the complex numbers a Cartesian plane, called the complex plane. This allows a geometric interpretation of the complex numbers and their operations, and conversely some geometric objects and operations can be expressed in terms of complex numbers. For example, the real numbers form the real line, which is pictured as the horizontal axis of the complex plane, while real multiples of formula_9 are the vertical axis. A complex number can also be defined by its geometric polar coordinates: the radius is called the absolute value of the complex number, while the angle from the positive real axis is called the argument of the complex number. The complex numbers of absolute value one form the unit circle. Adding a fixed complex number to all complex numbers defines a translation in the complex plane, and multiplying by a fixed complex number is a similarity centered at the origin (dilating by the absolute value, and rotating by the argument). The operation of complex conjugation is the reflection symmetry with respect to the real axis. 

The complex numbers form a rich structure that is simultaneously an algebraically closed field, a commutative algebra over the reals, and a Euclidean vector space of dimension two. 
==Definition and basic operations==

A complex number is an expression of the form , where and are real numbers, and is an abstract symbol, the so-called imaginary unit, whose meaning will be explained further below. For example, is a complex number.

For a complex number , the real number is called its &quot;real part&quot;, and the real number (not the complex number ) is its &quot;imaginary part&quot;. The real part of a complex number is denoted , formula_10, or formula_11; the imaginary part is , formula_12, or formula_13: for example, formula_14, formula_15.

A complex number can be identified with the ordered pair of real numbers formula_16, which may be interpreted as coordinates of a point in a Euclidean plane with standard coordinates, which is then called the &quot;complex plane&quot; or &quot;Argand diagram.&quot; The horizontal axis is generally used to display the real part, with increasing values to the right, and the imaginary part marks the vertical axis, with increasing values upwards. 
A real number can be regarded as a complex number , whose imaginary part is 0. A purely imaginary number is a complex number , whose real part is zero. It is common to write , , and ; for example, .

The set of all complex numbers is denoted by formula_17 (blackboard bold) or (upright bold).

In some disciplines such as electromagnetism and electrical engineering, is used instead of , as frequently represents electric current, and complex numbers are written as or .

===Addition and subtraction===
Two complex numbers formula_18 and formula_19 are added by separately adding their real and imaginary parts. That is to say:

formula_20
Similarly, subtraction can be performed as
formula_21

The addition can be geometrically visualized as follows: the sum of two complex numbers and , interpreted as points in the complex plane, is the point obtained by building a parallelogram from the three vertices , and the points of the arrows labeled and (provided that they are not on a line). Equivalently, calling these points , , respectively and the fourth point of the parallelogram the triangles and are congruent.

===Multiplication===
The product of two complex numbers is computed as follows:
:formula_22
For example, formula_23 
In particular, this includes as a special case the fundamental formula
:formula_24
This formula distinguishes the complex number &quot;i&quot; from any real number, since the square of any (negative or positive) real number is always a non-negative real number.

With this definition of multiplication and addition, familiar rules for the arithmetic of rational or real numbers continue to hold for complex numbers. More precisely, the distributive property, the commutative properties (of addition and multiplication) hold. Therefore, the complex numbers form an algebraic structure known as a &quot;field&quot;, the same way as the rational or real numbers do.

===Complex conjugate, absolute value, argument and division===
The &quot;complex conjugate&quot; of the complex number is defined as
formula_25 It is also denoted by some authors by formula_26. Geometrically, is the &quot;reflection&quot; of about the real axis. Conjugating twice gives the original complex number: formula_27 A complex number is real if and only if it equals its own conjugate. The unary operation of taking the complex conjugate of a complex number cannot be expressed by applying only the basic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. 
For any complex number , the product 
:formula_28
is a &quot;non-negative real&quot; number. This allows to define the &quot;absolute value&quot; (or &quot;modulus&quot; or &quot;magnitude&quot;) of &quot;z&quot; to be the square root
formula_29
By Pythagoras&#x27; theorem, formula_30 is the distance from the origin to the point representing the complex number &quot;z&quot; in the complex plane. In particular, the circle of radius one around the origin consists precisely of the numbers &quot;z&quot; such that formula_31. If formula_32 is a real number, then formula_33: its absolute value as a complex number and as a real number are equal. 

Using the conjugate, the reciprocal of a nonzero complex number formula_34 can be computed to be 

formula_35 of reals to formula_3 is an instance of the &quot;Cayley–Dickson construction&quot;. Applying this construction iteratively to formula_37 then yields the quaternions, the octonions, the sedenions, and the trigintaduonions. This construction turns out to diminish the structural properties of the involved number systems. 

Unlike the reals, formula_17 is not an ordered field, that is to say, it is not possible to define a relation that is compatible with the addition and multiplication. In fact, in any ordered field, the square of any element is necessarily positive, so precludes the existence of an ordering on formula_39 Passing from formula_37 to the quaternions formula_41 loses commutativity, while the octonions (additionally to not being commutative) fail to be associative. The reals, complex numbers, quaternions and octonions are all normed division algebras over formula_42. By Hurwitz&#x27;s theorem they are the only ones; the sedenions, the next step in the Cayley–Dickson construction, fail to have this structure.

The Cayley–Dickson construction is closely related to the regular representation of formula_43 thought of as an formula_42-algebra (an formula_45-vector space with a multiplication), with respect to the basis . This means the following: the formula_42-linear map
formula_47
for some fixed complex number can be represented by a matrix (once a basis has been chosen). With respect to the basis , this matrix is
formula_48
that is, the one mentioned in the section on matrix representation of complex numbers above. While this is a linear representation of formula_3 in the 2 × 2 real matrices, it is not the only one. Any matrix
formula_50
has the property that its square is the negative of the identity matrix: . Then
formula_51
is also isomorphic to the field formula_43 and gives an alternative complex structure on formula_53 This is generalized by the notion of a linear complex structure.

Hypercomplex numbers also generalize formula_54 formula_43 formula_56 and formula_57 For example, this notion contains the split-complex numbers, which are elements of the ring formula_58 (as opposed to formula_59 for complex numbers). In this ring, the equation has four solutions.

The field formula_42 is the completion of formula_61 the field of rational numbers, with respect to the usual absolute value metric. Other choices of metrics on formula_62 lead to the fields formula_63 of -adic numbers (for any prime number ), which are thereby analogous to formula_45. There are no other nontrivial ways of completing formula_62 than formula_42 and formula_67 by Ostrowski&#x27;s theorem. The algebraic closures formula_68 of formula_63 still carry a norm, but (unlike formula_3) are not complete with respect to it. The completion formula_71 of formula_68 turns out to be algebraically closed. By analogy, the field is called -adic complex numbers.

The fields formula_54 formula_67 and their finite field extensions, including formula_43 are called local fields.

==See also==


* Analytic continuation
* Circular motion using complex numbers
* Complex-base system
* Complex coordinate space
* Complex geometry
* Geometry of numbers
* Dual-complex number
* Eisenstein integer
* Geometric algebra (which includes the complex plane as the 2-dimensional spinor subspace formula_76)
* Unit complex number

==Notes==
==References==

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Historical references===
* 
* 
* — A gentle introduction to the history of complex numbers and the beginnings of complex analysis.
* — An advanced perspective on the historical development of the concept of number.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="18" end="32" title="Complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="52" end="65" title="number system" label="number system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="83" end="94" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="141" end="155" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="175" end="183" title="equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="351" end="367" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary number"/>
<link wikidata="Q9191" start="371" end="385" title="René Descartes" label="René Descartes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387017" start="618" end="630" title="mathematical sciences" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q50698" start="801" end="820" title="polynomial equation" label="polynomial equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192760" start="894" end="924" title="fundamental theorem of algebra" label="fundamental theorem of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="1363" end="1374" title="associative law" label="associative"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="1376" end="1387" title="commutative law" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q187959" start="1393" end="1409" title="distributive law" label="distributive law"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="1447" end="1469" title="multiplicative inverse" label="multiplicative inverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="1504" end="1509" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q125977" start="1687" end="1704" title="real vector space" label="real vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q123345399" start="1708" end="1721" title="Two-dimensional space" label="dimension two"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000912" start="1743" end="1757" title="standard basis" label="standard basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="1807" end="1822" title="Cartesian plane" label="Cartesian plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="1835" end="1848" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="2072" end="2081" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q62494" start="2257" end="2274" title="Polar coordinate system" label="polar coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="2301" end="2315" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="2480" end="2491" title="unit circle" label="unit circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q211459" start="2556" end="2567" title="translation (geometry)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q254465" start="2637" end="2647" title="similarity (geometry)" label="similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="2752" end="2771" title="complex conjugation" label="complex conjugation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955882" start="2779" end="2798" title="reflection symmetry" label="reflection symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047547" start="2900" end="2926" title="algebraically closed field" label="algebraically closed field"/>
<link wikidata="Q744960" start="2930" end="2949" title="commutative algebra (structure)" label="commutative algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="2972" end="2994" title="Euclidean vector space" label="Euclidean vector space"/>
<link wikidata="Q7078836" start="3085" end="3096" title="of the form" label="of the form"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="3113" end="3125" title="real numbers" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q193796" start="3168" end="3182" title="imaginary unit" label="imaginary unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="3630" end="3642" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="3801" end="3814" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="3830" end="3844" title="Argand diagram" label="Argand diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="4122" end="4138" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary number"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="4238" end="4241" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142171" start="4291" end="4306" title="blackboard bold" label="blackboard bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="4356" end="4372" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="4377" end="4399" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11651" start="4447" end="4463" title="electric current" label="electric current"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="4587" end="4592" title="addition" label="added"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="4685" end="4696" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q45867" start="4903" end="4916" title="parallelogram" label="parallelogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="5122" end="5130" title="triangle" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q154210" start="5140" end="5149" title="Congruence (geometry)" label="congruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q187959" start="5705" end="5726" title="distributive property" label="distributive property"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="5732" end="5754" title="commutative property" label="commutative properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="5864" end="5881" title="field (mathematics)" label="&amp;quot;field&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="6006" end="6023" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15955882" start="6149" end="6171" title="reflection symmetry" label="&amp;quot;reflection&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q657596" start="6333" end="6348" title="unary operation" label="unary operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="6640" end="6654" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="6738" end="6749" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518" start="6764" end="6788" title="Pythagoras&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Pythagoras&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="6933" end="6953" title="unit circle" label="circle of radius one"/>
<link wikidata="Q216906" start="7189" end="7199" title="multiplicative inverse" label="reciprocal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="7428" end="7438" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q743418" start="7445" end="7453" title="octonion" label="octonion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79188" start="7460" end="7468" title="sedenion" label="sedenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111667622" start="7479" end="7494" title="trigintaduonion" label="trigintaduonion"/>
<link wikidata="Q909412" start="7636" end="7649" title="ordered field" label="ordered field"/>
<link wikidata="Q369377" start="7879" end="7887" title="total order" label="ordering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139430" start="8123" end="8146" title="normed division algebra" label="normed division algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139430" start="8168" end="8190" title="Hurwitz&amp;#x27;s theorem (normed division algebras)" label="Hurwitz&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q79188" start="8219" end="8227" title="sedenion" label="sedenion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555242" start="8368" end="8390" title="regular representation" label="regular representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000660" start="8433" end="8440" title="Algebra (ring theory)" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="8840" end="8861" title="linear representation" label="linear representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6553426" start="9179" end="9203" title="linear complex structure" label="linear complex structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q837414" start="9206" end="9225" title="Hypercomplex number" label="Hypercomplex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q864145" start="9329" end="9349" title="split-complex number" label="split-complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="9556" end="9571" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="9600" end="9614" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="9615" end="9621" title="metric (mathematics)" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="9640" end="9647" title="metric (mathematics)" label="metrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="9695" end="9708" title="p-adic number" label="-adic numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="9718" end="9730" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919401" start="9871" end="9895" title="Ostrowski&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Ostrowski&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868517" start="10259" end="10270" title="local field" label="local field"/>
<link wikidata="Q485287" start="10291" end="10312" title="Analytic continuation" label="Analytic continuation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10315" end="10352" title="Circular motion#Using complex numbers" label="Circular motion using complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156566" start="10355" end="10374" title="Complex-base system" label="Complex-base system"/>
<link wikidata="Q21167419" start="10377" end="10401" title="Complex coordinate space" label="Complex coordinate space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137810" start="10404" end="10420" title="Complex geometry" label="Complex geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466519" start="10423" end="10442" title="Geometry of numbers" label="Geometry of numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q85757774" start="10445" end="10464" title="Dual-complex number" label="Dual-complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q262370" start="10467" end="10485" title="Eisenstein integer" label="Eisenstein integer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10488" end="10505" title="Geometric algebra#Unit pseudoscalars" label="Geometric algebra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10561" end="10567" title="Spinor#Two dimensions" label="spinor"/>
<link wikidata="Q105356493" start="10591" end="10610" title="Unit complex number" label="Unit complex number"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5828" wikidata="Q180933" url="?curid=5828" title="Cryptozoology">
<text>Cryptozoology is a pseudoscience and subculture that searches for and studies unknown, legendary, or extinct animals whose present existence is disputed or unsubstantiated, particularly those popular in folklore, such as Bigfoot, the Loch Ness Monster, Yeti, the chupacabra, the Jersey Devil, or the Mokele-mbembe. Cryptozoologists refer to these entities as &quot;cryptids&quot;, a term coined by the subculture. Because it does not follow the scientific method, cryptozoology is considered a pseudoscience by mainstream science: it is neither a branch of zoology nor of folklore studies. It was originally founded in the 1950s by zoologists Bernard Heuvelmans and Ivan T. Sanderson.
Scholars have noted that the subculture rejected mainstream approaches from an early date, and that adherents often express hostility to mainstream science. Scholars studying cryptozoologists and their influence (including cryptozoology&#x27;s association with Young Earth creationism) noted parallels in cryptozoology and other pseudosciences such as ghost hunting and ufology, and highlighted uncritical media propagation of cryptozoologist claims.

==Terminology, history, and approach==
As a field, cryptozoology originates from the works of Bernard Heuvelmans, a Belgian zoologist, and Ivan T. Sanderson, a Scottish zoologist. Notably, Heuvelmans published &quot;On the Track of Unknown Animals&quot; (French: ) in 1955, a landmark work among cryptozoologists that was followed by numerous other similar works. In addition, Sanderson published a series of books that contributed to the developing hallmarks of cryptozoology, including &quot;Abominable Snowmen: Legend Come to Life&quot; (1961). Heuvelmans himself traced cryptozoology to the work of Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans, who theorized that a large unidentified species of seal was responsible for sea serpent reports.

&quot;Cryptozoology&quot; is &#x27;the study of hidden animals&#x27; (from Ancient Greek: κρυπτός, &quot;kryptós&quot; &quot;hidden, secret&quot;; Ancient Greek ζῷον, &quot;zōion&quot; &quot;animal&quot;, and λόγος, &quot;logos&quot;, i.e. &quot;knowledge, study&quot;). The term dates from 1959 or before— Heuvelmans attributes the coinage of the term &quot;cryptozoology&quot; to Sanderson. Following &quot;cryptozoology&quot;, the term &quot;cryptid&quot; was coined in 1983 by cryptozoologist J. E. Wall in the summer issue of the International Society of Cryptozoology newsletter. According to Wall &quot;[It has been] suggested that new terms be coined to replace sensational and often misleading terms like &#x27;monster&#x27;. My suggestion is &#x27;cryptid&#x27;, meaning a living thing having the quality of being hidden or unknown ... describing those creatures which are (or may be) subjects of cryptozoological investigation.&quot; 

The &quot;Oxford English Dictionary&quot; defines the noun &quot;cryptid&quot; as &quot;an animal whose existence or survival to the present day is disputed or unsubstantiated; any animal of interest to a cryptozoologist&quot;. While used by most cryptozoologists, the term &quot;cryptid&quot; is not used by academic zoologists. In a textbook aimed at undergraduates, academics Caleb W. Lack and Jacques Rousseau note that the subculture&#x27;s focus on what it deems to be &quot;cryptids&quot; is a pseudoscientific extension of older belief in monsters and other similar entities from the folkloric record, yet with a &quot;new, more scientific-sounding name: cryptids&quot;.

While biologists regularly identify new species, cryptozoologists often focus on creatures from the folkloric record. Most famously, these include the Loch Ness Monster, Champ (folklore), Bigfoot, the chupacabra, as well as other &quot;imposing beasts that could be labeled as monsters&quot;. In their search for these entities, cryptozoologists may employ devices such as motion-sensitive cameras, night-vision equipment, and audio-recording equipment. While there have been attempts to codify cryptozoological approaches, unlike biologists, zoologists, botanists, and other academic disciplines, however, &quot;there are no accepted, uniform, or successful methods for pursuing cryptids&quot;. Some scholars have identified precursors to modern cryptozoology in certain medieval approaches to the folkloric record, and the psychology behind the cryptozoology approach has been the subject of academic study.

Few cryptozoologists have a formal science education, and fewer still have a science background directly relevant to cryptozoology. Adherents often misrepresent the academic backgrounds of cryptozoologists. According to writer Daniel Loxton and paleontologist Donald Prothero, &quot;[c]ryptozoologists have often promoted &#x27;Professor Roy Mackal, PhD.&#x27; as one of their leading figures and one of the few with a legitimate doctorate in biology. What is rarely mentioned, however, is that he had no training that would qualify him to undertake competent research on exotic animals. This raises the specter of &#x27;credential mongering&#x27;, by which an individual or organization feints a person&#x27;s graduate degree as proof of expertise, even though his or her training is not specifically relevant to the field under consideration.&quot; Besides Heuvelmans, Sanderson, and Mackal, other notable cryptozoologists with academic backgrounds include Grover Krantz, Karl Shuker, and Richard Greenwell.

Historically, notable cryptozoologists have often identified instances featuring &quot;irrefutable evidence&quot; (such as Sanderson and Krantz), only for the evidence to be revealed as the product of a hoax. This may occur during a closer examination by experts or upon confession of the hoaxer.

=== Expeditions ===
Cryptozoologists have often led unsuccessful expeditions to find evidence of cryptids. Bigfoot researcher René Dahinden led searches into caves to find evidence of sasquatch, as early sasquatch legends claimed they lived in rocky areas. Despite the failure of these searches, he spent years trying to find proof of bigfoot. Lensgrave Adam Christoffer Knuth led an expedition into Lake Tele in the Congo to find the Mokele-mbembe in 2018. While the expedition was a failure, they discovered a new species of green algae.

===Young Earth creationism===
A subset of cryptozoology promotes the pseudoscience of Young Earth creationism, rejecting conventional science in favor of a literal Biblical interpretation and promoting concepts such as &quot;living dinosaurs&quot;. Science writer Sharon A. Hill observes that the Young Earth creationist segment of cryptozoology is &quot;well-funded and able to conduct expeditions with a goal of finding a living dinosaur that they think would invalidate evolution&quot;.

Anthropologist Jeb J. Card says that &quot;[c]reationists have embraced cryptozoology and some cryptozoological expeditions are funded by and conducted by creationists hoping to disprove evolution.&quot; In a 2013 interview, paleontologist Donald Prothero notes an uptick in creationist cryptozoologists. He observes that &quot;[p]eople who actively search for Loch Ness monsters or Mokele Mbembe do it entirely as creationist ministers. They think that if they found a dinosaur in the Congo it would overturn all of evolution. It wouldn&#x27;t. It would just be a late-occurring dinosaur, but that&#x27;s their mistaken notion of evolution.&quot;

Citing a 2013 exhibit at the Petersburg, Kentucky-based Creation Museum, which claimed that dragons were once biological creatures who walked the earth alongside humanity and is broadly dedicated to Young Earth creationism, religious studies academic Justin Mullis notes that &quot;[c]ryptozoology has a long and curious history with Young Earth Creationism, with this new exhibit being just one of the most recent examples&quot;.

Academic Paul Thomas analyzes the influence and connections between cryptozoology in his 2020 study of the Creation Museum and the creationist theme park Ark Encounter. Thomas comments that, &quot;while the Creation Museum and the Ark Encounter are flirting with pseudoarchaeology, coquettishly whispering pseudoarchaeological rhetoric, they are each fully in bed with cryptozoology&quot; and observes that &quot;[y]oung-earth creationists and cryptozoologists make natural bed fellows. As with pseudoarchaeology, both young-earth creationists and cryptozoologists bristle at the rejection of mainstream secular science and lament a seeming conspiracy to prevent serious consideration of their claims.&quot;

===Lack of critical media coverage===
Media outlets have often uncritically disseminated information from cryptozoologist sources, including newspapers that repeat false claims made by cryptozoologists or television shows that feature cryptozoologists as monster hunters (such as the popular and purportedly nonfiction American television show &quot;MonsterQuest&quot;, which aired from 2007 to 2010). Media coverage of purported &quot;cryptids&quot; often fails to provide more likely explanations, further propagating claims made by cryptozoologists.

==Reception and pseudoscience==
There is a broad consensus among academics that cryptozoology is a pseudoscience. The subculture is regularly criticized for reliance on anecdotal information and because in the course of investigating animals that most scientists believe are unlikely to have existed, cryptozoologists do not follow the scientific method. No academic course of study nor university degree program grants the status of &quot;cryptozoologist&quot; and the subculture is primarily the domain of individuals without training in the natural sciences.

Anthropologist Jeb J. Card summarizes cryptozoology in a survey of pseudoscience and pseudoarchaeology:
Card notes that &quot;cryptozoologists often show their disdain and even hatred for professional scientists, including those who enthusiastically participated in cryptozoology&quot;, which he traces back to Heuvelmans&#x27;s early &quot;rage against critics of cryptozoology&quot;. He finds parallels with cryptozoology and other pseudosciences, such as ghost hunting and ufology, and compares the approach of cryptozoologists to colonial big-game hunters, and to aspects of European imperialism. According to Card, &quot;[m]ost cryptids are framed as the subject of indigenous legends typically collected in the heyday of comparative folklore, though such legends may be heavily modified or worse. Cryptozoology&#x27;s complicated mix of sympathy, interest, and appropriation of indigenous culture (or non-indigenous construction of it) is also found in New Age circles and dubious &quot;Indian burial grounds&quot; and other legends [...] invoked in hauntings such as the &quot;Amityville&quot; hoax [...]&quot;.

In a 2011 foreword for &quot;The American Biology Teacher&quot;, then National Association of Biology Teachers president Dan Ward uses cryptozoology as an example of &quot;technological pseudoscience&quot; that may confuse students about the scientific method. Ward says that &quot;Cryptozoology [...] is not valid science or even science at all. It is monster hunting.&quot; Historian of science Brian Regal includes an entry for cryptozoology in his &quot;Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia&quot; (2009). Regal says that &quot;as an intellectual endeavor, cryptozoology has been studied as much as cryptozoologists have sought hidden animals&quot;.

In a 1992 issue of &quot;Folklore&quot;, folklorist Véronique Campion-Vincent says:
Campion-Vincent says that &quot;four currents can be distinguished in the study of mysterious animal appearances&quot;: &quot;Forteans&quot; (&quot;compiler[s] of anomalies&quot; such as via publications like the &quot;Fortean Times&quot;), &quot;occultists&quot; (which she describes as related to &quot;Forteans&quot;), &quot;folklorists&quot;, and &quot;cryptozoologists&quot;. Regarding cryptozoologists, Campion-Vincent says that &quot;this movement seems to deserve the appellation of parascience, like parapsychology: the same corpus is reviewed; many scientists participate, but for those who have an official status of university professor or researcher, the participation is a private hobby&quot;.

In her &quot;Encyclopedia of American Folklore&quot;, academic Linda Watts says that &quot;folklore concerning unreal animals or beings, sometimes called monsters, is a popular field of inquiry&quot; and describes cryptozoology as an example of &quot;American narrative traditions&quot; that &quot;feature many monsters&quot;.

In his analysis of cryptozoology, folklorist Peter Dendle says that &quot;cryptozoology devotees consciously position themselves in defiance of mainstream science&quot; and that:
In a paper published in 2013, Dendle refers to cryptozoologists as &quot;contemporary monster hunters&quot; that &quot;keep alive a sense of wonder in a world that has been very thoroughly charted, mapped, and tracked, and that is largely available for close scrutiny on Google Earth and satellite imaging&quot; and that &quot;on the whole the devotion of substantial resources for this pursuit betrays a lack of awareness of the basis for scholarly consensus (largely ignoring, for instance, evidence of evolutionary biology and the fossil record).&quot;

According to historian Mike Dash, few scientists doubt there are thousands of unknown animals, particularly invertebrates, awaiting discovery; however, cryptozoologists are largely uninterested in researching and cataloging newly discovered species of ants or beetles, instead focusing their efforts towards &quot;more elusive&quot; creatures that have often defied decades of work aimed at confirming their existence.

Paleontologist George Gaylord Simpson (1984) lists cryptozoology among examples of human gullibility, along with creationism:
Paleontologist Donald Prothero (2007) cites cryptozoology as an example of pseudoscience and categorizes it, along with Holocaust denial and UFO abductions claims, as aspects of American culture that are &quot;clearly baloney&quot;.

In &quot;Scientifical Americans: The Culture of Amateur Paranormal Researchers&quot; (2017), Hill surveys the field and discusses aspects of the subculture, noting internal attempts at creating more scientific approaches and the involvement of Young Earth creationists and a prevalence of hoaxes. She concludes that many cryptozoologists are &quot;passionate and sincere in their belief that mystery animals exist. As such, they give deference to every report of a sighting, often without critical questioning. As with the ghost seekers, cryptozoologists are convinced that they will be the ones to solve the mystery and make history. With the lure of mystery and money undermining diligent and ethical research, the field of cryptozoology has serious credibility problems.&quot;

== Organizations ==
There have been several organizations, of varying types, dedicated or related to cryptozoology. These include:
* International Fortean Organization – a network of professional Fortean researchers and writers based in the United States
* International Society of Cryptozoology – an American organisation that existed from 1982 to 1998
* Kosmopoisk – a Russian organisation whose interests include cryptozoology and Ufology
* The Centre for Fortean Zoology- an English organization centered around hunting for unknown animals

== Museums and exhibitions ==
The zoological and cryptozoological collection and archive of Bernard Heuvelmans is held at the Musée Cantonal de Zoologie in Lausanne and consists of around &quot;1,000 books, 25,000 files, 25,000 photographs, correspondence, and artifacts&quot;.

In 2006, the Bates College Museum of Art held the &quot;Cryptozoology: Out of Time Place Scale&quot; exhibition, which compared cryptozoological creatures with recently extinct animals like the thylacine and extant taxa like the coelacanth, once thought long extinct (living fossils). The following year, the American Museum of Natural History put on a mixed exhibition of imaginary and extinct animals, including the elephant bird &quot;Aepyornis maximus&quot; and the great ape &quot;Gigantopithecus blacki&quot;, under the name &quot;Mythic Creatures: Dragons, Unicorns and Mermaids&quot;.

In 2003, cryptozoologist Loren Coleman opened the International Cryptozoology Museum in Portland, Maine. The museum houses more than 3000 cryptozoology related artifacts.

==See also==

* Ethnozoology
* Fearsome critters, fabulous beasts that were said to inhabit the timberlands of North America
* Folk belief
* List of cryptids, a list of cryptids notable within cryptozoology
* List of cryptozoologists, a list of notable cryptozoologists
* Scientific skepticism

==References==
==Sources==

* Bartholomew, Robert E. 2012. &quot;The Untold Story of Champ: A Social History of America&#x27;s Loch Ness Monster&quot;. State University of New York Press. 
* Campion-Vincent, Véronique. 1992. &quot;Appearances of Beasts and Mystery-cats in France&quot;. &quot;Folklore&quot; 103.2 (1992): 160–183.
* Card, Jeb J. 2016. &quot;Steampunk Inquiry: A Comparative Vivisection of Discovery Pseudoscience&quot; in Card, Jeb J. and Anderson, David S. &quot;Lost City, Found Pyramid: Understanding Alternative Archaeologies and Pseudoscientific Practices&quot;, pp. 24–25. University of Alabama Press. 
* Church, Jill M. (2009). &quot;Cryptozoology&quot;. In H. James Birx. &quot;Encyclopedia of Time: Science, Philosophy, Theology &amp; Culture, Volume 1&quot;. SAGE Publications. pp. 251–252. 
* Dash, Mike. 2000. &quot;Borderlands: The Ultimate Exploration of the Unknown&quot;. Overlook Press. 
* Dendle, Peter. 2006. &quot;Cryptozoology in the Medieval and Modern Worlds&quot;. &quot;Folklore&quot;, Vol. 117, No. 2 (Aug., 2006), pp. 190–206. Taylor &amp; Francis.
* Dendle, Peter. 2013. &quot;Monsters and the Twenty-First Century&quot; in &quot;The Ashgate Research Companion to Monsters and the Monstrous&quot;. Ashgate Publishing. 
* Hill, Sharon A. 2017. &quot;Scientifical Americans: The Culture of Amateur Paranormal Researchers&quot;. McFarland. 
* Lack, Caleb W. and Jacques Rousseau. 2016. &quot;Critical Thinking, Science, and Pseudoscience: Why We Can&#x27;t Trust Our Brains&quot;. Springer. 
* Lee, Jeffrey A. 2000. &quot;The Scientific Endeavor: A Primer on Scientific Principles and Practice&quot;. Benjamin Cummings. 
* Loxton, Daniel and Donald Prothero. 2013. &quot;Abominable Science: Origins of the Yeti, Nessie, and other Famous Cryptids&quot;. Columbia University Press. 
* Mullis, Justin. 2019. &quot;Cryptofiction! Science Fiction and the Rise of Cryptozoology&quot; in Caterine, Darryl &amp; John W. Morehead (ed.). 2019. &quot;The Paranormal and Popular Culture: A Postmodern Religious Landscape&quot;, pp. 240–252. Routledge. .
* Mullis, Justin. 2021. &quot;Thomas Jefferson: The First Cryptozoologist?&quot;. In Joseph P. Laycock &amp; Natasha L. Mikles (eds). &quot;Religion, Culture, and the Monstrous: Of Gods and Monsters&quot;, pp. 185–197. Lexington Books. 
* Nagel, Brian. 2009. &quot;Pseudoscience: A Critical Encyclopedia&quot;. ABC-CLIO.
* Paxton, C.G.M. 2011. &quot;Putting the &#x27;ology&#x27; into cryptozoology.&quot; &quot;Biofortean Notes&quot;. Vol. 7, pp. 7–20, 310.
* Prothero, Donald R. 2007. &quot;Evolution: What the Fossils Say and Why It Matters&quot;. Columbia University Press. 
* Radford, Benjamin. 2014. &quot;Bigfoot at 50: Evaluating a Half-Century of Bigfoot Evidence&quot; in Farha, Bryan (ed.). &quot;Pseudoscience and Deception: The Smoke and Mirrors of Paranormal Claims&quot;. University Press of America.
* Regal, Brian. 2011a. &quot;Cryptozoology&quot; in McCormick, Charlie T. and Kim Kennedy (ed.). &quot;Folklore: An Encyclopedia of Beliefs, Customs, Tales, Music, and Art&quot;, pp. 326–329. 2nd edition. ABC-CLIO. .
* Regal, Brian. 2011b. &quot;Sasquatch: Crackpots, Eggheads, and Cryptozoology&quot;. Springer. .
* Roesch, Ben S &amp; John L. Moore. (2002). &quot;Cryptozoology&quot;. In Michael Shermer (ed.). &quot;The Skeptic Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience: Volume One&quot;. ABC-CLIO. pp. 71–78. 
* Shea, Rachel Hartigan. 2013. &quot;The Science Behind Bigfoot and Other Monsters&quot;.&quot;National Geographic&quot;, September 9, 2013. Online.
* Shermer, Michael. 2003. &quot;Show Me the Body&quot; in &quot;Scientific American&quot;, issue 288 (5), p. 27. Online.
* Simpson, George Gaylord (1984). &quot;Mammals and Cryptozoology&quot;. &quot;Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society&quot;. Vol. 128, No. 1 (Mar. 30, 1984), pp. 1–19. American Philosophical Society.
* Thomas, Paul. 2020. &quot;Storytelling the Bible at the Creation Museum, Ark Encounter, and Museum of the Bible&quot;. Bloomsbury Publishing. 
* Uscinski, Joseph. 2020. &quot;Conspiracy Theories: A Primer&quot;. Rowman &amp; Littlefield Publishers. 
* Wall, J. E. 1983. &quot;The ISC Newsletter&quot;, vol. 2, issue 10, p. 10. International Society of Cryptozoology.
* Ward, Daniel. 2011. &quot;From the President&quot;. &quot;The American Biology Teacher&quot;, 73.8 (2011): 440–440.
* Watts, Linda S. 2007. &quot;Encyclopedia of American Folklore&quot;. Facts on File.
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q180933" start="0" end="13" title="Cryptozoology" label="Cryptozoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="19" end="32" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="37" end="47" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="203" end="211" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="221" end="228" title="Bigfoot" label="Bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q49658" start="234" end="251" title="Loch Ness Monster" label="Loch Ness Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q129628" start="253" end="257" title="Yeti" label="Yeti"/>
<link wikidata="Q183571" start="263" end="273" title="chupacabra" label="chupacabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q668330" start="279" end="291" title="Jersey Devil" label="Jersey Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q555716" start="300" end="313" title="Mokele-mbembe" label="Mokele-mbembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16322" start="365" end="373" title="List of cryptids" label="cryptids"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="445" end="462" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="557" end="564" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="572" end="588" title="folklore studies" label="folklore studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q542873" start="643" end="661" title="Bernard Heuvelmans" label="Bernard Heuvelmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675628" start="666" end="683" title="Ivan T. Sanderson" label="Ivan T. Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074821" start="946" end="969" title="Young Earth creationism" label="Young Earth creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289413" start="1037" end="1050" title="ghost hunting" label="ghost hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q219611" start="1055" end="1062" title="ufology" label="ufology"/>
<link wikidata="Q542873" start="1231" end="1249" title="Bernard Heuvelmans" label="Bernard Heuvelmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1253" end="1260" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1675628" start="1276" end="1293" title="Ivan T. Sanderson" label="Ivan T. Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3976869" start="1353" end="1384" title="On the Track of Unknown Animals" label="On the Track of Unknown Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2524065" start="1740" end="1766" title="Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans" label="Anthonie Cornelis Oudemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1941" end="1954" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2013" end="2026" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="2057" end="2063" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008997" start="2401" end="2439" title="International Society of Cryptozoology" label="International Society of Cryptozoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="2823" end="2848" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="3593" end="3602" title="folklore" label="folkloric"/>
<link wikidata="Q49658" start="3644" end="3661" title="Loch Ness Monster" label="Loch Ness Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061045" start="3663" end="3679" title="Champ (folklore)" label="Champ (folklore)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44810" start="3681" end="3688" title="Bigfoot" label="Bigfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q183571" start="3694" end="3704" title="chupacabra" label="chupacabra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5217971" start="4631" end="4644" title="Daniel Loxton" label="Daniel Loxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721746" start="4664" end="4679" title="Donald Prothero" label="Donald Prothero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373106" start="4742" end="4752" title="Roy Mackal" label="Roy Mackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q521444" start="5363" end="5376" title="Grover Krantz" label="Grover Krantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q296112" start="5378" end="5389" title="Karl Shuker" label="Karl Shuker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326065" start="5395" end="5412" title="Richard Greenwell" label="Richard Greenwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313691" start="5839" end="5852" title="René Dahinden" label="René Dahinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="6057" end="6066" title="Count" label="Lensgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799617" start="6113" end="6122" title="Lake Tele" label="Lake Tele"/>
<link wikidata="Q555716" start="6148" end="6161" title="Mokele-mbembe" label="Mokele-mbembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074821" start="6340" end="6363" title="Young Earth creationism" label="Young Earth creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q508069" start="6418" end="6441" title="Biblical hermeneutics" label="Biblical interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6479" end="6494" title="Young Earth creationism#Flood geology, the fossil record, and dinosaurs" label="living dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505283" start="6503" end="6517" title="Science journalism" label="Science writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211433" start="6518" end="6532" title="Sharon A. Hill" label="Sharon A. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="6745" end="6759" title="Anthropology" label="Anthropologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="6788" end="6802" title="Creationism" label="[c]reationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="6970" end="6984" title="paleontology" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11721746" start="6985" end="7000" title="Donald Prothero" label="Donald Prothero"/>
<link wikidata="Q49658" start="7106" end="7124" title="Loch Ness Monster" label="Loch Ness monsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q555716" start="7128" end="7141" title="Mokele-mbembe" label="Mokele Mbembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q430" start="7215" end="7223" title="dinosaur" label="dinosaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="7231" end="7236" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178159" start="7423" end="7443" title="Petersburg, Boone County, Kentucky" label="Petersburg, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139337" start="7450" end="7465" title="Creation Museum" label="Creation Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559" start="7486" end="7492" title="dragon" label="dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24908667" start="7980" end="7993" title="Ark Encounter" label="Ark Encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345825" start="8089" end="8106" title="pseudoarchaeology" label="pseudoarchaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510503" start="8885" end="8897" title="MonsterQuest" label="MonsterQuest"/>
<link wikidata="Q483677" start="9188" end="9201" title="pseudoscience" label="pseudoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="9425" end="9442" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345825" start="9737" end="9754" title="pseudoarchaeology" label="pseudoarchaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289413" start="10110" end="10123" title="ghost hunting" label="ghost hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q219611" start="10128" end="10135" title="ufology" label="ufology"/>
<link wikidata="Q16322" start="10285" end="10293" title="list of cryptids" label="cryptids"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="10379" end="10399" title="comparative folklore" label="comparative folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="10611" end="10618" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10645" end="10666" title="Indian burial grounds" label="Indian burial grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q44342" start="10683" end="10689" title="legend" label="legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396560" start="10708" end="10716" title="haunting" label="haunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572480" start="10730" end="10757" title="The Amityville Horror" label="&amp;quot;Amityville&amp;quot; hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932080" start="10842" end="10882" title="National Association of Biology Teachers" label="National Association of Biology Teachers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10893" end="10901" title="Dan Ward (educator)" label="Dan Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q201486" start="11148" end="11168" title="History of science" label="Historian of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090342" start="11169" end="11180" title="Brian Regal" label="Brian Regal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734670" start="11453" end="11461" title="The Folklore Society" label="Folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q132116" start="11469" end="11479" title="folkloristics" label="folklorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356679" start="11731" end="11744" title="Fortean Times" label="Fortean Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="12021" end="12035" title="parapsychology" label="parapsychology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12284" end="12295" title="Linda Watts" label="Linda Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173628" start="12594" end="12606" title="Peter Dendle" label="Peter Dendle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146846" start="13308" end="13317" title="Mike Dash" label="Mike Dash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386" start="13537" end="13540" title="ant" label="ant"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="13545" end="13551" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319603" start="13720" end="13742" title="George Gaylord Simpson" label="George Gaylord Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130352" start="13818" end="13829" title="creationism" label="creationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="13951" end="13967" title="Holocaust denial" label="Holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13972" end="13993" title="Ufology#Pseudoscience" label="UFO abductions claims"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074821" start="14309" end="14333" title="Young Earth creationists" label="Young Earth creationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q10289413" start="14588" end="14601" title="Ghost hunting" label="ghost seekers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6050647" start="14979" end="15013" title="International Fortean Organization" label="International Fortean Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008997" start="15103" end="15141" title="International Society of Cryptozoology" label="International Society of Cryptozoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656298" start="15202" end="15212" title="Kosmopoisk" label="Kosmopoisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q219611" start="15280" end="15287" title="Ufology" label="Ufology"/>
<link wikidata="Q14630553" start="15517" end="15543" title="Musée Cantonal de Zoologie" label="Musée Cantonal de Zoologie"/>
<link wikidata="Q807" start="15547" end="15555" title="Lausanne" label="Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868797" start="15683" end="15710" title="Bates College Museum of Art" label="Bates College Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q123102" start="15864" end="15873" title="thylacine" label="thylacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q59166" start="15899" end="15909" title="coelacanth" label="coelacanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q187419" start="15938" end="15952" title="living fossils" label="living fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q217717" start="15979" end="16013" title="American Museum of Natural History" label="American Museum of Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q214508" start="16088" end="16101" title="elephant bird" label="elephant bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638301" start="16108" end="16125" title="Aepyornis maximus" label="Aepyornis maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310434" start="16156" end="16178" title="Gigantopithecus blacki" label="Gigantopithecus blacki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656197" start="16289" end="16302" title="Loren Coleman" label="Loren Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16314" end="16348" title="Loren Coleman#International Cryptozoology Museum" label="International Cryptozoology Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="16352" end="16360" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="16362" end="16367" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177380" start="16452" end="16464" title="Ethnozoology" label="Ethnozoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740591" start="16467" end="16484" title="Fearsome critters" label="Fearsome critters"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401154" start="16563" end="16574" title="Folk belief" label="Folk belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q16322" start="16577" end="16593" title="List of cryptids" label="List of cryptids"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614860" start="16645" end="16669" title="List of cryptozoologists" label="List of cryptozoologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q929771" start="16708" end="16729" title="Scientific skepticism" label="Scientific skepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50365765" start="16761" end="16783" title="Robert Bartholomew" label="Bartholomew, Robert E."/>
<link wikidata="Q4050071" start="16883" end="16917" title="State University of New York Press" label="State University of New York Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895031" start="17327" end="17354" title="University of Alabama Press" label="University of Alabama Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628318" start="17413" end="17426" title="H. James Birx" label="H. James Birx"/>
<link wikidata="Q251266" start="17517" end="17534" title="SAGE Publications" label="SAGE Publications"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755744" start="17636" end="17650" title="Overlook Press" label="Overlook Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q880582" start="17802" end="17822" title="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis" label="Taylor &amp;amp; Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805028" start="17974" end="17992" title="Ashgate Publishing" label="Ashgate Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303647" start="18102" end="18111" title="McFarland &amp;amp; Company" label="McFarland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888447" start="18374" end="18391" title="Benjamin Cummings" label="Benjamin Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080179" start="18526" end="18551" title="Columbia University Press" label="Columbia University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="18802" end="18811" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="19034" end="19049" title="Lexington Books" label="Lexington Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q667886" start="19126" end="19134" title="ABC-CLIO" label="ABC-CLIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080179" start="19366" end="19391" title="Columbia University Press" label="Columbia University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551348" start="19602" end="19629" title="University Press of America" label="University Press of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q667886" start="19836" end="19844" title="ABC-CLIO" label="ABC-CLIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q21096327" start="19934" end="19942" title="Springer Nature" label="Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q126225" start="20021" end="20036" title="Michael Shermer" label="Michael Shermer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973845" start="20228" end="20247" title="National Geographic" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39379" start="20346" end="20365" title="Scientific American" label="Scientific American"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="20582" end="20612" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q568642" start="20735" end="20756" title="Bloomsbury Publishing" label="Bloomsbury Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30673915" start="20761" end="20777" title="Joseph Uscinski" label="Uscinski, Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008997" start="20943" end="20981" title="International Society of Cryptozoology" label="International Society of Cryptozoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030420" start="21172" end="21185" title="Facts on File" label="Facts on File"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5829" wikidata="Q3395392" url="?curid=5829" title="Craig Charles">
<text>Craig Joseph Charles (born 11 July 1964) is an English actor, comedian, DJ, and television and radio presenter. He is best known for his roles as Dave Lister in the science fiction sitcom &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; and Lloyd Mullaney in the soap opera &quot;Coronation Street&quot; (2005–2015). He presented the gladiator-style game show &quot;Robot Wars&quot; from 1998 to 2004, and narrated the comedy endurance show &quot;Takeshi&#x27;s Castle&quot;. As a DJ, he appears on BBC Radio 6 Music.

Charles first appeared on television as a performance poet, which led to minor presenting roles. After finding fame in &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, he regularly featured on national television with celebrity appearances on many popular shows while he continued to host a wide variety of programmes. From 2017 to 2022, Charles hosted &quot;The Gadget Show&quot; for Channel 5. His acting credits include playing inmate Eugene Buffy in the ITV drama &quot;The Governor&quot;, and leading roles in the British films &quot;Fated&quot; and &quot;Clubbing to Death&quot;. 

Charles has hosted &quot;The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show&quot; on BBC radio since 2002, and performs DJ sets at numerous clubs and festivals, nationally and internationally. In September 2015, he left &quot;Coronation Street&quot; after ten years of acting, to film new episodes of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; and to continue his BBC Radio 6 Music and BBC Radio 2 broadcasting.

== Early life ==
Craig Joseph Charles was born in Liverpool on 11 July 1964, the son of a Guyanese father and Irish mother. He grew up on the Cantril Farm housing estate with his older brother, Dean (died 2014), and two other brothers, Jimmy and Emile. He attended West Derby Comprehensive School followed by Childwall Hall College of Further Education, studying A-levels in History, Government &amp; Politics, English Literature and General Studies. He won a national competition run by &quot;The Guardian&quot; newspaper for a poem he wrote when he was 12 years old. Upon leaving school, Charles spent time working in a studio at Central Hall on Renshaw Street in Liverpool.

== Early career ==
Charles began his career as a contemporary and urban performance poet on the British cabaret circuit. His performances were considered original, with Charles described as having a natural ironic wit which appealed to talent scouts. In 1981, Charles climbed on stage at a Teardrop Explodes concert and recited a humorous, but derogatory, poem about the band&#x27;s singer, Julian Cope. Charles was invited to open subsequent gigs for the group, and went on to perform as a support act in pubs and clubs for the following three years, and at events such as the &quot;Larks in the Park&quot; music festival at Sefton Park (1982). He performed poetry reading poems by Vladimir Mayakovsky, W. H. Auden and E. E. Cummings, at Liverpool&#x27;s Everyman Theatre (1983), with such poets as Roger McGough and Adrian Henri.

Charles was involved in the Liverpool music scene, writing and singing lyrics for a number of local rock bands. In 1980, he played keyboards, bass and provided voice in the rock band Watt 4. He performed his political rap lyrics as a &#x27;Wordsmith&#x27;. In 1983, Charles was invited to record a session on the John Peel BBC Radio show, performing his poems backed by a band. This was his first professional engagement. He recorded a further Peel Session in 1984.

Charles realised he was using poetry as a vehicle for his sense of humour, and progressed into stand-up comedy. He was part of the &quot;Red Wedge&quot; comedy tour in 1986, which aimed to raise awareness of the social problems of the time, in support of the Labour Party. He also performed his first one-man show in 1986, which premiered in Edinburgh, and then toured internationally. Charles was a guest on programmes including Janice Long&#x27;s Radio 1 show, and he was a regular panellist on Ned Sherrin&#x27;s chat show &quot;Loose Ends&quot; (1987–88) on BBC Radio 4.

== Television career ==

=== Performance poetry ===
Charles first appeared on television as the resident poet on the arts programme &quot;Riverside&quot; on BBC2 and on the day-time BBC1 chat show &quot;Pebble Mill at One&quot;. Charles was the resident poet on the Channel 4 programme &quot;Black on Black&quot; (1985) and its entertainment-based successor &quot;Club Mix&quot; (1986), and he appeared, weekly, as a John Cooper Clarke-style &#x27;punk poet&#x27; on the BBC2 pop music programme &quot;Oxford Road Show&quot; (ORS). Charles performed his political poems as stand-up comedy on the late-night show &quot;Saturday Live&quot; (1985–87) and on the prime-time BBC1 chat show &quot;Wogan&quot; (1986–87), where he performed a topical poem in a weekly feature. He also appeared as a guest on shows including &quot;Open Air&quot; (1988). Charles included significant acting in his performance style, enabling him to put the emotion across.
In September 2015, Charles performed his &quot;epic&quot; poem &quot;Scary Fairy and the Tales of the Dark Wood&quot; live with the BBC Philharmonic orchestra, in a concert to be broadcast on BBC Radio 2&#x27;s &quot;Friday Night Is Music Night&quot; at Halloween.

=== &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; ===

Charles&#x27; first television acting role was the Liverpudlian slob Dave Lister in science fiction comedy series &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; starting in 1988. He was introduced to the show by &quot;Saturday Live&quot; and &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; producer Paul Jackson, who wanted his opinion on whether the black character Cat was a racist stereotype. Charles, who like all of the eventual main cast had no acting experience, was eventually offered an audition after begging Jackson.

Charles has appeared in all twelve series, as well as &quot;Red Dwarf: The Promised Land&quot; (2020). Charles&#x27; younger brother, Emile Charles, guest-starred in the third-series episode &quot;Timeslides&quot;, and the songs &quot;Bad News&quot; and &quot;Cash&quot; in this episode were written by Charles and performed by his band. The role has involved Charles playing a variety of alternative characters, including a gangster, a cowboy and angelic and evil versions of Lister, and in him carrying out a wide range of stunts, and acting involving special effects. All series, except 7 and 9, were recorded in front of a studio audience. Along with Danny John-Jules (Cat), Charles is one of only two cast members to appear in every episode of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; to date.

Charles reads the audiobook editions of both the &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; novel &quot;Last Human&quot; and his book &quot;The Log: A Dwarfer&#x27;s Guide to Everything&quot;, and he regularly attends sci-fi, comedy and memorabilia conventions in connection with the &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; franchise. During &quot;Back to Earth&quot;, Lister visits the set of &quot;Coronation Street&quot;, where he meets the actor Craig Charles.

=== &quot;Robot Wars&quot; ===
Charles presented &quot;Robot Wars&quot; on BBC2 (1998–2003) and Channel 5 (2003–04), from series 2 until series 7, which included two &quot;Extreme&quot; series and numerous &#x27;specials&#x27;. Charles was the main host and presided over the arena in which teams of amateur engineers battled their home-made radio-controlled robots against each other, and against the house robots. Charles introduced the show, enthusiastically announced the results of the battles and spoke to the contestants after the main events. He ended each episode with a short &quot;Robot Wars&quot;-themed poem. Charles&#x27; son, Jack, appeared on the show on several occasions, and was a contestant on &quot;Team Nemesis&quot; during series 4. Charles also hosted the &quot;Robot Wars Live&quot; UK tour, in 2001 and shows performed at the Wembley Arena.

&quot;Robot Wars&quot; returned to the BBC in 2016. Charles stated his interest in hosting it again, but the job went to Dara Ó Briain and Angela Scanlon.

=== &quot;Takeshi&#x27;s Castle&quot; ===
Charles provided the English voice-over commentary for the Challenge (2002–04) rebroadcast of the popular game show &quot;Takeshi&#x27;s Castle&quot;, originally by Tokyo Broadcasting System in Japan. In each episode, between 100 and 142 contestants attempted to pass a series of wacky and near-impossible physical challenges to reach the Show Down at the castle against Japanese actor Takeshi Kitano for a chance to win large cash prizes. Charles co-wrote the programme and commentated throughout all 122 episodes of the four series, and also some special and &quot;best of&quot; episodes. He provided comedy insights into the contestants&#x27; abilities, which were designed to appeal to adult audiences, as well as younger viewers – and also coined the term &quot;Keshi Heads&quot; to describe fans of the show. A 2013 reboot narrated by Dick and Dom was not as well received.

=== &quot;Coronation Street&quot; ===
In 2005, Charles joined the main cast of &quot;Coronation Street&quot;, playing a philandering taxicab driver, Lloyd Mullaney. Charles introduced aspects of the character himself, making Lloyd a Northern Soul DJ and record collector, and funk music enthusiast. Charles has chosen funk and soul songs playing as backing tracks during scenes, and posters for &quot;The Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club&quot; and &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; have appeared in the background.

Charles portrayed Lloyd as tough, but kind-hearted and romantic, and the character was popular with viewers. Charles added a comedy element to the role, but was also involved in traumatic and emotional scenes with intricate storylines. In 2010, his character was involved in the show&#x27;s dramatic 50th anniversary tram crash storyline, which was broadcast live. Charles presented documentaries for the show, including &quot;50 Years of Corrie Stunts&quot; (2010), which is included on the &quot;Tram Crash&quot; DVD. In November 2011, Charles took time off from &quot;Coronation Street&quot; to film a new series of &quot;Red Dwarf&quot;, returning in April 2012. In February 2014 an online mini-series, &quot;Steve &amp; Lloyd&#x27;s Streetcar Stories&quot;, ran alongside the television show&#x27;s storyline.

In May 2015, Craig announced he would be leaving &quot;Coronation Street&quot; for &quot;Red Dwarf,&quot; BBC Radio 2 and BBC Radio 6 Music. Lloyd left in a red Cadillac during the live episode on 23 September, although his final pre-recorded farewell scenes with Steve were shown during the following episode.

=== Other acting roles ===
Charles has acted in episodes of popular dramas such as &quot;The Bill&quot; (1995), &quot;EastEnders&quot; (2002) and &quot;Holby City&quot; (2003) and in the comedy &quot;The 10 Percenters&quot; (1996). Charles played the emotionally disturbed and violent prisoner, Eugene Buffy, in the highly successful Lynda La Plante drama series &quot;The Governor&quot; (1996); the title role in the Channel 4 pirate sitcom &quot;Captain Butler&quot; (1997); the warden of a women&#x27;s prison in the Canadian sci-fi fantasy &quot;Lexx&quot; (2001); Detective Chief Inspector Mercer in seven episodes of the BBC soap opera &quot;Doctors&quot; (2003); and soccer agent, Joel Brooks, in the Sky TV football soap &quot;Dream Team&quot; (2004).

=== Other presenting roles ===
Charles has presented children&#x27;s television programmes, including &quot;What&#x27;s That Noise?&quot; (1989) and &quot;Parallel 9&quot; (1992) on BBC1 and &quot;Go Getters&quot; (1994) on ITV. He was the travelling reporter for the highly acclaimed, but controversial, BBC &#x27;mockumentary&#x27; &quot;Ghostwatch&quot;, which tricked viewers into believing it was a live investigation into ghost sightings in a suburban home on Halloween night (1992). Charles presented the virtual reality game show &quot;Cyberzone&quot; (1993) on BBC2; the late-night entertainment show &quot;Funky Bunker&quot; (1997) on ITV; the reality show &quot;Jailbreak&quot; (2000) on Channel 5; the discussion show &quot;Amazing Space: The Pub Guide to the Universe&quot; (2001) on National Geographic; and the late-night current affairs chat show &quot;Weapons of Mass Distraction&quot; (2004) on ITV.

=== Other appearances ===
Charles has appeared on celebrity editions of &quot;University Challenge&quot; (1998), &quot;Can&#x27;t Cook, Won&#x27;t Cook&quot; (1998), &quot;The Weakest Link&quot; (2004), &quot;The Chase&quot; (2012) and &quot;Pointless&quot; (2013), and comedy panel shows such as &quot;Have I Got News for You&quot; (1995), &quot;Just a Minute&quot; (1995) and &quot;They Think It&#x27;s All Over&quot; (1996) and Keith Lemon&#x27;s &quot;Through the Keyhole&quot; (2014). He was a team captain on the sci-fi quiz series &quot;Space Cadets&quot; (1997) on Channel 4, which guest-starred William Shatner. Charles has opened &quot;The National Lottery Draw&quot; (1997) and his home has featured on &quot;Through the Keyhole&quot;. Charles was a contestant in the &quot;Celebrity Poker Club&quot; tournament (2004) on Challenge, where he reached the semi-finals, and in the Channel 4 reality game show, &quot;The Games&quot; (2005), which documented the contestants&#x27; intensive training regime and each live Olympic Games-style sporting event.

From 16 November 2014, Charles took part in the fourteenth series of &quot;I&#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!&quot; However, on 20 November, Charles left the series soon after learning that his brother Dean had died after suffering a heart attack.

== Radio ==
As well as his early appearances on shows such as Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Loose Ends&quot; (1987–88) and &quot;Kaleidoscope&quot; in the early 1990s, Charles could be heard on the London Radio Station Kiss 100 (Kiss FM) as the breakfast show presenter. In 1995, Charles played the Porter in Steven Berkoff&#x27;s adaptation of Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Macbeth&quot; on Radio 4.

Since 2002, Charles has been a DJ on BBC Radio 6 Music presenting &quot;The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show&quot;, on air on Saturday evenings 6 pm to 9 pm, where he plays a diverse range of funk and soul music, from classic tracks to the latest releases, and provides publicity for less familiar bands. Charles explains the context for the music and carries out interviews with guest musicians. He was with the station at its launch, and while it was being tested during the previous year, under the name Network Y. Charles has also hosted the station&#x27;s &quot;Breakfast Show&quot; (2004), and sits in for other presenters including Andrew Collins, Phil Wilding, Phill Jupitus and Radcliffe &amp; Maconie.

From January until November 2014, Charles also broadcast &quot;The Funk and Soul Show&quot; live on BBC Radio 2, immediately after his 6 Music show. He regularly sits in for various presenters, and has presented numerous programmes on the station, including &quot;The Craig Charles Soul All-Nighter&quot; (2011), which he hosted continuously for 12 hours, and the &quot;Beatleland&quot; (2012) documentary on The Beatles. Charles has also chosen music as a guest of other broadcasters such as Ken Bruce on Radio 2 and Liz Kershaw on 6 Music. Charles covered for Graham Norton on Radio 2&#x27;s Saturday mid-morning show during Norton&#x27;s ten-week 2015 summer break. From 16 April 2016 until 18 June 2022, Charles presented the House Party on Saturday nights on BBC Radio 2, with the show airing between 10 pm and midnight. For eight weeks from April–June 2020, he also presented &quot;Craig Charles At Teatime&quot; between 4 pm and 7 pm on weekdays on Radio 6 Music. The show was sometimes billed as &quot;Craig Charles Weekend Workout&quot; on Fridays.

Since 18 October 2021, Charles has hosted the weekday afternoon show on BBC Radio 6 Music (1 pm – 4 pm). The shows include the &quot;Trunk of Punk&quot; and the &quot;Jar of Ska&quot;. In 2023 the weekday show won the Gold Aria award for Best Music Entertainment Show.

== Music ==
Charles has been involved in the music industry through much of his career. His bands have included Watt 4 (1980), in which he played keyboards and sang; Craig Charles and the Beat Burglars (1989); The Sons of Gordon Gekko (1989), where he wrote lyrics and also composed tunes; and The Eye (2000–02), with whom he recorded the rock album &quot;Giving You the Eye, Live at the Edinburgh Festival&quot;. Charles plays guitar and piano.

In 1987, Charles provided the poem track used for the opening credits of the BBC series &quot;The Marksman&quot; (in which he also acted), which is included on the album &quot;The Marksman: Music from the BBC TV Series&quot;. Charles wrote lyrics for Suzanne Rhatigan&#x27;s album &quot;To Hell with Love&quot; (1992). In 1993, Charles was signed to the Acid Jazz record label.

In 2009, Charles formed the Fantasy Funk Band from the leading British musicians in the genre, and has presented the band at festivals, including Glastonbury and the BBC&#x27;s Proms in the Park. As a continuation of his 6 Music show, Charles regularly takes the Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club to varied venues across the UK and abroad, and to the major UK music festivals. He performs live DJ sets, occasionally comperes and curates events, including his own Craig Charles Fantasy Weekender, and has broadcast the radio show live from festival locations.

In 2012, Charles released the compilation album &quot;The Craig Charles Funk &amp; Soul Club&quot;, on CD and as a digital download, as part of a three-album deal with Freestyle Records. The second volume was released in the same format in 2013, and the third in 2014. He followed these with a &quot;Craig Charles Funk and Soul Classics&quot; album of three CDs in 2015.

== Stand-up comedy and theatre ==
Charles returned to stand-up comedy between 1995 and 2001, regularly touring his one-man adult-rated shows nationally and releasing the videos &quot;Craig Charles: Live on Earth!&quot; (1995), &quot;Live Official Bootleg&quot; (1996) and &quot;Sickbag&quot; (2000). International performances included the Great Norwegian Comedy Festival and the Melbourne International Comedy Festival.

Charles appeared in the John Godber comedy play &quot;Teechers&quot;, in which he swapped in and out of various roles, at the Arts Theatre, London, and at the Edinburgh Festival (1989), and he played Idle Jack in the pantomime &quot;Dick Whittington&quot;, at the Hull New Theatre (1997). In 2000, he performed the show &quot;Craig Charles and His Band&quot; at the Edinburgh Festival.

Charles has a regular slot at Butlins Minehead House Of Fun Weekend every third November for three nights, of DJing, Comedy, Twanging and singing.

== Film roles ==
Charles played Eddie in the 1987 political drama &quot;Business as Usual&quot;. In 2006, Charles starred in two British feature films: the fantasy film &quot;Fated&quot; and the gangster film &quot;Clubbing to Death&quot;. Charles voiced Zipper the Cat in the animation &quot;Prince Cinders&quot; (1993) and Asterix in &quot;Asterix Conquers America&quot; (1994). Roles in short films include playing Keith Dennis in the comedy &quot;The Colour of Funny&quot; (1999) and Mark in the drama &quot;Ten Minutes&quot; (2004).

== Writing ==
In 1993, Charles worked with Russell Bell on the &quot;Craig Charles Almanac of Total Knowledge&quot;, writing about his &#x27;streetwise&#x27; sense of humour on a range of topics, from the world&#x27;s most embarrassing stories to how to explain the mysteries of the universe. In 1997, Charles and Bell wrote Charles&#x27; &quot;Red Dwarf&quot; character&#x27;s book &quot;The Log&quot;, in which Lister decides to leave a log detailing mankind&#x27;s greatest achievements. In 1998, Charles published &quot;No Other Blue&quot;, a collection of his poetry, with illustrations by Philippa Drakeford, on diverse personal subjects including prison, his mother&#x27;s final illness, love and politics at home and abroad. More recently, he has written a series of nursery rhymes titled &quot;Scary Fairy and the Tales of the Dark Wood&quot;.

In 2000, Charles wrote his first autobiography about his experiences growing up in Liverpool, titled &quot;No Irish, No Niggers&quot;. In 2007, he announced he would release his autobiography, planned for March 2008, published by Hodder Headline and titled &quot;On the Rocks&quot;, which would cover the recent incidents in his life and be based on much of his journal, which Charles said he kept while in rehab.

Charles has been involved in journalism and has had a column in &quot;Time Out&quot; magazine. In 1994, he launched a single issue of &quot;Comedy&quot; magazine with articles dedicated to the comedy circuit. In 2005 and 2006, Charles was a monthly columnist for the &quot;Liverpool Echo&quot; newspaper. His television writing credits include &quot;The Easter Stories&quot; (1994), &quot;Funky Bunker&quot; (1997) and &quot;Takeshi&#x27;s Castle&quot; (2002). He is also involved in music journalism, as he wrote liner notes for the funk and soul music producer Mr. Confuse for his albums &quot;Feel The Fire&quot; (2008), &quot;Do You Realize&quot; (2012) and &quot;Only A Man&quot; (2018) regarding his work as a music presenter for &quot;The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show&quot; on BBC Radio 6 Music.

== Personal life ==
Charles resides in Altrincham, Greater Manchester. He has three children: a son named Jack from his first marriage to actress Cathy Tyson, and two daughters named Anna-Jo and Nellie from his second marriage to Jackie Fleming.

In July 1994, Charles and another man were charged with rape and four counts of indecent assault, following allegations by an associate and ex-girlfriend of Charles. Charles was remanded in custody for three-and-a-half months before being granted bail, during which time he was assaulted by a man wielding a makeshift knife. In March 1995, Charles and his co-accused were acquitted of all charges at trial. After being acquitted, Charles spoke of the need to restore anonymity for those accused of rape. He stated: &quot;The fact that my name and address along with my picture can appear on the front of the papers before the so-called &#x27;victim&#x27; has even signed a statement proves that anonymity for rape defendants is a must and that the law must be changed.&quot;

Charles has battled drug addiction: he described himself in 2015 as &quot;quite an addictive person&quot;, trying to find healthier addictions, of which work was one. In June 2006, newspaper allegations of crack cocaine use resulted in Charles being suspended from both &quot;Coronation Street&quot; and BBC Radio 6 Music. In August, Charles was arrested and released on bail pending further enquiries, and in September he accepted a caution for possession of a Class A drug. Charles returned to hosting his 6 Music show from November 2006 and filming &quot;Coronation Street&quot; from January 2007. In a 2015 interview, Charles spoke of his need to remain &quot;vigilant&quot; in abstaining from drugs. In 2020, he said that the newspaper reports were the best thing that could have happened to him, leading him to join Narcotics Anonymous and straighten out his personal life.

== Credits ==
===Filmography===
=== Radio ===
== Bibliography ==
===Published===
* 1993, &quot;Craig Charles Almanac of Total Knowledge&quot; (with Russell Bell), Penguin Books
* 1997, &quot;The Log: A Dwarfer&#x27;s Guide to Everything&quot; (with Russell Bell), Penguin Books
* 1998, &quot;No Other Blue&quot; (illustrations by Philippa Drakeford), Penguin Books

===Unpublished===
* 2000, &quot;No Irish, No Niggers&quot;, Penguin Books 
* 2008, &quot;On the Rocks&quot;, Hodder Headline

==References==
== External links ==
* &quot;Craig Charles&quot; (BBC Radio 6 Music)
* &quot;The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show&quot; (BBC Radio 6 Music)
* Craig Charles BFI site
* Craig Charles Online Website
* Marie Birch&#x27;s Unofficial Craig Charles Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3395392" start="0" end="20" title="Craig Charles" label="Craig Joseph Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489077" start="146" end="157" title="Dave Lister" label="Dave Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="194" end="203" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662657" start="214" end="228" title="Lloyd Mullaney" label="Lloyd Mullaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="253" end="270" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q566838" start="339" end="349" title="Robot Wars (TV series)" label="Robot Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="420" end="441" title="Takeshi&amp;#x27;s Castle#United Kingdom" label="Takeshi&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="472" end="489" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="BBC Radio 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168247" start="534" end="550" title="performance poet" label="performance poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344874" start="825" end="840" title="The Gadget Show" label="The Gadget Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="851" end="860" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727943" start="1079" end="1115" title="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show" label="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="1383" end="1400" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="BBC Radio 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="1405" end="1416" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="1482" end="1491" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="1522" end="1530" title="Guyana" label="Guyanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617955" start="1574" end="1586" title="Cantril Farm" label="Cantril Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984954" start="1697" end="1728" title="West Derby Comprehensive School" label="West Derby Comprehensive School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098625" start="1741" end="1750" title="Childwall" label="Childwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q379609" start="1795" end="1803" title="A-levels" label="A-levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="1926" end="1938" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="2214" end="2221" title="cabaret" label="cabaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971690" start="2400" end="2417" title="Teardrop Explodes" label="Teardrop Explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371735" start="2501" end="2512" title="Julian Cope" label="Julian Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446116" start="2736" end="2747" title="Sefton Park" label="Sefton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q132964" start="2793" end="2812" title="Vladimir Mayakovsky" label="Vladimir Mayakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="2814" end="2825" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q298703" start="2830" end="2844" title="E. E. Cummings" label="E. E. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3061525" start="2866" end="2882" title="Everyman Theatre, Liverpool" label="Everyman Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741508" start="2910" end="2923" title="Roger McGough" label="Roger McGough"/>
<link wikidata="Q373134" start="2928" end="2940" title="Adrian Henri" label="Adrian Henri"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="3256" end="3265" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305215" start="3547" end="3556" title="Red Wedge" label="Red Wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="3669" end="3681" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3752" end="3761" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154279" start="3840" end="3851" title="Janice Long" label="Janice Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="3859" end="3866" title="BBC Radio 1" label="Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945635" start="3907" end="3918" title="Ned Sherrin" label="Ned Sherrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675943" start="3942" end="3952" title="Loose Ends (radio)" label="Loose Ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="3972" end="3983" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="4143" end="4147" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017460" start="4189" end="4207" title="Pebble Mill at One" label="Pebble Mill at One"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="4252" end="4261" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602261" start="4403" end="4421" title="John Cooper Clarke" label="John Cooper Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115441" start="4488" end="4504" title="Oxford Road Show" label="Oxford Road Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426631" start="4604" end="4617" title="Saturday Live (UK TV series)" label="Saturday Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q795551" start="5065" end="5081" title="BBC Philharmonic" label="BBC Philharmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503544" start="5150" end="5177" title="Friday Night Is Music Night" label="Friday Night Is Music Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489077" start="5299" end="5310" title="Dave Lister" label="Dave Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="5350" end="5359" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151529" start="5478" end="5490" title="Paul Jackson (producer)" label="Paul Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050998" start="5546" end="5549" title="Cat (Red Dwarf)" label="Cat"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5768" end="5796" title="Red Dwarf: The Promised Land" label="Red Dwarf: The Promised Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744204" start="5905" end="5915" title="Timeslides" label="Timeslides"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701386" start="6363" end="6379" title="Danny John-Jules" label="Danny John-Jules"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494423" start="6572" end="6582" title="Last Human" label="Last Human"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6798" end="6811" title="Red Dwarf: Back to Earth" label="Back to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q566838" start="6971" end="6981" title="Robot Wars (TV series)" label="Robot Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="7768" end="7781" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q983613" start="7905" end="7918" title="Dara Ó Briain" label="Dara Ó Briain"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667762" start="7923" end="7937" title="Angela Scanlon" label="Angela Scanlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="8011" end="8021" title="voice-over" label="voice-over"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068886" start="8041" end="8050" title="Challenge (TV channel)" label="Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8104" end="8125" title="Takeshi&amp;#x27;s Castle#United Kingdom" label="Takeshi&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q605233" start="8147" end="8172" title="Tokyo Broadcasting System" label="Tokyo Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q26372" start="8368" end="8382" title="Takeshi Kitano" label="Takeshi Kitano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273581" start="8823" end="8835" title="Dick and Dom" label="Dick and Dom"/>
<link wikidata="Q945030" start="8948" end="8965" title="Coronation Street" label="Coronation Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662657" start="9012" end="9026" title="Lloyd Mullaney" label="Lloyd Mullaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928583" start="9096" end="9109" title="Northern Soul" label="Northern Soul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9258" end="9308" title="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show#The Craig Charles Funk &amp;amp; Soul Club" label="&amp;quot;The Craig Charles Funk &amp;amp; Soul Club&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5902" start="10274" end="10283" title="Red Dwarf" label="Red Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="10291" end="10302" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="10307" end="10324" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="BBC Radio 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q929589" start="10586" end="10594" title="The Bill" label="The Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q607514" start="10615" end="10625" title="EastEnders" label="EastEnders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610941" start="10649" end="10659" title="Holby City" label="Holby City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711738" start="10697" end="10714" title="The 10 Percenters" label="The 10 Percenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018958" start="10831" end="10846" title="Lynda La Plante" label="Lynda La Plante"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993199" start="10866" end="10878" title="The Governor (British TV series)" label="The Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036580" start="10945" end="10959" title="Captain Butler" label="Captain Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q657308" start="11047" end="11051" title="Lexx" label="Lexx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233919" start="11145" end="11152" title="Doctors (2000 TV series)" label="Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033167" start="11205" end="11208" title="Sky (UK and Ireland)" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306461" start="11232" end="11242" title="Dream Team (TV series)" label="Dream Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134947" start="11413" end="11423" title="Parallel 9" label="Parallel 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="11440" end="11444" title="BBC1" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="11573" end="11585" title="mockumentary" label="mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124503" start="11598" end="11608" title="Ghostwatch" label="Ghostwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="11770" end="11785" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="11828" end="11832" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q16850870" start="11931" end="11940" title="Jailbreak (TV series)" label="Jailbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="11957" end="11966" title="Channel 5 (British TV channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q157118" start="12055" end="12074" title="National Geographic Channel" label="National Geographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q287137" start="12255" end="12275" title="University Challenge" label="University Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028854" start="12296" end="12328" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Cook, Won&amp;#x27;t Cook" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Cook, Won&amp;#x27;t Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q327762" start="12349" end="12365" title="The Weakest Link" label="The Weakest Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498075" start="12386" end="12395" title="The Chase (British game show)" label="The Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004615" start="12419" end="12428" title="Pointless" label="Pointless"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768525" start="12480" end="12503" title="Have I Got News for You" label="Have I Got News for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331688" start="12524" end="12537" title="Just a Minute" label="Just a Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783773" start="12561" end="12590" title="They Think It&amp;#x27;s All Over (TV series)" label="They Think It&amp;#x27;s All Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116190" start="12608" end="12619" title="Keith Lemon" label="Keith Lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798464" start="12633" end="12652" title="Through the Keyhole" label="Through the Keyhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572274" start="12721" end="12733" title="Space Cadets (game show)" label="Space Cadets"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="12750" end="12759" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q16297" start="12781" end="12796" title="William Shatner" label="William Shatner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753197" start="12817" end="12854" title="The National Lottery Draws" label="&amp;quot;The National Lottery Draw&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798464" start="12897" end="12916" title="Through the Keyhole" label="Through the Keyhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057753" start="12962" end="12982" title="Celebrity Poker Club" label="Celebrity Poker Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735741" start="13101" end="13110" title="The Games (British TV series)" label="The Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="13204" end="13217" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q18757413" start="13289" end="13306" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British series 14)" label="fourteenth series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235466" start="13316" end="13358" title="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here! (British TV series)" label="I&amp;#x27;m a Celebrity...Get Me Out of Here!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675943" start="13581" end="13591" title="Loose Ends (radio)" label="Loose Ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416895" start="13708" end="13716" title="Kiss 100" label="Kiss 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q529849" start="13798" end="13812" title="Steven Berkoff" label="Steven Berkoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="13834" end="13845" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="13859" end="13866" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="13923" end="13940" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="BBC Radio 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727943" start="13958" end="13994" title="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show" label="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="14078" end="14082" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="14087" end="14091" title="soul (music)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756646" start="14525" end="14539" title="Andrew Collins (broadcaster)" label="Andrew Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q350139" start="14555" end="14568" title="Phill Jupitus" label="Phill Jupitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280019" start="14573" end="14596" title="Radcliffe &amp;amp; Maconie" label="Radcliffe &amp;amp; Maconie"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="14699" end="14710" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="15008" end="15019" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387391" start="15092" end="15101" title="Ken Bruce" label="Ken Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949201" start="15117" end="15128" title="Liz Kershaw" label="Liz Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q19154" start="15161" end="15174" title="Graham Norton" label="Graham Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="15363" end="15374" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650945" start="16626" end="16642" title="Suzanne Rhatigan" label="Suzanne Rhatigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002465" start="16729" end="16738" title="Acid Jazz Records" label="Acid Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16782" end="16799" title="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show#The Fantasy Funk Band" label="Fantasy Funk Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q309066" start="16900" end="16911" title="Glastonbury Festival" label="Glastonbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="16931" end="16948" title="Proms in the Park" label="Proms in the Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17017" end="17051" title="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show#The Craig Charles Funk &amp;amp; Soul Club" label="Craig Charles Funk &amp;amp; Soul Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012417" start="18067" end="18106" title="Melbourne International Comedy Festival" label="Melbourne International Comedy Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293910" start="18133" end="18144" title="John Godber" label="John Godber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694199" start="18163" end="18171" title="Teechers" label="Teechers"/>
<link wikidata="Q829363" start="18268" end="18286" title="Edinburgh Festival" label="Edinburgh Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q13409536" start="18326" end="18335" title="pantomime" label="pantomime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935948" start="18373" end="18389" title="Hull New Theatre" label="Hull New Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001845" start="18716" end="18733" title="Business as Usual (film)" label="Business as Usual"/>
<link wikidata="Q704708" start="18986" end="19010" title="Asterix Conquers America" label="Asterix Conquers America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732516" start="20267" end="20282" title="Hodder Headline" label="Hodder Headline"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657609" start="20522" end="20530" title="Time Out (magazine)" label="Time Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658415" start="20725" end="20739" title="Liverpool Echo" label="Liverpool Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263757" start="20966" end="20977" title="liner notes" label="liner notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="20986" end="20990" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="20995" end="21005" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21015" end="21026" title="Mr. Confuse" label="Mr. Confuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727943" start="21194" end="21230" title="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show" label="The Craig Charles Funk and Soul Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="21240" end="21257" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="BBC Radio 6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q445058" start="21299" end="21309" title="Altrincham" label="Altrincham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="21311" end="21329" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q445755" start="21406" end="21417" title="Cathy Tyson" label="Cathy Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293890" start="21563" end="21567" title="Rape in English law" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21587" end="21603" title="Indecent assault#England and Wales" label="indecent assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354932" start="21685" end="21693" title="Remand (detention)" label="remanded"/>
<link wikidata="Q330694" start="22489" end="22502" title="crack cocaine" label="crack cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209574" start="22717" end="22724" title="Police caution" label="caution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964398" start="22745" end="22757" title="Misuse of Drugs Act 1971" label="Class A drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502731" start="23105" end="23124" title="Narcotics Anonymous" label="Narcotics Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336200" start="23327" end="23340" title="Penguin Books" label="Penguin Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732516" start="23639" end="23654" title="Hodder Headline" label="Hodder Headline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5830" wikidata="Q178626" url="?curid=5830" title="County Mayo">
<text>County Mayo (; ) is a county in Ireland. In the West of Ireland, in the province of Connacht, it is named after the village of Mayo, now generally known as Mayo Abbey. Mayo County Council is the local authority. The population was 137,231 at the 2022 census. The boundaries of the county, which was formed in 1585, reflect the Mac William Íochtar lordship at that time.

==Geography==

It is bounded on the north and west by the Atlantic Ocean; on the south by County Galway; on the east by County Roscommon; and on the northeast by County Sligo. Mayo is the third-largest of Ireland&#x27;s 32 counties in area and 18th largest in terms of population. It is the second-largest of Connacht&#x27;s five counties in both size and population. Mayo has of coastline, or approximately 21% of the total coastline of the State. It is one of three counties which claims to have the longest coastline in Ireland, alongside Cork and Donegal. There is a distinct geological difference between the west and the east of the county. The west consists largely of poor subsoils and is covered with large areas of extensive Atlantic blanket bog, whereas the east is largely a limestone landscape. Agricultural land is therefore more productive in the east than in the west. Clew Bay lies on the west coast of the county.

*The highest point in Mayo (and Connacht) is Mweelrea, at 
*The River Moy in the northeast of the county is renowned for its salmon fishing
*Ireland&#x27;s largest island, Achill Island, lies off Mayo&#x27;s west coast
*Mayo has Ireland&#x27;s highest cliffs at Croaghaun, Achill Island, while the Benwee Head cliffs in Kilcommon Erris drop almost perpendicularly into the Atlantic Ocean.
*The northwest areas of County Mayo have some of the best renewable energy resources in Europe, if not the world, in terms of wind resources, ocean wave, tidal and hydroelectric resources

There are nine historic baronies, four in the northern area and five in the south of the county:

North Mayo
*Erris (north-west, containing Belmullet, Gweesalia, Bangor Erris, Kilcommon, Ballycroy etc.)
*Burrishoole (west, containing Achill, Mulranny and Newport, County Mayo)
*Gallen (east, containing Bonniconlon, Foxford)
*Tyrawley (north-east, containing Ballina, Ballycastle, Killala, Moygownagh)

South Mayo
*Clanmorris, (south-east, containing Claremorris and Balla)
*Costello (east-south-east, containing Kilkelly Ballyhaunis etc.) 
*Murrisk (south-west, containing Westport, Louisburgh, Croagh Patrick etc.)
*Kilmaine (south, containing Ballinrobe, Cong etc.)
*Carra (south, containing Castlebar, Partry etc.)

===Largest towns by population===

According to the 2022 census:
#Castlebar 13,054
#Ballina 10,556
#Westport 6,872
#Claremorris 3,857
#Ballinrobe 3,148
#Ballyhaunis 2,773
#Swinford 1,459
#Foxford 1,452
#Kiltimagh 1,232
#Crossmolina 1,134

===Flora and fauna===
A survey of the terrestrial and freshwater algae of Clare Island was made between 1990 and 2005 and published in 2007. A record of &quot;Gunnera tinctoria&quot; is also noted.

Consultants working for the Corrib gas project have carried out extensive surveys of wildlife flora and fauna in Kilcommon Parish, Erris between 2002 and 2009. This information is published in the Corrib Gas Proposal Environmental impact statements 2009 and 2010.

==History==

===Prehistory===

There is evidence of human occupation of what is now County Mayo going far back into prehistory. At Belderrig on the north Mayo coast, there is evidence for Mesolithic (Middle Stone Age) communities around 4500 BC. while throughout the county there is a wealth of archaeological remains from the Neolithic (New Stone Age) period (ca. 4,000 BC to 2,500 BC), particularly in terms of megalithic tombs and ritual stone circles.

The first people who came to Ireland – mainly to coastal areas as the interior was heavily forested – arrived during the Middle Stone Age, as far back as eleven thousand years ago. Artefacts of hunter/gatherers are sometimes found in middens, rubbish pits around hearths where people would have rested and cooked over large open fires. Once cliffs erode, midden remains become exposed as blackened areas containing charred stones, bones, and shells. They are usually found a metre below the surface. Mesolithic people did not have major rituals associated with burial, unlike those of the Neolithic (New Stone Age) period.
The Neolithic period followed the Mesolithic around 6,000 years ago. People began to farm the land, domesticate animals for food and milk, and settle in one place for longer periods. These people had skills such as making pottery, building houses from wood, weaving, and knapping (stone tool working). The first farmers cleared forestry to graze livestock and grow crops. In North Mayo, where the ground cover was fragile, thin soils washed away and blanket bog covered the land farmed by the Neolithic people.

Extensive pre-bog field systems have been discovered under the blanket bog, particularly along the North Mayo coastline in Erris and north Tyrawley at sites such as the Céide Fields, centred on the northeast coast.

The Neolithic people developed rituals associated with burying their dead; this is why they built huge, elaborate, galleried stone tombs for their dead leaders, known nowadays as megalithic tombs. There are over 160 recorded megaliths in County Mayo, such as Faulagh.

===Megalithic tombs===
There are four distinct types of Irish megalithic tombs—court tombs, portal tombs, passage tombs and wedge tombs—examples of all of which can be found in County Mayo. Areas particularly rich in megalithic tombs include Achill, Kilcommon, Ballyhaunis, Moygownagh, Killala and the Behy/Glenurla area around the Céide Fields.

===Bronze Age (ca. 2,500 BC to 500 BC)===
Megalithic tomb building continued into the Bronze Age when metal began to be used for tools alongside the stone tools. The Bronze Age lasted approximately from 4,500 years ago to 2,500 years ago (2,500 BC to 500 BC). Archaeological remains from this period include stone alignments, stone circles and fulachta fiadh (early cooking sites). They continued to bury their chieftains in megalithic tombs which changed design during this period, more being of the wedge tomb type and cist burials.

===Iron Age (ca. 500 BC to AD 325)===
Around 2,500 years ago the Iron Age took over from the Bronze Age as more and more metalworking took place. This is thought to have coincided with the arrival of Celtic speaking peoples and the introduction of the ancestor of the Irish language. Towards the end of this period, the Roman Empire was at its height in Britain but it is not thought that the Roman Empire extended into Ireland. Remains from this period, which lasted until the Early Christian period began about AD 325 (with the arrival of Saint Patrick into Ireland, as a slave) include crannógs (Lake dwellings), promontory forts, ringforts and souterrains of which there are numerous examples across the county. The Iron Age was a time of tribal warfare and kingships, each fighting neighbouring kings, vying for control of territories and taking slaves. Territories were marked by tall stone markers, Ogham stones, using the first written down words using the Ogham alphabet. The Iron Age is the time period in which the mythological tales of the Ulster Cycle and sagas took place, as well as that of the Táin Bó Flidhais, whose narrative is set in mainly in Erris.

===Early Christian period (ca. AD 325 to AD 800)===

Christianity came to Ireland around the start of the 5th century. It brought many changes including the introduction of the Latin alphabet. The tribal &#x27;tuatha&#x27; and new Christian religious settlements existed side by side. Sometimes it suited the chieftains to become part of the early Churches, other times they remained as separate entities. St. Patrick (4th century) may have spent time in County Mayo and it is believed that he spent forty days and forty nights on Croagh Patrick praying for the people of Ireland. From the middle of the 6th-century hundreds of small monastic settlements were established around the county. Some examples of well-known early monastic sites in Mayo include Mayo Abbey, Aughagower, Ballintubber, Errew Abbey, Cong Abbey, Killala, Turlough on the outskirts of Castlebar, and island settlements off the Mullet Peninsula like the Inishkea Islands, Inishglora and Duvillaun.

In 795 the first of the Viking raids took place. The Vikings came from Scandinavia to raid the monasteries as they were places of wealth with precious metal working taking place in them. Some of the larger ecclesiastical settlements erected round towers to prevent their precious items from being plundered and also to show their status and strength against these pagan raiders from the north. There are round towers at Aughagower, Balla, Killala, Turlough and Meelick. The Vikings established settlements that later developed into towns (Dublin, Cork, Wexford, Waterford etc.) but none were in County Mayo. Between the reigns of Kings of Connacht Cathal mac Conchobar mac Taidg (973–1010) and Tairrdelbach Ua Conchobair (1106–1156), various tribal territories were incorporated into the kingdom of Connacht and ruled by the Siol Muirdaig dynasty, based initially at Rathcroghan in County Roscommon, and from 1050 at Tuam. The families of O&#x27;Malley and O&#x27;Dowd of Mayo served as admirals of the fleet of Connacht, while families such as O&#x27;Lachtnan, Mac Fhirbhisigh, and O&#x27;Cleary were ecclesiastical and bardic clans.

===Anglo-Normans (12th to 16th centuries)===
In AD 1169 when one of the warring kings in the east of Ireland, Dermot MacMurrough, appealed to the King of England for help in his fight with a neighbouring king, the response resulted in the Anglo-Norman colonisation of Ireland.
County Mayo came under Norman control in AD 1235. Norman control meant the eclipse of many Gaelic lords and chieftains, chiefly the O&#x27;Connors of Connacht. During the 1230s, the Anglo-Normans and Welsh under Richard Mór de Burgh (c. 1194 – 1242) invaded and settled in the county, introducing new families such as Burke, Gibbons, Staunton, Prendergast, Morris, Joyce, Walsh, Barrett, Lynott, Costello, Padden and Price, Norman names are still common in County Mayo. Following the collapse of the lordship in the 1330s, all these families became estranged from the Anglo-Irish administration based in Dublin and assimilated with the Gaelic-Irish, adopting their language, religion, dress, laws, customs and culture and marrying into Irish families. They became &quot;more Irish than the Irish themselves&quot;.

The most powerful clan to emerge during this era were the Mac William Burkes, also known as the Mac William Iochtar (see Burke Civil War 1333–1338), descended from Sir William Liath de Burgh, who defeated the Gaelic-Irish at the Second Battle of Athenry in August 1316. They were frequently at war with their cousins, Clanricarde of Galway, and in alliance with or against various factions of the O&#x27;Conor&#x27;s of Siol Muiredaig and O&#x27;Kelly&#x27;s of Uí Maine. The O&#x27;Donnell&#x27;s of Tyrconnell regularly invaded in an attempt to secure their right to rule.
The Anglo-Normans encouraged and established many religious orders from continental Europe to settle in Ireland. Mendicant orders—Augustinians, Carmelites, Dominicans and Franciscans began new settlements across Ireland and built large churches, many under the patronage of prominent Gaelic families. Some of these sites include Cong, Strade, Ballintubber, Errew Abbey, Burrishoole Abbey and Mayo Abbey. During the 15th and 16th centuries, despite regular conflicts between them as England chopped and changed between religious beliefs, the Irish usually regarded the King of England as their King. When Elizabeth I came to the throne in the mid-16th century, the English people, as was customary at that time, followed the religious practices of the reigning monarch and became Protestant. Many Irish people such as Grace O&#x27;Malley, the famous pirate queen, had close relationships with the English monarchy, and the English kings and queens were welcome visitors to Irish shores. The Irish however, generally held onto their Catholic religious practices and beliefs. The early plantations of settlers in Ireland began during the reign of Queen Mary in the mid-16th century and continued throughout the long reign of Queen Elizabeth I until 1603. By then the term &quot;County Mayo&quot; had come into use. In the summer of 1588, the galleons of the Spanish Armada were wrecked by storms along the west coast of Ireland. Some of the hapless Spaniards came ashore in Mayo, only to be robbed and imprisoned, and in many cases slaughtered.

Almost all the religious foundations set up by the Anglo-Normans were suppressed in the wake of the Reformation in the 16th century.

Protestant settlers from Scotland, England, and elsewhere in Ireland, settled in the County in the early 17th century. Many would be killed or forced to flee because of the 1641 Rebellion, during which a number of massacres were committed by the Catholic Gaelic Irish, most notably at Shrule in 1642. A third of the overall population was reported to have perished due to warfare, famine and plague between 1641 and 1653, with several areas remaining disturbed and frequented by Reparees into the 1670s.

===17th and 18th centuries===

Pirate Queen Grace O&#x27;Malley is probably the best-known person from County Mayo between the mid-16th century and the turn of the 17th century. In the 1640s, when Oliver Cromwell overthrew the English monarchy and set up a parliamentarian government, Ireland suffered severely. With a stern regime in absolute control needing to pay its armies and allies, the need to pay them with grants of land in Ireland led to the &#x27;to hell or to Connaught&#x27; policies. Displaced native Irish families from other (eastern and southern mostly) parts of the country were either forced to leave the country or were awarded grants of land &#x27;west of the Shannon&#x27; and put off their own lands in the east. The land in the west was divided and sub-divided between more and more people as huge estates were granted on the best land in the east to those who best pleased the English. Mayo does not seem to have been affected much during the Williamite War in Ireland, though many natives were outlawed and exiled.

For the vast majority of people in County Mayo the 18th century was a period of unrelieved misery. Because of the penal laws, Catholics had no hope of social advancement while they remained in their native land. Some, like William Brown (1777–1857), left Foxford with his family at the age of nine and thirty years later was an admiral in the fledgeling Argentine Navy. Today he is a national hero in that country.

The general unrest in Ireland was felt just as keenly across Mayo, and as the 19th century approached and news reached Ireland about the American War of Independence and the French Revolution, the downtrodden Irish, constantly suppressed by Government policies and decisions from Dublin and London, began to rally themselves for their own stand against British rule in their country. 1798 saw Mayo become a central part of the United Irishmen Rebellion when General Humbert from France landed in Killala with over 1,000 soldiers playing to support the main uprising. They marched across the county towards the administrative centre of Castlebar, leading to the Battle of Castlebar. Taking the garrison by surprise Humbert&#x27;s army was victorious. He established a &#x27; Republic of Connacht&#x27; with John Moore of the Moore family from Moore Hall near Partry as its head. Humbert&#x27;s army marched on towards Sligo, Leitrim and Longford where they were suddenly faced with a massive British army and were forced to surrender in less than half an hour. The French soldiers were treated honourably, but for the Irish the surrender meant slaughter. Many died on the scaffold in towns like Castlebar and Claremorris, where the high sheriff for County Mayo, the Honourable Denis Browne, M.P., brother of Lord Altamont, wreaked a terrible vengeance – thus earning for himself the nickname which has survived in folk memory to the present day, &#x27;Donnchadh an Rópa&#x27; (Denis of the Rope).

In the 18th century and early 19th century, sectarian tensions arose as evangelical Protestant missionaries sought to &#x27;redeem the Irish poor from the errors of Popery&#x27;. One of the best known was the Rev. Edward Nangle&#x27;s mission at Dugort in Achill. These too were the years of the campaign for Catholic Emancipation and, later, for the abolition of the tithes, which a predominately Catholic population was forced to pay for the upkeep of the clergy of the Established (Protestant) Church.

===19th and 20th centuries===

During the early years of the 19th century, famine was a common occurrence, particularly where population pressure was a problem. The population of Ireland grew to over eight million people prior to the Irish Famine (or Great Famine) of 1845–47. The Irish people depended on the potato crop for their sustenance. Disaster struck in August 1845, when a killer fungus (later diagnosed as Phytophthora infestans) started to destroy the potato crop. When widespread famine struck, about a million people died and a further million left the country. People died in the fields of starvation and disease. The catastrophe was particularly bad in County Mayo, where nearly ninety per cent of the population depended on the potato as their staple food. By 1848, Mayo was a county of total misery and despair, with any attempts at alleviating measures in complete disarray.

There are numerous reminders of the Great Famine to be seen on the Mayo landscape: workhouse sites, famine graves, sites of soup kitchens, deserted homes and villages and even traces of undug &#x27;lazy-beds&#x27; in fields on the sides of hills. Many roads and lanes were built as famine relief measures. There were nine workhouses in the county: Ballina, Ballinrobe, Belmullet, Castlebar, Claremorris, Killala, Newport, Swinford and Westport.

A small poverty-stricken place called Knock, County Mayo, made headlines when it was announced that an apparition of the Blessed Virgin Mary, St. Joseph and St. John had taken place there on 21 August 1879, witnessed by fifteen local people.

A national movement was initiated in County Mayo during 1879 by Michael Davitt, James Daly, and others, which brought about a major social change in Ireland. Michael Davitt, a labourer whose family had moved to England joined forces with Charles Stewart Parnell to win back the land for the people from the landlords and stop evictions for non-payment of rents. The organisation became known as the Irish National Land League, and its struggle to win rights for poor farmers in Ireland was known as the Land War.

It was in this era of agrarian unrest that a new verb was introduced to the English language by Mayo - &quot;to boycott&quot;. Charles Boycott was an English landlord deeply unpopular with his tenants. When Charles Steward Parnell made a speech in Ennis, County Clare, urging nonviolent resistance against landlords, his tactics were enthusiastically taken in Mayo against Boycott. The entire Catholic community around Lough Mask in South Mayo where Boycott had his estate became a campaign of total social ostracisation against Boycott, a tactic that would one day come to bear his name. The campaign against Boycott became a in the British press after he wrote a letter to &quot;The Times&quot;. The British elite rallied to his cause and Fifty Orangemen from County Cavan and County Monaghan travelled to his estate to harvest the crops, while a regiment of the 19th Royal Hussars and more than 1,000 men of the Royal Irish Constabulary were deployed to protect the harvesters. However, the cost of doing this was completely uneconomic: It cost the British government somewhere in the region of £10,000 to simply harvest £500 worth of crops. Boycott sold off the estate and the British government&#x27;s resolve to try to break boycotts in this completely dissolved, resulting in victory for the tenants.
The &quot;Land Question&quot; was gradually resolved by a scheme of state-aided land purchase schemes. The tenants became the owners of their lands under the newly set-up Land Commission.

A Mayo nun, Mother Agnes Morrogh-Bernard, set up the Foxford Woollen Mill in 1892. She made Foxford synonymous throughout the world with high-quality tweeds, rugs and blankets.

Mayo, as all parts of what became the Irish Free State, was affected by the events of the Irish revolutionary period, including the Irish War of Independence and the subsequent Irish Civil War. Major John MacBride of Westport was amongst those who took part in the 1916 Easter Rising and was subsequently executed by the British for his participation. His death served as a rallying call for Republicans in Mayo and led to Mayo men such as P. J. Ruttledge, Ernie O&#x27;Malley, Michael Kilroy and Thomas Derrig to rise up during the War of Independence. In the ensuing Civil War, many of these leading figures chose the Anti-treaty side and fought in bitter battles such as those in Ballina, which changed hands between pro and anti-treaty forces a number of times.

In the aftermath of the Civil War, there was a consolidation of many of those with anti-treaty feelings into the new political party Fianna Fáil. PJ Ruttledge and Thomas Derrig would become founding members of the party and served in Éamon de Valera&#x27;s first-ever Fianna Fáil government as ministers. Mayo politicians would continue to contribute to the national political scene over the decades. In 1990 Mary Robinson, from County Mayo, became the first-ever female President of Ireland, and is widely credited with revitalising the position with importance and focus it had never possessed before. During her tenure she unveiled Ireland&#x27;s National Famine Memorial which is situated in the village of Murrisk, County Mayo.

In 2011 Enda Kenny became the first politician from a Mayo constituency and the second Mayo native to serve as Taoiseach, the head of government of Ireland. Kenny went on to become the longest-serving Fine Gael Taoiseach in Irish history.

===Clans and families===
In the early historic period, what is now County Mayo consisted of a number of large kingdoms, minor lordships and tribes of obscure origins. They included:

* Calraige – pre-historic tribe found in the parishes of Attymass, Kilgarvan, Crossmolina and the River Moy
* Ciarraige – settlers from Munster found in south-east Mayo around Kiltimagh and west County Roscommon
* Conmaicne – a people located in the barony of Kilmaine, alleged descendants of Fergus mac Róich
* Fir Domnann – branch of the Laigin, originally from Britain, located in Erris
* Gamanraige – pre-historic kings of Connacht, famous for battle with Medb &amp; Ailill of Cruachan in Táin Bó Flidhais. Based in Erris, Carrowmore Lake, Killala Bay, Lough Conn
* Gailenga – kingdom extending east from Castlebar to adjoining parts of Mayo
* Uí Fiachrach Muidhe – a sept of the Connachta, based around Ballina, some of whom were kings of Connacht
* Partraige – a pre-Gaelic people of Lough Mask and Lough Carra, namesakes of Partry
* Umaill – kingdom surrounding Clew Bay, east towards Castlebar, its rulers adopted the surname O&#x27;Malley

==Politics==

===Local government and political subdivisions===

Mayo County Council is the authority responsible for local government. As a county council, it is governed by the Local Government Act 2001. The county is divided into four municipal districts of Ballina, Castlebar, Claremorris and Westport–Belmullet, each with a population of roughly 32,000 to 34,000 people. The council is responsible for housing and community, roads and transportation, urban planning and development, amenity and culture, and environment.

County Mayo is divided into six local electoral areas (LEAs). Councillors are elected for a five-year term.
The county town is at &quot;Áras an Contae&quot; in Castlebar, the main population centre located in the centre of the county.

===National politics===

Since 2016, Mayo has been represented on a national political level by four TDs who represent the constituency of Mayo in Dáil Éireann. Previous to 2016 the constituency had five TDs but this was reduced based on the county&#x27;s current population in line with proportional representation. The electoral divisions of Cong, Dalgan, Houndswood, Kilmaine, Neale, Shrule, in the former Rural District of Ballinrobe, are in Galway West.

====Voting patterns and political history====
Historically, Mayo has tended to vote Fianna Fáil, as Fianna Fáil managed to position themselves in the 20th century as the party best fit to represent farmers with small holdings, who were plentiful in Mayo. With so many of Mayo&#x27;s electorate being small farmers, the county became a base for the emergence of Clann na Talmhan, an agrarian party in the 1940s and 1950s. Clann an Talmhan&#x27;s second leader, Joseph Blowick came from South Mayo and that is where his seat was. The party was not able to last in the long run though as it was unable to hold together its voting bloc of both small farmers in the west of Ireland and large farmers in the east.

Towards the start of the 21st century, the balance of power in Mayo began to shift towards Fine Gael, thanks in part to the emergence of Enda Kenny and Michael Ring. Kenny, who became Taoiseach in 2011, led Fine Gael to a historic victory in the 2011 Irish general election which included securing four out of five available seats for his party in Mayo.

In 2020, Rose Conway-Walsh came within 200 votes of topping the poll and became the first Sinn Féin TD for Mayo since 1927, riding a nationwide surge for Sinn Féin that year.

Despite being historically the third-largest party in Ireland, Labour has struggled to ever make inroads into Mayo. The party has only ever had one TD for Mayo, former party leader Thomas J. O&#x27;Connell, who represented South Mayo between 1927 and 1932. While Labour has not proven itself electorally successful in Mayo, Mayo has provided important members to the Labour Party. Mary Robinson from Ballina became the first-ever female President of Ireland as a Labour candidate while Pat Rabbitte, originally from Claremorris, served as leader of the Labour Party from 2002 to 2007. Serving alongside Rabbitte was Emmet Stagg, one of the longest-standing Labour TDs of the modern era, himself from Hollymount not far from Claremorris.

==Demographics==

Irish history has been defined by waves of emigration due to push and pull factors. Mayo was one of the counties most depopulated by emigration in the ninetieth and twentieth century. Initially triggered by starvation during the Great Famine, the population fell from 388,887 to 274,830 between 1841 and 1851. Then in search of work in the newly industrialising United Kingdom and the United States, the population plummeted from 388,887 in 1841 to 199,166 in 1901. It reached a low of 109,525 in 1971. Emigration slowed dramatically as the Irish economy began to expand in the 1990s and early 2000s, and the population of Mayo increased from 110,713 in 1991 to 130,638 in 2011.

===Religion===

In the 2006 National Census, the religious demographic breakdown for County Mayo was 114,215 Roman Catholics, 2,476 Church of Ireland, 733 Muslims, 409 other Christians, 280 Presbyterians, 250 Orthodox Christians, 204 Methodists, 853 other stated religions, 3,267 no religion and 1,152 no stated religion.

===Irish language===

9% of the population of County Mayo live in the Gaeltacht. The Gaeltacht Irish-speaking region in County Mayo is the third-largest in Ireland with 10,886 inhabitants. These Irish-speaking areas of Mayo contain 5,956 Irish speakers. Tourmakeady is the largest village in this area. All schools in the area use Irish as the language of instruction. Mayo has four gaelscoileanna in its four major towns, providing primary education to students through Irish.

==Transport==

===Rail===
Westport railway station is the terminus station on the Dublin to Westport Rail service. Railway stations are also located at Ballyhaunis, Claremorris, Castlebar, Manulla, Ballina and Foxford. All railway stations are located on the same railway line, with the exception of Ballina and Foxford which requires passengers to change at Manulla Junction. There are currently four services each way every day on the line.

There are also proposals to reopen the currently disused Western Railway Corridor connecting Limerick with Sligo.

===Road===
There are a number of national primary roads in the county including the N5 road connecting Westport with Dublin, the N17 road connecting the county with Galway and Sligo and the N26 road connecting Ballina with Dublin via the N5. There are a number of national secondary roads in the county also including the N58 road, N59 road, N60 road, N83 road &amp; N84 road. As of 2021, a new road running from northwest of Westport to east of Castlebar is under construction. The road is a dual carriageway with junctions at the N59, N84 and N60 and will open in late 2022.

===Air===
Ireland West Airport is an international airport located in the county. The name is derived from the nearby village of Knock. Recent years have seen the airport&#x27;s passenger numbers grow to over 650,000 yearly with a number of UK and European destinations. August 2014 saw the airport have its busiest month on record with 102,774 passengers using the airport.

==Places of interest==

* Ashford Castle
* Ballintubber Abbey
* Blacksod Lighthouse
* Broadhaven Bay
* Burrishoole Abbey
* Céide Fields
* Clare Island
* Cong Abbey
* Croagh Patrick
* Eagle Island lighthouse
* Erris
* Granuaile&#x27;s Castle, Clare Island
* Great Western Greenway
* Joyce Country
* Killala Bay
* Knock Shrine
* List of designated Scenic Roads in County Mayo 
* Lough Mask
* Mayo Peace Park
* Moore Hall
* Moygownagh
* Mullet Peninsula
* Murrisk Abbey
* Murrisk Millennium Peace Park
* National Museum of Ireland – Country Life
* National Famine Memorial
* Nephin
* Partry Mountains
* Rockfleet Castle
* Sruwaddacon Bay
* Tourmakeady
* Uggool Beach
* Westport House
* Wild Nephin National Park
==Media==

Newspapers in County Mayo include &quot;The Mayo News&quot;, the &quot;Connaught Telegraph&quot;, the &quot;Connacht Tribune&quot;, &quot;Western People&quot;, and &quot;Mayo Advertiser&quot;, which is Mayo&#x27;s only free newspaper.

&quot;Mayo Now&quot; is a monthly entertainment and culture magazine for the towns of Ballina, Foxford, Killala, Crossmolina and surrounding areas – this is out on the first Friday of each month.

Mayo has its own online TV channel &quot;Mayo TV&quot; which was launched in 2011. It covers news and events from around the county and regularly broadcasts live to a worldwide audience. Local radio stations include Erris FM, Community Radio Castlebar, Westport Community Radio, BCR FM (Ballina Community Radio) and M.W.R. (Mid West Radio).

The documentary &quot;Pipe Down&quot;, which won best feature documentary at the 2009 Waterford Film Festival, was made in Mayo.

==Energy==
===Energy controversy===

There is local resistance to Shell&#x27;s decision to process raw gas from the Corrib gas field at an onshore terminal. In 2005, five local men were jailed for contempt of court after refusing to follow an Irish court order. Subsequent protests against the project led to the Shell to Sea and related campaigns.

===Energy audit===
The Mayo Energy Audit 2009–2020 is an investigation into the implications of peak oil and subsequent fossil fuel depletion for a rural county in west of Ireland. The study draws together many different strands to examine current energy supply and demand within the area of study, and assesses these demands in
the face of the challenges posed by the declining production of fossil fuels and expected disruptions to supply chains, and by long-term economic recession.

==Sport==

The Mayo GAA senior team last won the Sam Maguire Cup in 1951, when the team was captained by Seán Flanagan. The team&#x27;s third title followed victories in 1936 and the previous year, 1950. Since 1951, the team have made numerous All-Ireland Final appearances (in 1989, twice in 1996, 1997, 2004, 2006, 2012, 2013, twice again in 2016 against Dublin, 2017, 2020, with their latest appearance being against Tyrone in the 2021 final), though the team have failed on all occasions to achieve victory over their opponents.

The team&#x27;s unofficial supporters club are Mayo Club &#x27;51, named after the last team who won the Sam Maguire. The county colours of Mayo GAA are traditionally green and red.

The county&#x27;s most popular association football teams are Westport United and Castlebar Celtic.

Although Gaelic football and association football are the most popular sport in the county, other sports are popular in the county as well such as rugby, basketball, hurling, swimming, tennis, badminton, athletics, handball and racquetball.

==Notable people==

* Richard Bourke, 6th Earl of Mayo (1822–1872) – Viceroy of India (1869–1872)
* Patrick Browne (1720–1790) – physician and botanist
* Michael Davitt (1846–1906) – Irish republican, agrarian campaigner, labour leader, Home Rule politician and Member of Parliament (MP) who founded the Irish National Land League.
* Grace O&#x27;Malley (circa 1530 – circa 1603) – Lord of the O&#x27;Malley dynasty in the 16th century
* Admiral William Brown (1777–1857) – Founder of the Argentine Navy
* Charles Haughey (1925–2006) – Taoiseach of Ireland (1979–1982; 1987–1992)
* Enda Kenny (born 1951) – Politician, leader of Fine Gael (2002–2017), and Taoiseach of Ireland (2011–2017)
* John MacBride (1868–1916) – Republican and military leader, executed by the British for his participation in the 1916 Easter Rising
* William O&#x27;Dwyer (1890–1964) – 100th mayor of New York City (1946–1950)
* Michael Ring (born 1953) – Politician and Mayo TD, Minister for Rural and Community Development (2017–2020)
* Mary Robinson (born 1944) – First female President of Ireland (1990–1997), and United Nations High Commissioner for Human rights.
* Millie Robinson (1924–1994) – Cyclist: first winner of women&#x27;s Tour de France (1955) and holder of women&#x27;s world hour record (1958)
* Sally Rooney (born 1991) – Author (&quot;Conversations with Friends&quot;, &quot;Normal People&quot;), and screenwriter
* John Ruane (1936–2006) – American jockey, born County Mayo
* Martin Sheridan, Olympic Games gold medalist representing the United States
* Louis Walsh (born 1952) – Entertainment manager and judge on &quot;The X Factor&quot; (UK), and &quot;Ireland&#x27;s Got Talent&quot;

==See also==
* High Sheriff of Mayo
* List of abbeys and priories in the Republic of Ireland (County Mayo)
* List of loughs of County Mayo
* List of Mayo people
* List of mountains and hills of County Mayo
* List of rivers of County Mayo
* List of roads of County Mayo
* Lord Lieutenant of Mayo
* Mayo County Council
* River Robe
* Táin Bó Flidhais

==References==
==External links==
* Connaught Telegraph
* County Mayo: An Outline History 
* Family History in North County Mayo
* Historical Ballinrobe
* Irish language in Mayo
* Wild Atlantic Way Mayo Route Map and Guide 
* Mayo.ie
* Mayo County Council&#x27;s website
* Mayo News
* The Mayo Peace Park and Garden of Remembrance
* Western People</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="0" end="11" title="County Mayo" label="County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q179872" start="22" end="28" title="Counties of Ireland" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="32" end="39" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986331" start="48" end="63" title="West Region, Ireland" label="West of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202156" start="72" end="80" title="Provinces of Ireland" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="84" end="92" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596195" start="127" end="131" title="Mayo, County Mayo" label="Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797511" start="168" end="187" title="Mayo County Council" label="Mayo County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074936" start="195" end="210" title="Local government in the Republic of Ireland" label="local authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q108030587" start="246" end="257" title="2022 census of Ireland" label="2022 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722378" start="327" end="346" title="Mac William Íochtar" label="Mac William Íochtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="429" end="443" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q169923" start="461" end="474" title="County Galway" label="County Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="491" end="507" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q179325" start="533" end="545" title="County Sligo" label="County Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="680" end="688" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q107675896" start="873" end="890" title="List of Irish counties by coastline" label="longest coastline"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="913" end="917" title="County Cork" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="922" end="929" title="County Donegal" label="Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q681004" start="1052" end="1059" title="subsoil" label="subsoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925171" start="1115" end="1126" title="blanket bog" label="blanket bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1158" end="1167" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100897" start="1256" end="1264" title="Clew Bay" label="Clew Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956300" start="1349" end="1357" title="Mweelrea" label="Mweelrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149711" start="1368" end="1377" title="River Moy" label="River Moy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="1429" end="1435" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="1436" end="1443" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q631581" start="1476" end="1489" title="Achill Island" label="Achill Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q841068" start="1566" end="1575" title="Croaghaun" label="Croaghaun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1602" end="1613" title="Benwee Head" label="Benwee Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741252" start="1624" end="1633" title="Kilcommon" label="Kilcommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="1634" end="1639" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="1677" end="1691" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q853565" start="1906" end="1914" title="Barony (Ireland)" label="baronies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="1992" end="1997" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q816116" start="2022" end="2031" title="Belmullet" label="Belmullet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776959" start="2033" end="2042" title="Gweesalia" label="Gweesalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672315" start="2044" end="2056" title="Bangor Erris" label="Bangor Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741252" start="2058" end="2067" title="Kilcommon" label="Kilcommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852072" start="2069" end="2078" title="Ballycroy, County Mayo" label="Ballycroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000454" start="2086" end="2097" title="Burrishoole" label="Burrishoole"/>
<link wikidata="Q631581" start="2116" end="2122" title="Achill Island" label="Achill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016316" start="2124" end="2132" title="Mulranny" label="Mulranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q778403" start="2137" end="2157" title="Newport, County Mayo" label="Newport, County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863021" start="2160" end="2166" title="Gallen (barony)" label="Gallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775887" start="2185" end="2196" title="Bonniconlon, County Mayo" label="Bonniconlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440225" start="2198" end="2205" title="Foxford" label="Foxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809156" start="2208" end="2216" title="Tyrawley" label="Tyrawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q384721" start="2241" end="2248" title="Ballina, County Mayo" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q805397" start="2250" end="2261" title="Ballycastle, County Mayo" label="Ballycastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741335" start="2263" end="2270" title="Killala" label="Killala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775743" start="2272" end="2282" title="Moygownagh" label="Moygownagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125799" start="2297" end="2307" title="Clanmorris" label="Clanmorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095348" start="2333" end="2344" title="Claremorris" label="Claremorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q805124" start="2349" end="2354" title="Balla, County Mayo" label="Balla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863015" start="2357" end="2365" title="Barony of Costello" label="Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016314" start="2395" end="2403" title="Kilkelly" label="Kilkelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q427043" start="2404" end="2415" title="Ballyhaunis" label="Ballyhaunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243436" start="2424" end="2431" title="Murrisk" label="Murrisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="2456" end="2464" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025558" start="2466" end="2476" title="Louisburgh, County Mayo" label="Louisburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q628687" start="2478" end="2492" title="Croagh Patrick" label="Croagh Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010177" start="2500" end="2508" title="Kilmaine" label="Kilmaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q805277" start="2528" end="2538" title="Ballinrobe" label="Ballinrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125668" start="2540" end="2544" title="Cong, County Mayo" label="Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045997" start="2552" end="2557" title="Carra, County Mayo" label="Carra"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="2577" end="2586" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275864" start="2588" end="2594" title="Partry" label="Partry"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="2668" end="2677" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q384721" start="2686" end="2693" title="Ballina, County Mayo" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="2702" end="2710" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095348" start="2718" end="2729" title="Claremorris" label="Claremorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q805277" start="2737" end="2747" title="Ballinrobe" label="Ballinrobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q427043" start="2755" end="2766" title="Ballyhaunis" label="Ballyhaunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038011" start="2774" end="2782" title="Swinford" label="Swinford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440225" start="2790" end="2797" title="Foxford" label="Foxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741450" start="2805" end="2814" title="Kiltimagh" label="Kiltimagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025597" start="2822" end="2833" title="Crossmolina" label="Crossmolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q133625" start="3000" end="3007" title="Gunnera" label="Gunnera"/>
<link wikidata="Q823006" start="3068" end="3086" title="Corrib gas project" label="Corrib gas project"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="3134" end="3139" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="3144" end="3149" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741252" start="3153" end="3162" title="Kilcommon" label="Kilcommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="3171" end="3176" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="3257" end="3287" title="Environmental impact statement" label="Environmental impact statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603045" start="3436" end="3445" title="Belderrig (archaeological site)" label="Belderrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="3493" end="3503" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3632" end="3641" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="3956" end="3972" title="mesolithic" label="hunter/gatherers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="3996" end="4002" title="midden" label="midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="4025" end="4031" title="hearth" label="hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925171" start="4835" end="4846" title="blanket bog" label="blanket bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="5020" end="5025" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809156" start="5036" end="5044" title="Tyrawley" label="Tyrawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150321" start="5066" end="5078" title="Céide Fields" label="Céide Fields"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5372" end="5379" title="Faulagh" label="Faulagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175402" start="5438" end="5460" title="Irish megalithic tombs" label="Irish megalithic tombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q284279" start="5461" end="5471" title="court cairn" label="court tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="5474" end="5485" title="Dolmen" label="portal tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426772" start="5488" end="5500" title="passage grave" label="passage tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428504" start="5506" end="5516" title="wedge-shaped gallery grave" label="wedge tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q631581" start="5624" end="5630" title="Achill Island" label="Achill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741252" start="5632" end="5641" title="Kilcommon" label="Kilcommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q427043" start="5643" end="5654" title="Ballyhaunis" label="Ballyhaunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775743" start="5656" end="5666" title="Moygownagh" label="Moygownagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741335" start="5668" end="5675" title="Killala" label="Killala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150321" start="5714" end="5726" title="Céide Fields" label="Céide Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="5815" end="5825" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193753" start="6037" end="6053" title="stone row" label="stone alignments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935728" start="6055" end="6067" title="stone circle" label="stone circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778145" start="6073" end="6087" title="Fulacht fiadh" label="fulachta fiadh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428504" start="6230" end="6240" title="wedge-shaped gallery grave" label="wedge tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399576" start="6250" end="6254" title="cist" label="cist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6330" end="6338" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="6465" end="6471" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="6533" end="6547" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q51644" start="6743" end="6758" title="Early Christianity" label="Early Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="6806" end="6819" title="Saint Patrick" label="Saint Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q91759" start="6854" end="6861" title="crannóg" label="crannóg"/>
<link wikidata="Q92086" start="6881" end="6896" title="promontory fort" label="promontory fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q92383" start="6899" end="6907" title="ringfort" label="ringfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q137937" start="6913" end="6923" title="souterrain" label="souterrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="6985" end="6993" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q184661" start="7171" end="7176" title="Ogham" label="Ogham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080010" start="7230" end="7244" title="Ogham inscription" label="Ogham alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134199" start="7317" end="7329" title="Ulster Cycle" label="Ulster Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463568" start="7375" end="7391" title="Táin Bó Flidhais" label="Táin Bó Flidhais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="7429" end="7434" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="7614" end="7628" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463598" start="7647" end="7653" title="tuatha" label="tuatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q628687" start="7968" end="7982" title="Croagh Patrick" label="Croagh Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432503" start="8193" end="8203" title="School of Mayo" label="Mayo Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252222" start="8205" end="8215" title="Aughagower" label="Aughagower"/>
<link wikidata="Q302197" start="8217" end="8229" title="Ballintubber" label="Ballintubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916952" start="8231" end="8242" title="Errew Abbey" label="Errew Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160358" start="8244" end="8254" title="Cong Abbey" label="Cong Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741335" start="8256" end="8263" title="Killala" label="Killala"/>
<link wikidata="Q693128" start="8336" end="8352" title="Mullet Peninsula" label="Mullet Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q841031" start="8362" end="8378" title="Inishkea Islands" label="Inishkea Islands"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8380" end="8390" title="Inishglora" label="Inishglora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776586" start="8395" end="8404" title="Duvillaun" label="Duvillaun"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="8431" end="8437" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="8478" end="8489" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335799" start="8648" end="8659" title="Irish round tower" label="round tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252222" start="8827" end="8837" title="Aughagower" label="Aughagower"/>
<link wikidata="Q805124" start="8839" end="8844" title="Balla, County Mayo" label="Balla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741335" start="8846" end="8853" title="Killala" label="Killala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670232" start="9037" end="9054" title="Kings of Connacht" label="Kings of Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052051" start="9055" end="9085" title="Cathal mac Conchobar mac Taidg" label="Cathal mac Conchobar mac Taidg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740972" start="9101" end="9127" title="Tairrdelbach Ua Conchobair" label="Tairrdelbach Ua Conchobair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009358" start="9274" end="9285" title="Rathcroghan" label="Rathcroghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="9289" end="9305" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q996691" start="9324" end="9328" title="Tuam" label="Tuam"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164022" start="9346" end="9359" title="O&amp;#x27;Malley (surname)" label="O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071782" start="9364" end="9375" title="O&amp;#x27;Dowd" label="O&amp;#x27;Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="9394" end="9401" title="admiral" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q189524" start="9410" end="9415" title="Naval fleet" label="fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="9419" end="9427" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q16853742" start="9469" end="9484" title="Mac Fhirbhisigh" label="Mac Fhirbhisigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q887822" start="9653" end="9671" title="Dermot MacMurrough" label="Dermot MacMurrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="10002" end="10014" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="10020" end="10025" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151004" start="10032" end="10052" title="Richard Mór de Burgh" label="Richard Mór de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915567" start="10138" end="10143" title="House of Burke" label="Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522852" start="10145" end="10152" title="Gibbons (surname)" label="Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16883806" start="10154" end="10162" title="Staunton (surname)" label="Staunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21511565" start="10164" end="10175" title="Prendergast (surname)" label="Prendergast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780710" start="10177" end="10183" title="Morris (surname)" label="Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q65651301" start="10185" end="10190" title="Joyce (name)" label="Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963813" start="10192" end="10197" title="Walsh (surname)" label="Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q431890" start="10199" end="10206" title="Barrett (surname)" label="Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15947024" start="10208" end="10214" title="Lynott (disambiguation)" label="Lynott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109134" start="10216" end="10224" title="Costello (surname)" label="Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123312" start="10226" end="10232" title="Padden" label="Padden"/>
<link wikidata="Q21242872" start="10237" end="10242" title="Price (surname)" label="Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="10388" end="10399" title="Anglo-Irish" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="10424" end="10430" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746331" start="10590" end="10626" title="more Irish than the Irish themselves" label="more Irish than the Irish themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722378" start="10731" end="10750" title="Mac William Iochtar" label="Mac William Iochtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998929" start="10756" end="10771" title="Burke Civil War" label="Burke Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568793" start="10803" end="10825" title="William Liath de Burgh" label="William Liath de Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141460" start="10864" end="10888" title="Second Battle of Athenry" label="Second Battle of Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q663069" start="10953" end="10964" title="Clanricarde" label="Clanricarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="10968" end="10974" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q928249" start="11074" end="11086" title="Kelly (surname)" label="O&amp;#x27;Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994052" start="11097" end="11105" title="Uí Maine" label="Uí Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541447" start="11111" end="11125" title="O&amp;#x27;Donnell dynasty" label="O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274522" start="11136" end="11146" title="Tyrconnell" label="Tyrconnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="11340" end="11352" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinians"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="11354" end="11364" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="11366" end="11376" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="11381" end="11392" title="Franciscans" label="Franciscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="11494" end="11500" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125668" start="11539" end="11543" title="Cong, County Mayo" label="Cong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017534" start="11545" end="11551" title="Strade" label="Strade"/>
<link wikidata="Q302197" start="11553" end="11565" title="Ballintubber" label="Ballintubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q27916952" start="11567" end="11578" title="Errew Abbey" label="Errew Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545887" start="11580" end="11597" title="Burrishoole Friary" label="Burrishoole Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432503" start="11602" end="11612" title="School of Mayo" label="Mayo Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="11814" end="11825" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q262705" start="12027" end="12046" title="Grace O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Grace O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="12432" end="12449" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q179684" start="12565" end="12579" title="Spanish Armada" label="Spanish Armada"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="12853" end="12864" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="12887" end="12897" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="12912" end="12920" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="12922" end="12929" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="13060" end="13074" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="1641 Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="13133" end="13141" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="13142" end="13148" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085874" start="13172" end="13178" title="Shrule" label="Shrule"/>
<link wikidata="Q862527" start="13366" end="13374" title="Whiteboys" label="Reparees"/>
<link wikidata="Q262705" start="13436" end="13455" title="Grace O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Grace O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676678" start="13851" end="13874" title="to hell or to Connaught" label="to hell or to Connaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320981" start="14361" end="14386" title="Williamite War in Ireland" label="Williamite War in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738523" start="14549" end="14559" title="Penal Laws against Irish Catholics" label="penal laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q966952" start="14658" end="14671" title="William Brown (admiral)" label="William Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="14988" end="15016" title="American War of Independence" label="American War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="15025" end="15042" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q944941" start="15278" end="15303" title="Irish Rebellion of 1798" label="United Irishmen Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474206" start="15309" end="15324" title="Jean Joseph Amable Humbert" label="General Humbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741335" start="15347" end="15354" title="Killala" label="Killala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888269" start="15512" end="15531" title="Battle of Castlebar" label="Battle of Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712121" start="15618" end="15651" title="Irish Republic (1798)" label="&amp;#x27; Republic of Connacht&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q963468" start="15657" end="15667" title="John Moore (Irish politician)" label="John Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908162" start="15693" end="15703" title="Moore Hall, County Mayo" label="Moore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257126" start="16127" end="16139" title="Denis Browne (politician)" label="Denis Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q66473008" start="16557" end="16575" title="Edward Nangle" label="Rev. Edward Nangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q631581" start="16604" end="16610" title="Achill Island" label="Achill"/>
<link wikidata="Q428286" start="16657" end="16678" title="Catholic Emancipation" label="Catholic Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="17088" end="17100" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Irish Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364438" start="18233" end="18238" title="Knock Shrine" label="Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387994" start="18502" end="18516" title="Michael Davitt" label="Michael Davitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132300" start="18518" end="18528" title="James Daly (Irish Land League)" label="James Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q317436" start="18676" end="18699" title="Charles Stewart Parnell" label="Charles Stewart Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q446921" start="18837" end="18863" title="Irish National Land League" label="Irish National Land League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801918" start="18941" end="18949" title="Land War" label="Land War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179366" start="19064" end="19071" title="boycott" label="boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q455534" start="19079" end="19094" title="Charles Boycott" label="Charles Boycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q209128" start="19200" end="19205" title="Ennis" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181862" start="19207" end="19219" title="County Clare" label="County Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q754479" start="19228" end="19249" title="nonviolent resistance" label="nonviolent resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768048" start="19371" end="19381" title="Lough Mask" label="Lough Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="19633" end="19642" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345321" start="19699" end="19708" title="Orange Institution" label="Orangemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187402" start="19714" end="19726" title="County Cavan" label="County Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184760" start="19731" end="19746" title="County Monaghan" label="County Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595814" start="19817" end="19835" title="19th Royal Hussars" label="19th Royal Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549059" start="19867" end="19891" title="Royal Irish Constabulary" label="Royal Irish Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672859" start="20431" end="20446" title="Irish Land Commission" label="Land Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q18756561" start="20468" end="20489" title="Agnes Bernard" label="Agnes Morrogh-Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="20665" end="20681" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071764" start="20717" end="20743" title="Irish revolutionary period" label="Irish revolutionary period"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="20759" end="20784" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="20804" end="20819" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048468" start="20827" end="20840" title="John MacBride" label="John MacBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="20897" end="20910" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524549" start="21067" end="21082" title="P. J. Ruttledge" label="P. J. Ruttledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581859" start="21084" end="21103" title="Ernie O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Ernie O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000311" start="21105" end="21119" title="Michael Kilroy" label="Michael Kilroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945705" start="21124" end="21137" title="Thomas Derrig" label="Thomas Derrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015384" start="21247" end="21263" title="Irish Republican Army (1922–1969)" label="Anti-treaty side"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="21527" end="21538" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="21628" end="21643" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q188214" start="21803" end="21816" title="Mary Robinson" label="Mary Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="21865" end="21885" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22044" end="22068" title="Murrisk Millennium Peace Park#National Famine Memorial" label="National Famine Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243436" start="22105" end="22112" title="Murrisk" label="Murrisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q57815" start="22136" end="22146" title="Enda Kenny" label="Enda Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="22239" end="22248" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22508" end="22533" title="Faulagh" label="tribes of obscure origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202332" start="22553" end="22561" title="Calraige" label="Calraige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084736" start="22608" end="22616" title="Attymass" label="Attymass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081709" start="22618" end="22627" title="Kilgarvan" label="Kilgarvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025597" start="22629" end="22640" title="Crossmolina" label="Crossmolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149711" start="22649" end="22658" title="River Moy" label="River Moy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202671" start="22661" end="22670" title="Ciarraige" label="Ciarraige"/>
<link wikidata="Q131438" start="22687" end="22694" title="Munster" label="Munster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741450" start="22727" end="22736" title="Kiltimagh" label="Kiltimagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q179437" start="22746" end="22762" title="County Roscommon" label="County Roscommon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161255" start="22765" end="22774" title="Conmhaícne" label="Conmaicne"/>
<link wikidata="Q223573" start="22801" end="22807" title="barony (country subdivision)" label="barony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010177" start="22811" end="22819" title="Kilmaine" label="Kilmaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q387800" start="22844" end="22860" title="Fergus mac Róich" label="Fergus mac Róich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745929" start="22863" end="22874" title="Fir Domnann" label="Fir Domnann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444722" start="22891" end="22897" title="Laigin" label="Laigin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="22915" end="22922" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="22935" end="22940" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5519578" start="22943" end="22953" title="Gamanraige" label="Gamanraige"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670232" start="22969" end="22986" title="kings of Connacht" label="kings of Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141828" start="23011" end="23015" title="Medb" label="Medb"/>
<link wikidata="Q405146" start="23022" end="23028" title="Ailill mac Máta" label="Ailill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009358" start="23032" end="23040" title="Rathcroghan" label="Cruachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463568" start="23044" end="23060" title="Táin Bó Flidhais" label="Táin Bó Flidhais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="23071" end="23076" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045261" start="23078" end="23093" title="Carrowmore Lake" label="Carrowmore Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q944964" start="23095" end="23106" title="Killala Bay" label="Killala Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q949985" start="23108" end="23118" title="Lough Conn" label="Lough Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517176" start="23121" end="23129" title="Gailenga" label="Gailenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="23160" end="23169" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905325" start="23199" end="23211" title="Uí Fiachrach" label="Uí Fiachrach"/>
<link wikidata="Q938504" start="23235" end="23244" title="Connachta" label="Connachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q384721" start="23259" end="23266" title="Ballina, County Mayo" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670232" start="23286" end="23303" title="kings of Connacht" label="kings of Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140809" start="23306" end="23315" title="Partraige" label="Partraige"/>
<link wikidata="Q692312" start="23324" end="23330" title="Gaels" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768048" start="23341" end="23351" title="Lough Mask" label="Lough Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871364" start="23356" end="23367" title="Lough Carra" label="Lough Carra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275864" start="23382" end="23388" title="Partry" label="Partry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881056" start="23391" end="23397" title="Umaill" label="Umaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100897" start="23420" end="23428" title="Clew Bay" label="Clew Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="23443" end="23452" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20164022" start="23485" end="23498" title="O&amp;#x27;Malley (surname)" label="O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797511" start="23565" end="23584" title="Mayo County Council" label="Mayo County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074936" start="23618" end="23634" title="Local government in the Republic of Ireland" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321471" start="23641" end="23655" title="county council" label="county council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664078" start="23679" end="23704" title="Local Government Act 2001" label="Local Government Act 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947" start="23907" end="23914" title="House" label="housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590" start="23940" end="23949" title="transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q69883" start="23956" end="23970" title="urban planning" label="urban planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="24000" end="24007" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="24013" end="24024" title="natural environment" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664352" start="24059" end="24079" title="local electoral area" label="local electoral area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="24139" end="24150" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="24187" end="24196" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="24364" end="24367" title="Teachta Dála" label="TDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="24410" end="24422" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="24551" end="24578" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500304" start="24584" end="24603" title="electoral division (Ireland)" label="electoral divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251639" start="24709" end="24720" title="Galway West (Dáil constituency)" label="Galway West"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="24807" end="24818" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q944018" start="25084" end="25100" title="Clann na Talmhan" label="Clann na Talmhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706630" start="25183" end="25197" title="Joseph Blowick" label="Joseph Blowick"/>
<link wikidata="Q57815" start="25569" end="25579" title="Enda Kenny" label="Enda Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777472" start="25584" end="25596" title="Michael Ring" label="Michael Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="25616" end="25625" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q767723" start="25678" end="25705" title="2011 Irish general election" label="2011 Irish general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="26026" end="26032" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340903" start="26144" end="26168" title="Thomas J. O&amp;#x27;Connell" label="Thomas J. O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q560453" start="26449" end="26461" title="Pat Rabbitte" label="Pat Rabbitte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508524" start="26502" end="26528" title="Leader of the Labour Party (Ireland)" label="leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777541" start="26579" end="26590" title="Emmet Stagg" label="Emmet Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q778598" start="26663" end="26673" title="Hollymount" label="Hollymount"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="26948" end="26960" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q158490" start="27792" end="27801" title="Gaeltacht" label="Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247547" start="27976" end="27987" title="Tourmakeady" label="Tourmakeady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3971356" start="28227" end="28251" title="Westport railway station, Mayo" label="Westport railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743699" start="28283" end="28314" title="Dublin-Westport/Galway railway line" label="Dublin to Westport Rail service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968961" start="28353" end="28364" title="Ballyhaunis railway station" label="Ballyhaunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969436" start="28366" end="28377" title="Claremorris railway station" label="Claremorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059129" start="28379" end="28388" title="Castlebar railway station" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595462" start="28390" end="28397" title="Manulla Junction railway station" label="Manulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060415" start="28399" end="28406" title="Ballina railway station" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969652" start="28411" end="28418" title="Foxford railway station" label="Foxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060415" start="28501" end="28508" title="Ballina railway station" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969652" start="28513" end="28520" title="Foxford railway station" label="Foxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595462" start="28560" end="28576" title="Manulla Junction railway station" label="Manulla Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019185" start="28702" end="28726" title="Western Railway Corridor" label="Western Railway Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="28738" end="28746" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="28752" end="28757" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212112" start="28793" end="28814" title="national primary road" label="national primary road"/>
<link wikidata="Q496894" start="28844" end="28851" title="N5 road (Ireland)" label="N5 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="28863" end="28871" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="28877" end="28883" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951906" start="28889" end="28897" title="N17 road (Ireland)" label="N17 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="28925" end="28931" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="28936" end="28941" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951922" start="28950" end="28958" title="N26 road (Ireland)" label="N26 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q384721" start="28970" end="28977" title="Ballina, County Mayo" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="28983" end="28989" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257315" start="29024" end="29047" title="national secondary road" label="national secondary road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951988" start="29082" end="29090" title="N58 road (Ireland)" label="N58 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584732" start="29092" end="29100" title="N59 road (Ireland)" label="N59 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951997" start="29102" end="29110" title="N60 road (Ireland)" label="N60 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952024" start="29112" end="29120" title="N83 road (Ireland)" label="N83 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952028" start="29127" end="29135" title="N84 road (Ireland)" label="N84 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q848921" start="29348" end="29368" title="Ireland West Airport" label="Ireland West Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q858133" start="29467" end="29472" title="Knock, County Mayo" label="Knock"/>
<link wikidata="Q725274" start="29740" end="29754" title="Ashford Castle" label="Ashford Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q805274" start="29757" end="29775" title="Ballintubber Abbey" label="Ballintubber Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778643" start="29778" end="29797" title="Blacksod Lighthouse" label="Blacksod Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089032" start="29800" end="29814" title="Broadhaven Bay" label="Broadhaven Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545887" start="29817" end="29834" title="Burrishoole Friary" label="Burrishoole Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150321" start="29837" end="29849" title="Céide Fields" label="Céide Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095319" start="29852" end="29864" title="Clare Island" label="Clare Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160358" start="29867" end="29877" title="Cong Abbey" label="Cong Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q628687" start="29880" end="29894" title="Croagh Patrick" label="Croagh Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q15215812" start="29897" end="29920" title="Eagle Island lighthouse" label="Eagle Island lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776648" start="29923" end="29928" title="Erris" label="Erris"/>
<link wikidata="Q28232553" start="29931" end="29954" title="Granuaile&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Granuaile&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600194" start="29971" end="29993" title="Great Western Greenway" label="Great Western Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297444" start="29996" end="30009" title="Joyce Country" label="Joyce Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q944964" start="30012" end="30023" title="Killala Bay" label="Killala Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364438" start="30026" end="30038" title="Knock Shrine" label="Knock Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30041" end="30087" title="List of roads of County Mayo#Designated scenic roads" label="List of designated Scenic Roads in County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768048" start="30091" end="30101" title="Lough Mask" label="Lough Mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177717" start="30104" end="30119" title="Mayo Peace Park" label="Mayo Peace Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6908162" start="30122" end="30132" title="Moore Hall, County Mayo" label="Moore Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775743" start="30135" end="30145" title="Moygownagh" label="Moygownagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q693128" start="30148" end="30164" title="Mullet Peninsula" label="Mullet Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895541" start="30167" end="30180" title="Murrisk Abbey" label="Murrisk Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q113641963" start="30183" end="30212" title="Murrisk Millennium Peace Park" label="Murrisk Millennium Peace Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940834" start="30215" end="30256" title="National Museum of Ireland – Country Life" label="National Museum of Ireland – Country Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30259" end="30283" title="Murrisk Millennium Peace Park#National Famine Memorial" label="National Famine Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650901" start="30286" end="30292" title="Nephin" label="Nephin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776448" start="30295" end="30311" title="Partry Mountains" label="Partry Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160689" start="30314" end="30330" title="Rockfleet Castle" label="Rockfleet Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7586590" start="30333" end="30348" title="Sruwaddacon Bay" label="Sruwaddacon Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247547" start="30351" end="30362" title="Tourmakeady" label="Tourmakeady"/>
<link wikidata="Q56290076" start="30365" end="30377" title="Uggool Beach" label="Uggool Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752984" start="30380" end="30394" title="Westport House" label="Westport House"/>
<link wikidata="Q805409" start="30397" end="30422" title="Wild Nephin National Park" label="Wild Nephin National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15043309" start="30474" end="30487" title="The Mayo News" label="The Mayo News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161342" start="30505" end="30524" title="Connaught Telegraph" label="Connaught Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161292" start="30542" end="30558" title="Connacht Tribune" label="Connacht Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988160" start="30572" end="30586" title="Western People" label="Western People"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840914" start="31191" end="31205" title="MidWest Radio" label="Mid West Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="31405" end="31410" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="31442" end="31445" title="natural gas" label="gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q823006" start="31455" end="31471" title="Corrib gas field" label="Corrib gas field"/>
<link wikidata="Q708562" start="31536" end="31553" title="contempt of court" label="contempt of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481838" start="31652" end="31664" title="Shell to Sea" label="Shell to Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209916" start="31785" end="31793" title="peak oil" label="peak oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="31809" end="31830" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel depletion"/>
<link wikidata="Q175185" start="31837" end="31842" title="rural area" label="rural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341477" start="31937" end="31950" title="energy supply" label="energy supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="32082" end="32094" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="32164" end="32173" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778431" start="32191" end="32199" title="Mayo GAA" label="Mayo GAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776400" start="32225" end="32240" title="Sam Maguire Cup" label="Sam Maguire Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q466420" start="32281" end="32294" title="Seán Flanagan" label="Seán Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150978" start="32420" end="32437" title="List of All-Ireland Senior Football Championship finals" label="All-Ireland Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989614" start="32955" end="32970" title="Westport United F.C." label="Westport United"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939925" start="32975" end="32991" title="Castlebar Celtic F.C." label="Castlebar Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204632" start="33003" end="33018" title="Gaelic football" label="Gaelic football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="33023" end="33043" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614140" start="33258" end="33290" title="Richard Bourke, 6th Earl of Mayo" label="Richard Bourke, 6th Earl of Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="33305" end="33321" title="Governor-General of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15480" start="33336" end="33350" title="Patrick Browne (physician)" label="Patrick Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387994" start="33390" end="33404" title="Michael Davitt" label="Michael Davitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="33419" end="33435" title="Irish republicanism" label="Irish republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q492050" start="33437" end="33445" title="agrarianism" label="agrarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="33458" end="33471" title="Trades union" label="labour leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q7467819" start="33473" end="33482" title="Irish Home Rule movement" label="Home Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q446921" start="33540" end="33566" title="Irish National Land League" label="Irish National Land League"/>
<link wikidata="Q262705" start="33570" end="33589" title="Grace O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="Grace O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413096" start="33630" end="33643" title="Kings of Umhaill" label="O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q966952" start="33674" end="33695" title="William Brown (admiral)" label="Admiral William Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777326" start="33725" end="33739" title="Argentine Navy" label="Argentine Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333735" start="33742" end="33757" title="Charles Haughey" label="Charles Haughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="33772" end="33781" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q57815" start="33818" end="33828" title="Enda Kenny" label="Enda Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="33865" end="33874" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="33892" end="33901" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048468" start="33927" end="33940" title="John MacBride" label="John MacBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q193689" start="34045" end="34058" title="Easter Rising" label="Easter Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q441554" start="34061" end="34081" title="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer" label="William O&amp;#x27;Dwyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="34111" end="34124" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777472" start="34139" end="34151" title="Michael Ring" label="Michael Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869725" start="34181" end="34185" title="Mayo (Dáil constituency)" label="Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q30645438" start="34190" end="34234" title="Minister for Rural and Community Development" label="Minister for Rural and Community Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q188214" start="34249" end="34262" title="Mary Robinson" label="Mary Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q213702" start="34290" end="34310" title="President of Ireland" label="President of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="34328" end="34342" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="34365" end="34377" title="Human rights" label="Human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q54553548" start="34381" end="34396" title="Millie Robinson" label="Millie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q111264661" start="34436" end="34463" title="Grande Boucle Féminine Internationale" label="women&amp;#x27;s Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q766067" start="34504" end="34515" title="hour record" label="hour record"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861296" start="34525" end="34537" title="Sally Rooney" label="Sally Rooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q55360330" start="34566" end="34592" title="Conversations with Friends" label="Conversations with Friends"/>
<link wikidata="Q55360383" start="34606" end="34619" title="Normal People" label="Normal People"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255886" start="34647" end="34657" title="John Ruane" label="John Ruane"/>
<link wikidata="Q347267" start="34708" end="34723" title="Martin Sheridan" label="Martin Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="34725" end="34738" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q658547" start="34786" end="34797" title="Louis Walsh" label="Louis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453652" start="34853" end="34865" title="The X Factor" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744391" start="34888" end="34913" title="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Got Talent" label="Ireland&amp;#x27;s Got Talent"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191312" start="34936" end="34956" title="High Sheriff of Mayo" label="High Sheriff of Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34959" end="35027" title="List of monastic houses in Ireland#County Mayo" label="List of abbeys and priories in the Republic of Ireland (County Mayo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6626749" start="35030" end="35059" title="List of loughs of County Mayo" label="List of loughs of County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870265" start="35062" end="35081" title="List of Mayo people" label="List of Mayo people"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629388" start="35084" end="35126" title="List of mountains and hills of County Mayo" label="List of mountains and hills of County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636618" start="35129" end="35158" title="List of rivers of County Mayo" label="List of rivers of County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636843" start="35161" end="35189" title="List of roads of County Mayo" label="List of roads of County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679607" start="35192" end="35215" title="Lord Lieutenant of Mayo" label="Lord Lieutenant of Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797511" start="35218" end="35237" title="Mayo County Council" label="Mayo County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327740" start="35240" end="35250" title="River Robe (Ireland)" label="River Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463568" start="35253" end="35269" title="Táin Bó Flidhais" label="Táin Bó Flidhais"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5833" wikidata="Q190678" url="?curid=5833" title="County Fermanagh">
<text>County Fermanagh ( ; ) is one of the thirty-two counties of Ireland, one of the nine counties of Ulster and one of six counties of Northern Ireland.

The county covers an area of and had a population of 63,585 as of 2021. Enniskillen is the county town and largest in both size and population.

Fermanagh is one of four counties of Northern Ireland to have a majority of its population from a Catholic background, according to the 2011 census.

==Geography==

Fermanagh spans an area of 1,851 km2 (715 sq; mi), accounting for 13.2% of the landmass of Northern Ireland. Nearly a third of the county is covered by lakes and waterways, including Upper and Lower Lough Erne and the River Erne. Forests cover 14% of the landmass (42,000 hectares). It is the only county in Northern Ireland that does not border Lough Neagh.

The county has three prominent upland areas: 
* the expansive West Fermanagh Scarplands to the southwest of Lough Erne, which rise to about 350m,
* the Sliabh Beagh hills, situated to the east on the Monaghan border, and 
* the Cuilcagh mountain range, located along Fermanagh&#x27;s southern border, which contains Cuilcagh, the county&#x27;s highest point, at 665m.

The county borders:
* County Tyrone to the north-east, 
* County Monaghan to the south-east, 
* County Cavan to the south-west, 
* County Leitrim to the west, and 
* County Donegal to the north-west.

Fermanagh is by far the least populous of Northern Ireland&#x27;s six counties, with just over one-third the population of Tyrone, the next least populous county.

It is approximately from Belfast and from Dublin. The county town, Enniskillen, is the largest settlement in Fermanagh, situated in the middle of the county.

The county enjoys a temperate oceanic climate (&quot;Cfb&quot;&#x27;) with cool winters, mild humid summers, and a lack of temperature extremes, according to the Köppen climate classification.

The National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty manages three sites of historic and natural beauty in the county: Crom Estate, Florence Court, and Castle Coole.

===Geology===
The oldest sediments in the county are found north of Lough Erne. These so-called red beds were formed approximately 550 million years ago. Extensive sandstone can be found in the eastern part of the county, laid down during the Devonian, 400 million years ago. Much of the rest of the county&#x27;s sediments are shale and limestone dating from the Carboniferous, 354 to 298 million years ago. These softer sediments have produced extensive cave systems such as the Shannon Cave, the Marble Arch Caves and the Caves of the Tullybrack and Belmore hills. The carboniferous shale exists in several counties of northwest Ireland, an area known colloquially as the Lough Allen basin. The basin is estimated to contain 9.4 trillion cubic metres of natural gas, equivalent to 1.5 billion barrels of oil.

The county is situated over a sequence of prominent faults, primarily the Killadeas – Seskinore Fault, the Tempo – Sixmilecross Fault, the Belcoo Fault and the Clogher Valley Fault which cross-cuts Lough Erne.

==History==

The Menapii are the only known Celtic tribe specifically named on Ptolemy&#x27;s 150 AD map of Ireland, where they located their first colony—Menapia—on the Leinster coast . They later settled around Lough Erne, becoming known as the Fir Manach, and giving their name to Fermanagh and Monaghan. Mongán mac Fiachnai, a 7th-century King of Ulster, is the protagonist of several legends linking him with Manannán mac Lir. They spread across Ireland, evolving into historic Irish (also Scottish and Manx) clans.

The Annals of Ulster which cover medieval Ireland between AD 431 to AD 1540 were written at Belle Isle on Lough Erne near Lisbellaw.

In the early 9th century, the Erne was considered to be the boundary of Connacht and Ulster, specifically the over-kingdom of Airgíalla. The Fir Manach proper, Tirkennedy and Magherastephana, along with Clankelly were part of the western Airgíalla group-kingdom of Uí Creamthainn with its seat at Clogher, whereas Lurg was associated with the northern Airgíalla branch of Uí Fiachrach centred at Ardstraw.

Fermanagh was a stronghold of the Maguire clan and Donn Carrach Maguire (died 1302) was the first of the chiefs of the Maguire dynasty. However, on the confiscation of lands relating to Hugh Maguire, Fermanagh was divided in a similar manner to the other five escheated counties among Scottish and English undertakers and native Irish. The baronies of Knockninny and Magheraboy were allotted to Scottish undertakers, those of Clankelly, Magherastephana and Lurg to English undertakers and those of Clanawley, Coole, and Tyrkennedy, to servitors and natives. The chief families to benefit under the new settlement were the families of Cole, Blennerhasset, Butler, Hume, and Dunbar.

Fermanagh was made into a county by a statute of Elizabeth I, but it was not until the time of the Plantation of Ulster that it was finally brought under civil government.

The closure of all the lines of Great Northern Railway (Ireland) within County Fermanagh in 1957 left the county as the first non-island county in the UK without a railway service.

==Administration==
The county was administered by Fermanagh County Council from 1899 until the abolition of county councils in Northern Ireland in 1973. With the creation of Northern Ireland&#x27;s district councils, Fermanagh District Council became the only one of the 26 that contained all of the county from which it derived its name. After the re-organisation of local government in 2015, Fermanagh was still the only county wholly within one council area, namely Fermanagh and Omagh District Council, albeit that it constituted only a part of that entity.

For the purposes of elections to the UK Parliament, the territory of Fermanagh is part of the Fermanagh and South Tyrone Parliamentary Constituency. This constituency elected Provisional IRA hunger-striker Bobby Sands as a member of parliament in the April 1981 Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election, shortly before his death.

==Demographics==
=== 2011 census ===
On Census Day 27 March 2011, the usually resident population of Fermanagh Local Government District, the borders of the district were very similar to those of the traditional County Fermanagh, was 61,805. Of these:
*0.93% were from an ethnic minority population and the remaining 99.07% were white (including Irish Traveller)
*59.16% belong to or were brought up in the Catholic religion and 37.78% belong to or were brought up in a &#x27;Protestant and Other Christian (including Christian related)&#x27; religion
*37.20% indicated that they had a British national identity, 36.08% had an Irish national identity and 29.53% had a Northern Irish national identity

===2021 Census===
On Census Day (2021), the usually resident population of Fermanagh Local Government District, the borders of the district were very similar to those of the traditional County Fermanagh, was 63,585. Of these:

*58.8% belong to or were brought up in the Catholic religion and 35.5% belong to or were brought up in a &#x27;Protestant and Other Christian (including Christian related)&#x27; religion.

=== Community background and religion ===

=== Ethnicity ===
=== Country of birth ===
=== Main languages ===
=== Knowledge of Irish ===
* In County Fermanagh, 1.91% claim to use Irish daily and 0.22% claim that Irish is their main language.

=== Knowledge of Ulster Scots ===
* 0.99% claim to use Ulster Scots daily in County Fermanagh.

=== National identity ===
==Industry and tourism==
Agriculture and tourism are two of the most important industries in Fermanagh. The main types of farming in the area are beef, dairy, sheep, pigs and some poultry. Most of the agricultural land is used as grassland for grazing and silage or hay rather than for other crops.

The waterways are extensively used by cabin cruisers, other small pleasure craft and anglers. The main town of Fermanagh is Enniskillen (, &#x27;Ceithleann&#x27;s island&#x27;). The island town hosts a range of attractions including the Castle Coole Estate and Enniskillen Castle, which is home to the museum of The Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers and the 5th Royal Inniskilling Dragoon Guards. Fermanagh is also home to The Boatyard Distillery, a distillery producing gin.

Attractions outside Enniskillen include:
* Belleek Pottery
* Castle Archdale
* Crom Estate
* Cuilcagh Boardwalk Trail
* Devenish Island
* Florence Court
* Marble Arch Caves
* Tempo Manor

==Settlements==
The classification of settlements by NISRA defines six categories following the 2011 census (ignoring Belfast and Derry City which have their own separate categories), namely; Large towns, Medium towns, Small towns, Intermediate settlements, Villages and Small villages or hamlets. The majority of the settlements in County Fermanagh lie within the final category, five within the village category and one each in the intermediate settlements and medium towns categories. No settlements in the county are classified as Large towns or Small towns.

=== Large towns ===
(population of 18,000 or more and under 75,000 at 2011 Census)
* none

===Medium towns===
(population of 10,000 or more and under 18,000 at 2011 Census)
* Enniskillen

===Small towns===
(population of 5,000 or more and under 10,000 at 2011 Census)
* none

===Intermediate settlements===
(population of 2,500 or more and under 4,500 at 2011 Census)
* Lisnaskea

===Villages===
(population of 1,000 or more and under 2,500 at 2011 Census)
* Ballinamallard
* Irvinestown
* Kesh
* Lisbellaw
* Maguiresbridge

===Small villages or hamlets===
(population of less than 1,000 at 2011 Census)
===Population of Settlements===

Population statistics were not made available from the 2001, 2011 and 2021 censuses, where noted with an &quot;N/A&quot;.

==Subdivisions==
Baronies

*Clanawley
*Clankelly
*Coole
*Knockninny
*Lurg
*Magheraboy
*Magherastephana
*Tirkennedy
Parishes

Townlands
==Media==
Newspapers
* &quot;The Fermanagh Herald&quot;
* &quot;The Impartial Reporter&quot;

==Education==
There are 41 primary schools currently in operation in County Fermanagh, 10 secondary schools, one special school and one further education college.

Primary Schools

Secondary Schools

Further Education College
* &quot;South West College, Enniskillen Campus&quot;
Special School
* &quot;Willowbridge Special School&quot;
Closed Schools 
* &quot;St Mary&#x27;s High School, Belleek&quot; -Brollagh Closed 2021
* &quot;St. Eugene’s College, Roslea&quot; - Closed 2017
* &quot;St. Eugene’s Primary School, Knocks&quot; - Closed 2013
* &quot;Lisnaskea High School&quot; - Closed 2013
* &quot;Corranny Primary School&quot; - Closed 2012
* &quot;Cornagague Primary School&quot;- Closed 2012
* &quot;Duke of Westminster High School, Ballinamallard&quot; - Closed 2004
* &quot;Kesh Duke of Westminster&quot; - Closed 2004
* &quot;Ashwoods Primary School&quot; - Closed 1968
* &quot;St Mary&#x27;s Primary School, Bannagh&quot; - Closed 1960/70s

==Sport==

Fermanagh GAA has never won a Senior Provincial or an All-Ireland title in any Gaelic games, it is only one of two counties to win neither title. There are 22 GAA clubs in the county, this is the second least of all 32 counties (Longford now has the least, with 21 GAA clubs).

Only Ballinamallard United F.C. take part in the Northern Ireland football league system. All other Fermanagh clubs play in the Fermanagh &amp; Western FA league systems. Fermanagh Mallards F.C. played in the Women&#x27;s Premier League until 2013.

Enniskillen RFC was founded in 1925 and is still going. There is also a rugby league team, the Fermanagh Redskins

Famous football players from Fermanagh include –

* Sandy Fulton
* Jim Cleary
*Roy Carroll
* Harry Chatton
* Barry Owens
* Kyle Lafferty

==Notable people==

Famous people born, raised in or living in Fermanagh include: 

* John Armstrong (1717–1795), born in Fermanagh, Major General in the Continental Army and delegate in the Continental Congress
* Samuel Beckett (1906–1989), author and playwright from Foxrock in Dublin, educated at Portora Royal School
* Darren Breslin, traditional musician
* The 1st Viscount Brookeborough, Prime Minister of Northern Ireland, 1943–1963
* Denis Parsons Burkitt (1911–1993), doctor, discoverer of Burkitt&#x27;s lymphoma
* Roy Carroll (born 1977), association footballer
* Edward Cooney (1867–1960), evangelist and early leader of the Cooneyite and Go-Preachers
* Brian D&#x27;Arcy (born 1945), C.P., Passionist priest and media personality
* Brendan Dolan (born 1973), professional darts player for the PDC
* Adrian Dunbar (born 1958), actor
* Arlene Foster, Baroness Foster of Aghadrumsee (born 1970), politician
* Neil Hannon (born 1970), musician
* Robert Kerr (1882–1963), athlete and Olympic gold medalist
* Kyle Lafferty (born 1987), Northern Ireland International association footballer
* Charles Lawson (born 1959), actor (plays Jim McDonald in &quot;Coronation Street&quot;)
* Francis Little (1822–1890), born in Fermanagh, Wisconsin State Senator
* Terence MacManus (c. 1823–1861), leader in Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848
* Michael Magner (1840–97), recipient of the Victoria Cross
* Peter McGinnity, Gaelic footballer, Fermanagh&#x27;s first winner of an All-Star Award
* Martin McGrath, Gaelic footballer, All-Star winner
* Ciarán McMenamin (born 1975), actor
* Gilla Mochua Ó Caiside (12th century), poet
* Aurora Mulligan, director
* Barry Owens, Gaelic footballer, two-time All-Star winner
* Sean Quinn (born 1947), entrepreneur
* Michael Sleavon (1826–1902), recipient of the Victoria Cross
* Joan Trimble (1915–2000), pianist and composer
* Oscar Wilde (1854–1900), author and playwright, educated at Portora Royal School
* Gordon Wilson (1927–1995), peace campaigner and Irish senator

==Surnames==
The most common surnames in County Fermanagh at the time of the United Kingdom Census of 1901 were:
# Maguire
# McManus
# Johnston
# Armstrong
# Gallagher
# Elliott
# Murphy
# Reilly
# Cassidy
# Wilson

==Railways==
The railway lines in County Fermanagh connected Enniskillen railway station with Derry from 1854, Dundalk from 1861, Bundoran from 1868 and Sligo from 1882.

The railway companies that served the county, prior to the establishment by the merger of Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway, Enniskillen and Bundoran Railway the Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway which was later named the Irish North Western Railway, thus forming the Great Northern Railway (Ireland). By 1883 the Great Northern Railway (Ireland) absorbed all the lines except the Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway, which remained independent throughout its existence.

In October 1957 the Government of Northern Ireland closed the GNR line, which made it impossible for the SL&amp;NCR continue and forced it also to close.

The nearest railway station to Enniskillen is Sligo station which is served by trains to Dublin Connolly and is operated by Iarnród Éireann. The Dublin-Sligo railway line has a two-hourly service run by Iarnród Éireann. The connecting bus from Sligo via Manorhamilton to Enniskillen is route 66 operated by Bus Éireann.

==See also==
* Abbeys and priories in Northern Ireland (County Fermanagh)
* Castles in County Fermanagh
* Extreme points of the United Kingdom
* High Sheriff of Fermanagh
* List of parishes of County Fermanagh
* List of places in County Fermanagh
* List of townlands in County Fermanagh
* Lord Lieutenant of Fermanagh
* People from County Fermanagh

==Notes==
==References==
* Clogher Record
* &quot;Fermanagh&quot; A Dictionary of British Place-Names. A. D. Mills. Oxford University Press, 2003. Oxford Reference Online. Oxford University Press. Northern Ireland Public Libraries. 25 July 2007
* &quot;Fermanagh&quot; Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007. Encyclopædia Britannica Online Library Edition. 25 July 2007 &lt;Britannica Library&gt;.
* Fermanagh: its special landscapes: a study of the Fermanagh countryside and its heritage /Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland. – Belfast: HMSO, 1991 
* Livingstone, Peadar. – The Fermanagh story:a documented history of the County Fermanagh from the earliest times to the present day – Enniskillen: Cumann Seanchais Chlochair, 1969.
* Lowe, Henry N. – County Fermanagh 100 years ago: a guide and directory 1880. – Belfast: Friar&#x27;s Bush Press, 1990. 
* Parke, William K. – A Fermanagh Childhood. Derrygonnelly, Co Fermanagh: Friar&#x27;s Bush Press, 1988. 
* Impartial Reporter
* Fermanagh Herald

==External links==
*Fermanagh on the interactive map of the counties of Great Britain and Ireland – Wikishire
* A folk history of Fermanagh</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190678" start="0" end="16" title="County Fermanagh" label="County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q179872" start="37" end="56" title="Counties of Ireland" label="thirty-two counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="60" end="67" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="97" end="103" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317848" start="115" end="127" title="Counties of Northern Ireland" label="six counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="131" end="147" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q990109" start="222" end="233" title="Enniskillen" label="Enniskillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="241" end="252" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="393" end="401" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="431" end="442" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324180" start="659" end="669" title="Lough Erne" label="Lough Erne"/>
<link wikidata="Q122766" start="678" end="688" title="River Erne" label="River Erne"/>
<link wikidata="Q206942" start="806" end="817" title="Lough Neagh" label="Lough Neagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121975" start="882" end="907" title="Knockmore" label="West Fermanagh Scarplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319121" start="972" end="984" title="Sliabh Beagh" label="Sliabh Beagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544420" start="1136" end="1144" title="Cuilcagh" label="Cuilcagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="1211" end="1224" title="County Tyrone" label="County Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q184760" start="1247" end="1262" title="County Monaghan" label="County Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q187402" start="1285" end="1297" title="County Cavan" label="County Cavan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107397" start="1320" end="1334" title="County Leitrim" label="County Leitrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="1355" end="1369" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192229" start="1513" end="1519" title="County Tyrone" label="Tyrone"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="1579" end="1586" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="1596" end="1602" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="1733" end="1742" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="1743" end="1758" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1875" end="1904" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="1911" end="1975" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187547" start="2042" end="2053" title="Crom Estate" label="Crom Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073959" start="2055" end="2069" title="Florence Court" label="Florence Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969030" start="2075" end="2087" title="Castle Coole" label="Castle Coole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065586" start="2186" end="2194" title="red beds" label="red beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="2254" end="2263" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="2333" end="2341" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="2418" end="2423" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2428" end="2437" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="2454" end="2467" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488840" start="2571" end="2583" title="Shannon Cave" label="Shannon Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q739118" start="2589" end="2606" title="Marble Arch Caves" label="Marble Arch Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055113" start="2615" end="2656" title="Caves of the Tullybrack and Belmore hills" label="Caves of the Tullybrack and Belmore hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366974" start="2765" end="2776" title="Lough Allen" label="Lough Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="2847" end="2858" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178506" start="2886" end="2900" title="Barrel (unit)" label="barrels of oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407254" start="2977" end="3004" title="Killadeas – Seskinore Fault" label="Killadeas – Seskinore Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698890" start="3010" end="3036" title="Tempo – Sixmilecross Fault" label="Tempo – Sixmilecross Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882088" start="3042" end="3054" title="Belcoo Fault" label="Belcoo Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134905" start="3063" end="3083" title="Clogher Valley Fault" label="Clogher Valley Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="3193" end="3200" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3222" end="3229" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159736" start="3284" end="3292" title="Leinster" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324180" start="3327" end="3337" title="Lough Erne" label="Lough Erne"/>
<link wikidata="Q33127325" start="3398" end="3407" title="Fermanagh" label="Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q373901" start="3412" end="3420" title="Monaghan" label="Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899827" start="3422" end="3441" title="Mongán mac Fiachnai" label="Mongán mac Fiachnai"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="3465" end="3471" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888724" start="3528" end="3544" title="Manannán mac Lir" label="Manannán mac Lir"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="3565" end="3572" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q564325" start="3640" end="3656" title="Annals of Ulster" label="Annals of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324180" start="3742" end="3752" title="Lough Erne" label="Lough Erne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400138" start="3758" end="3767" title="Lisbellaw" label="Lisbellaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="3842" end="3850" title="Connacht" label="Connacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="3855" end="3861" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030487" start="3896" end="3905" title="Airgíalla" label="Airgíalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279482" start="3930" end="3940" title="Tirkennedy" label="Tirkennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279421" start="3945" end="3960" title="Magherastephana" label="Magherastephana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111483" start="3973" end="3982" title="Clankelly" label="Clankelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283248" start="4067" end="4074" title="Clogher" label="Clogher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279473" start="4084" end="4088" title="Lurg" label="Lurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446135" start="4166" end="4174" title="Ardstraw" label="Ardstraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274203" start="4211" end="4223" title="Maguire of Fermanagh" label="Maguire clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931652" start="4363" end="4375" title="Hugh Maguire (Lord of Fermanagh)" label="Hugh Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111469" start="4529" end="4539" title="Knockninny" label="Knockninny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730406" start="4544" end="4554" title="Magheraboy" label="Magheraboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111483" start="4603" end="4612" title="Clankelly" label="Clankelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279421" start="4614" end="4629" title="Magherastephana" label="Magherastephana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279473" start="4634" end="4638" title="Lurg" label="Lurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111466" start="4675" end="4684" title="Clanawley" label="Clanawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111474" start="4686" end="4691" title="Coole (barony)" label="Coole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279482" start="4697" end="4707" title="Tirkennedy" label="Tyrkennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q393046" start="4958" end="4978" title="Plantation of Ulster" label="Plantation of Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599675" start="5064" end="5096" title="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)" label="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760759" start="5264" end="5288" title="Fermanagh County Council" label="Fermanagh County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198461" start="5431" end="5457" title="Fermanagh District Council" label="Fermanagh District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992116" start="5683" end="5719" title="Fermanagh and Omagh District Council" label="Fermanagh and Omagh District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q751637" start="5871" end="5924" title="Fermanagh and South Tyrone (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Fermanagh and South Tyrone Parliamentary Constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="5952" end="5967" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="Provisional IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="5968" end="5982" title="hunger strike" label="hunger-striker"/>
<link wikidata="Q121615" start="5983" end="5994" title="Bobby Sands" label="Bobby Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444368" start="6028" end="6077" title="April 1981 Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election" label="April 1981 Fermanagh and South Tyrone by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198461" start="6207" end="6242" title="Fermanagh District Council" label="Fermanagh Local Government District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198461" start="6883" end="6918" title="Fermanagh District Council" label="Fermanagh Local Government District"/>
<link wikidata="Q990109" start="8012" end="8023" title="Enniskillen" label="Enniskillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969030" start="8125" end="8137" title="Castle Coole" label="Castle Coole"/>
<link wikidata="Q281623" start="8149" end="8167" title="Enniskillen Castle" label="Enniskillen Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374326" start="8204" end="8232" title="Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers" label="Royal Inniskilling Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641441" start="8241" end="8278" title="5th Royal Inniskilling Dragoon Guards" label="5th Royal Inniskilling Dragoon Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q959362" start="8354" end="8357" title="gin" label="gin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883748" start="8403" end="8418" title="Belleek Pottery Ltd" label="Belleek Pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049985" start="8421" end="8436" title="Castle Archdale" label="Castle Archdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187547" start="8439" end="8450" title="Crom Estate" label="Crom Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544420" start="8453" end="8477" title="Cuilcagh Boardwalk Trail" label="Cuilcagh Boardwalk Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q739845" start="8480" end="8495" title="Devenish Island" label="Devenish Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073959" start="8498" end="8512" title="Florence Court" label="Florence Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q739118" start="8515" end="8532" title="Marble Arch Caves" label="Marble Arch Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q990109" start="9287" end="9298" title="Enniskillen" label="Enniskillen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300579" start="9482" end="9491" title="Lisnaskea" label="Lisnaskea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514196" start="9571" end="9585" title="Ballinamallard" label="Ballinamallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533408" start="9588" end="9599" title="Irvinestown" label="Irvinestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2689247" start="9602" end="9606" title="Kesh, County Fermanagh" label="Kesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400138" start="9609" end="9618" title="Lisbellaw" label="Lisbellaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226432" start="9621" end="9635" title="Maguiresbridge" label="Maguiresbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111466" start="9900" end="9909" title="Clanawley" label="Clanawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111483" start="9911" end="9920" title="Clankelly" label="Clankelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111474" start="9922" end="9927" title="Coole (barony)" label="Coole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4111469" start="9929" end="9939" title="Knockninny" label="Knockninny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279473" start="9941" end="9945" title="Lurg" label="Lurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730406" start="9947" end="9957" title="Magheraboy" label="Magheraboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279421" start="9959" end="9974" title="Magherastephana" label="Magherastephana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4279482" start="9976" end="9986" title="Tirkennedy" label="Tirkennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444364" start="10036" end="10056" title="The Fermanagh Herald" label="The Fermanagh Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7741518" start="10071" end="10093" title="The Impartial Reporter" label="The Impartial Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q674454" start="11348" end="11374" title="Ballinamallard United F.C." label="Ballinamallard United F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q4421004" start="11392" end="11431" title="Northern Ireland football league system" label="Northern Ireland football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444357" start="11471" end="11497" title="Fermanagh &amp;amp; Western FA" label="Fermanagh &amp;amp; Western FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839139" start="11514" end="11537" title="Fermanagh Mallards F.C." label="Fermanagh Mallards F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2949826" start="11552" end="11579" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Premier League (Northern Ireland)" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11688" end="11706" title="Rugby league in Ireland#Ulster League" label="Fermanagh Redskins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417250" start="11760" end="11772" title="Sandy Fulton" label="Sandy Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194227" start="11775" end="11785" title="Jim Cleary (Northern Irish footballer)" label="Jim Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q258824" start="11787" end="11798" title="Roy Carroll" label="Roy Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667889" start="11801" end="11814" title="Harry Chatton" label="Harry Chatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864589" start="11817" end="11828" title="Barry Owens" label="Barry Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369793" start="11831" end="11844" title="Kyle Lafferty" label="Kyle Lafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q331294" start="11932" end="11946" title="John Armstrong, Sr." label="John Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q26718" start="12037" end="12057" title="Continental Congress" label="Continental Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="12060" end="12074" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843815" start="12115" end="12122" title="Foxrock" label="Foxrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="12126" end="12132" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909328" start="12146" end="12166" title="Portora Royal School" label="Portora Royal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q336890" start="12208" end="12238" title="Basil Brooke, 1st Viscount Brookeborough" label="The 1st Viscount Brookeborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q684914" start="12240" end="12274" title="Prime Minister of Northern Ireland" label="Prime Minister of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q713342" start="12288" end="12309" title="Denis Parsons Burkitt" label="Denis Parsons Burkitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016605" start="12345" end="12368" title="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Burkitt&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q258824" start="12371" end="12382" title="Roy Carroll" label="Roy Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342400" start="12421" end="12434" title="Edward Cooney" label="Edward Cooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167684" start="12483" end="12492" title="Cooneyite" label="Cooneyite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859368" start="12497" end="12509" title="Two by Twos" label="Go-Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963496" start="12512" end="12529" title="Brian D&amp;#x27;Arcy" label="Brian D&amp;#x27;Arcy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573945" start="12591" end="12604" title="Brendan Dolan" label="Brendan Dolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676131" start="12652" end="12655" title="Professional Darts Corporation" label="PDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825024" start="12658" end="12671" title="Adrian Dunbar" label="Adrian Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792148" start="12693" end="12738" title="Arlene Foster" label="Arlene Foster, Baroness Foster of Aghadrumsee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916110" start="12765" end="12776" title="Neil Hannon" label="Neil Hannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q451086" start="12801" end="12812" title="Robert Kerr (athlete)" label="Robert Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369793" start="12862" end="12875" title="Kyle Lafferty" label="Kyle Lafferty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080121" start="12945" end="12959" title="Charles Lawson" label="Charles Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062555" start="13035" end="13049" title="Francis Little (American politician)" label="Francis Little"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412814" start="13082" end="13105" title="Wisconsin Senate" label="Wisconsin State Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701949" start="13108" end="13124" title="Terence MacManus" label="Terence MacManus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321690" start="13151" end="13184" title="Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848" label="Young Irelander Rebellion of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832438" start="13187" end="13201" title="Michael Magner" label="Michael Magner"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="13230" end="13244" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175780" start="13247" end="13262" title="Peter McGinnity" label="Peter McGinnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776162" start="13336" end="13350" title="Martin McGrath (Gaelic footballer)" label="Martin McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q977116" start="13389" end="13405" title="Ciarán McMenamin" label="Ciarán McMenamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561932" start="13427" end="13449" title="Gilla Mochua Ó Caiside" label="Gilla Mochua Ó Caiside"/>
<link wikidata="Q114070874" start="13473" end="13488" title="Aurora Mulligan" label="Aurora Mulligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864589" start="13501" end="13512" title="Barry Owens" label="Barry Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932292" start="13560" end="13570" title="Sean Quinn" label="Sean Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834443" start="13599" end="13614" title="Michael Sleavon" label="Michael Sleavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q544277" start="13662" end="13674" title="Joan Trimble" label="Joan Trimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="13711" end="13722" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909328" start="13771" end="13791" title="Portora Royal School" label="Portora Royal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11972379" start="13794" end="13807" title="Gordon Wilson (peace campaigner)" label="Gordon Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887924" start="13934" end="13963" title="United Kingdom Census 1901" label="United Kingdom Census of 1901"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274203" start="13972" end="13979" title="Maguire (surname)" label="Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904337" start="13982" end="13989" title="McManus" label="McManus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565753" start="13992" end="14000" title="Johnston (surname)" label="Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q13627772" start="14003" end="14012" title="Armstrong (surname)" label="Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492185" start="14015" end="14024" title="Gallagher (surname)" label="Gallagher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953798" start="14037" end="14043" title="Murphy" label="Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865428" start="14055" end="14062" title="Cassidy (surname)" label="Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645480" start="14065" end="14071" title="Wilson (name)" label="Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379215" start="14134" end="14161" title="Enniskillen railway station" label="Enniskillen railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="14167" end="14172" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q204956" start="14184" end="14191" title="Dundalk" label="Dundalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009405" start="14203" end="14211" title="Bundoran" label="Bundoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="14226" end="14231" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671228" start="14334" end="14369" title="Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway" label="Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379214" start="14371" end="14403" title="Enniskillen and Bundoran Railway" label="Enniskillen and Bundoran Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228801" start="14408" end="14439" title="Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway" label="Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228801" start="14466" end="14493" title="Irish North Western Railway" label="Irish North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599675" start="14512" end="14544" title="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)" label="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599675" start="14558" end="14590" title="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)" label="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540485" start="14625" end="14669" title="Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway" label="Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q107001347" start="14745" end="14775" title="Government of Northern Ireland" label="Government of Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059721" start="14926" end="14939" title="Sligo Mac Diarmada Station" label="Sligo station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543742" start="14969" end="14984" title="Dublin Connolly" label="Dublin Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="15004" end="15019" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743407" start="15025" end="15050" title="Dublin-Sligo railway line" label="Dublin-Sligo railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="15124" end="15129" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891064" start="15134" end="15147" title="Manorhamilton" label="Manorhamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017233" start="15187" end="15198" title="Bus Éireann" label="Bus Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15216" end="15274" title="List of monastic houses in Ireland#County Fermanagh" label="Abbeys and priories in Northern Ireland (County Fermanagh)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15277" end="15304" title=":Category:Castles in County Fermanagh" label="Castles in County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244628" start="15307" end="15343" title="Extreme points of the United Kingdom" label="Extreme points of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150581" start="15346" end="15371" title="High Sheriff of Fermanagh" label="High Sheriff of Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969759" start="15374" end="15410" title="List of parishes of County Fermanagh" label="List of parishes of County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633654" start="15413" end="15447" title="List of places in County Fermanagh" label="List of places in County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643568" start="15450" end="15487" title="List of townlands in County Fermanagh" label="List of townlands in County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679566" start="15490" end="15518" title="Lord Lieutenant of Fermanagh" label="Lord Lieutenant of Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15521" end="15549" title=":Category:People from County Fermanagh" label="People from County Fermanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134904" start="15578" end="15592" title="Clogher Record" label="Clogher Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453711" start="16109" end="16128" title="Peadar Livingstone" label="Livingstone, Peadar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5835" wikidata="Q229188" url="?curid=5835" title="Christian (disambiguation)">
<text>Christian most often refers to:

* Christians, people who follow or adhere to Christianity
* pertaining to Christianity
* Christian (given name), including a list of people and fictional characters with the given name
* Christian (surname), including a list of people with the surname

Christian or The Christian may also refer to:
==Arts and entertainment==
===Film===
* &quot;Christian&quot; (1939 film), a Czech comedy film
* &quot;Christian&quot; (1989 film), a Danish drama film
* &quot;The Christian&quot; (1911 film), an Australian silent film
* &quot;The Christian&quot; (1914 film), an American silent film directed by Frederick A. Thomson
* &quot;The Christian&quot; (1915 film), a British silent film directed by George Loane Tucker 
* &quot;The Christian&quot; (1923 film), an American silent film drama directed by Maurice Tourneur

===Television===
* &quot;Christian&quot; (TV series), an Italian television series

===Music===
* &quot;Christian&quot; (song), a 1982 song by China Crisis 
* &quot;Christian the Christian&quot;, a 2004 album by Lackthereof
* The Christians (band), a UK band from Liverpool, formed 1985
* &quot;Christian&quot;, a 2023 song by Zior Park

===Other uses in arts and entertainment===
* &quot;The Christian&quot;, an 1897 novel and play by Hall Caine, adapted for Broadway
* &quot;The Christian&quot; (magazine), the title of several magazines
* Christian, the protagonist in John Bunyan&#x27;s novel &quot;The Pilgrim&#x27;s Progress&quot;

==People==
* Christian of Clogher (d. 1138), saint and Irish bishop
* Christian of Oliva, a 13th-century Cistercian monk
* Christian (bishop of Aarhus), fl. c. 1060 to c. 1102
* Christian (footballer, born 1995) (Christian Savio Machado)
* Christian (footballer, born 2000) (Christian Roberto Alves Cardoso)
* Christian (singer) (Gaetano Cristiano Rossi, born 1949)
* Christian, ring name of professional wrestler Christian Cage (William Jason Reso, born November 30, 1973)
* Prince Christian (disambiguation)
* Christian I (disambiguation)
* Christian II (disambiguation)
* Christian III (disambiguation)

==Other uses==
* Christian the lion (born 1969)
* Christian, West Virginia, a place in the U.S.

==See also==

* The Christians (disambiguation)
* Cyclone Christian, another name for the St. Jude storm of 2013
* Christian Doctrine in United States federal law, arising from &quot;G. L. Christian and Associates v. United States&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229188" start="0" end="9" title="Christian (disambiguation)" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q106039" start="35" end="45" title="Christians" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="107" end="119" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18001597" start="122" end="144" title="Christian (given name)" label="Christian (given name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865575" start="220" end="239" title="Christian (surname)" label="Christian (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q229188" start="286" end="295" title="Christian (disambiguation)" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q229188" start="299" end="312" title="Christian (disambiguation)" label="The Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109245" start="372" end="405" title="Christian (1939 film)" label="&amp;quot;Christian&amp;quot; (1939 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12305810" start="429" end="462" title="Christian (1989 film)" label="&amp;quot;Christian&amp;quot; (1989 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722714" start="486" end="523" title="The Christian (1911 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Christian&amp;quot; (1911 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21183765" start="553" end="590" title="The Christian (1914 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Christian&amp;quot; (1914 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55635121" start="651" end="688" title="The Christian (1915 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Christian&amp;quot; (1915 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62168932" start="747" end="784" title="The Christian (1923 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Christian&amp;quot; (1923 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q110764074" start="865" end="898" title="Christian (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Christian&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217994" start="944" end="972" title="Christian (song)" label="&amp;quot;Christian&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6468740" start="1011" end="1034" title="Christian the Christian" label="Christian the Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q388573" start="1072" end="1093" title="The Christians (band)" label="The Christians (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q123476109" start="1173" end="1182" title="Zior Park" label="Zior Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331144" start="1282" end="1292" title="Hall Caine" label="Hall Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722713" start="1317" end="1353" title="The Christian (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;The Christian&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q268211" start="1449" end="1476" title="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress" label="The Pilgrim&amp;#x27;s Progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110349" start="1497" end="1517" title="Christian of Clogher" label="Christian of Clogher"/>
<link wikidata="Q861344" start="1554" end="1572" title="Christian of Oliva" label="Christian of Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q27973845" start="1607" end="1635" title="Christian (bishop of Aarhus)" label="Christian (bishop of Aarhus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q58127918" start="1662" end="1695" title="Christian (footballer, born 1995)" label="Christian (footballer, born 1995)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85752255" start="1724" end="1757" title="Christian (footballer, born 2000)" label="Christian (footballer, born 2000)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3675612" start="1794" end="1812" title="Christian (singer)" label="Christian (singer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44537" start="1898" end="1912" title="Christian Cage" label="Christian Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q346050" start="1960" end="1993" title="Prince Christian (disambiguation)" label="Prince Christian (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q429259" start="1996" end="2024" title="Christian I (disambiguation)" label="Christian I (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4241263" start="2027" end="2056" title="Christian II (disambiguation)" label="Christian II (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109755" start="2059" end="2089" title="Christian III (disambiguation)" label="Christian III (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078690" start="2108" end="2126" title="Christian the lion" label="Christian the lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109239" start="2141" end="2165" title="Christian, West Virginia" label="Christian, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722728" start="2204" end="2235" title="The Christians (disambiguation)" label="The Christians (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15107436" start="2238" end="2255" title="Cyclone Christian" label="Cyclone Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512069" start="2371" end="2418" title="G. L. Christian and Associates v. United States" label="G. L. Christian and Associates v. United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5836" wikidata="Q2039150" url="?curid=5836" title="Geography of Colombia">
<text>The Republic of Colombia is situated largely in the north-west of South America, with some territories falling within the boundaries of Central America. It is bordered to the north-west by Panama; to the east by Brazil and Venezuela; to the south by Ecuador and Peru; and it shares maritime limits with Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Honduras, Jamaica, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti.

Colombia has a land size of and it is the 25th largest nation in the world and the fourth-largest country in South America (after Brazil, Argentina, and Peru). Colombia&#x27;s population is not evenly distributed, and most of the people live in the mountainous western portion of the country as well as along the northern coastline; the highest number live in or near the capital city of Bogotá. The southern and eastern portions of the country are sparsely inhabited, consisting of tropical rainforest, and inland tropical plains that contain large estates or large livestock farms, oil and gas production facilities, small farming communities, and indigenous tribes with their territories. Colombia has the 35th largest Exclusive Economic Zone of .

==Main ==

Colombia usually classifies its geography into five natural regions, from the Andes mountain range, a region shared with Ecuador, Venezuela; the Pacific Ocean coastal region, shared with Panama and Ecuador; the Caribbean Sea coastal region, shared with Venezuela and Panama; the &quot;Llanos&quot; (plains), shared with Venezuela; to the Amazon Rainforest region shared with Venezuela, Brazil, Peru and Ecuador. Colombia is one of only two South American countries that have coastline on both the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, the other being Chile.

&quot;The World Factbook&quot; does not differentiate between the Amazon region of Colombia (predominantly jungle) and the Orinoquia region of Colombia (predominantly plains). It suggests dividing the country into four geographic regions: the Andean highlands, consisting of the three Andean ranges and intervening valley lowlands; the Caribbean lowlands coastal region; the Pacific lowlands coastal region, separated from the Caribbean lowlands by swamps at the base of the Isthmus of Panama; and eastern Colombia, the great plain that lies to the east of the Andes Mountains.

The chief western mountain range, the Cordillera Occidental, is a moderately high range with peaks reaching up to about (4,670 m). The Cauca River Valley, an important agricultural region with several large cities on its borders, separates the Cordillera Occidental from the massive Cordillera Central. Several snow-clad volcanoes in the Cordillera Central have summits that rise above . The valley of the slow-flowing and muddy Magdalena River, a major transportation artery, separates the Cordillera Central from the main eastern range, the Cordillera Oriental. The peaks of the Cordillera Oriental are moderately high. This range differs from Colombia&#x27;s other mountain ranges in that it contains several large basins. In the east, the sparsely populated, flat to gently rolling eastern lowlands called &quot;llanos&quot; cover almost 60 percent of the country&#x27;s total land area.

This cross section of the republic does not include two of Colombia&#x27;s regions: the Caribbean coastal lowlands and the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, both in the northern part of the country. The lowlands in the west are mostly swampy; the reed-filled marshes of the area are called &quot;ciénagas&quot; by the people of Colombia. The Guajira Peninsula in the east is semiarid and is occupied primarily by indigenous peoples. The Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta is a spectacular triangular snowcapped block of rock that towers over the eastern part of this lowland. Here can be found the highest peak of the country, named Pico Cristobal Colon (5775 m).

===Andean region===

Near the Ecuadorian frontier, the Andes Mountains divide into three distinct, roughly parallel chains, called cordilleras, that extend northeastward almost to the Caribbean Sea. Altitudes reach more than , and mountain peaks are permanently covered with snow. The elevated basins and plateaus of these ranges have a moderate climate that provides pleasant living conditions and in many places enables farmers to harvest twice a year. Torrential rivers on the slopes of the mountains produce a large hydroelectric power potential and add their volume to the navigable rivers in the valleys. In the late 1980s, approximately 78 percent of the country&#x27;s population lived in the Andean highlands.

The Cordillera Occidental in the west, the Cordillera Central in the center, and the Cordillera Oriental in the east have different characteristics. Geologically, the Cordillera Occidental and the Cordillera Central form the western and eastern sides of a massive crystalline arch that extends from the Caribbean lowlands to the southern border of Ecuador. The Cordillera Oriental, however, is composed of folded stratified rocks overlying a crystalline core.

The Cordillera Occidental is relatively low and is the least populated of the three cordilleras. Summits are only about above sea level and do not have permanent snows. Few passes exist, although one that is about above sea level provides the major city of Cali with an outlet to the Pacific Ocean. The relatively low elevation of the cordillera permits dense vegetation, which on the western slopes is truly tropical.

The Cordillera Occidental is separated from the Cordillera Central by the deep rift of the Cauca Valley. The Río Cauca rises within of the border with Ecuador and flows through some of the best farmland in the country. After the two cordilleras converge, the Cauca Valley becomes a deep gorge reaching to the Caribbean lowlands.

The Cordillera Central is the loftiest of the mountain systems. Its crystalline rocks form a towering wall dotted with snow-covered volcanoes that is long. There are no plateaus in this range and no passes under . The highest peak in this range, the Nevado del Huila, reaches above sea level. The second highest peak is a volcano, Nevado del Ruiz, which erupted violently on November 13, 1985. Toward its northern end, this cordillera separates into several branches that descend toward the Caribbean coast.

Between the Cordillera Central and the Cordillera Oriental flows the Magdalena River. This river rises near a point some north of the border with Ecuador, where the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Central diverge. Its spacious drainage area is fed by numerous mountain torrents originating high in the snowfields. The Magdalena River is generally navigable from the Caribbean Sea as far as the town of Neiva, deep in the interior, but it is interrupted midway by rapids. The valley floor is very deep; nearly from the river&#x27;s mouth the elevation is no more than about .

In the Cordillera Oriental, at elevations between , three large fertile basins and a number of small ones provide suitable areas for settlement and intensive economic production. In the basin of Cundinamarca, where the Spanish encountered the regional Chibcha Indians, the European invaders established the town of Santa Fe de Bogotá (present-day Bogotá) at an elevation of above sea level.

To the north of Bogotá, in the densely populated basins of Chiquinquirá and Boyacá, are fertile fields, rich mines, and large industrial establishments that produce much of the national wealth. Still farther north, where the Cordillera Oriental makes an abrupt turn to the northwest near the border with Venezuela, the Sierra Nevada de Cocuy, the highest point of this range, rises to above sea level. In the department of Santander, the valleys on the western slopes are more spacious, and agriculture is intensive in the area around Bucaramanga. The northernmost region of the range around Cúcuta is so rugged that historically it has been easier for residents here to maintain communications and transportation with Venezuela than with the adjacent parts of Colombia.

The basic plantation of Colombia is grassy and is near the equator which allows many tropical-like plants.

===Caribbean region===

The Caribbean lowlands consist of all of Colombia north of an imaginary line extending northeastward from the Golfo de Urabá to the Venezuelan frontier at the northern extremity of the Cordillera Oriental. The semiarid Guajira Peninsula and Guajira–Barranquilla xeric scrub, in the extreme north, bear little resemblance to the rest of the region. In the southern part rises the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, an isolated mountain system with peaks reaching heights over and slopes generally too steep for cultivation.

The Caribbean lowlands region is in roughly the shape of a triangle, the longest side of which is the coastline. Most of the country&#x27;s commerce moves through the cities of Cartagena, Barranquilla, Santa Marta, and the other ports located along this important coast. Inland from these cities are swamps, hidden streams, and shallow lakes that support banana and cotton plantations for major commodity crops, countless small farms, and, in higher places, cattle ranches.

The city of Cartagena is a petrochemical, seaport (#1 in the country), and tourist city (#1 in the country). Santa Marta is also a seaport and tourist city but it is smaller scale city in comparison. Barranquilla is located some from the Caribbean coastline but it is a more developed city, with a greater number of industries and commercial places, widely known for its skilled workers in producing all forms of metalwork and accomplishing construction. Its inhabitants have the highest education level of the region. The city is famous as the starting point and focus of the region and the country&#x27;s development: it was the first city in the nation to install and use telephones, public lighting, air mail, planes, and industrial works.

The Caribbean region merges next to and is connected with the Andean highlands through the two great river valleys. After the Andean highlands, it is the second-most important region in terms of economic activity. Approximately 17% of the country&#x27;s population lived in this region in the late 1980s.

The region also includes the peninsular archipelago of San Andres Island and the Insular Territories of Colombia, which are disputed in part by Nicaragua. However, the Colombian Navy protects such territories with the use of force when necessary to avoid foreign invasion. The islands are fortified with two important bases for defense and custom controls. These were formerly used for research of classified projects with civilian assistance; the local universities often conduct research in the areas of oceanography and marine biology but also in the fields of biochemistry, genetics and immunology. Colombia is known for its advances in medical fields in experimental surgery, breast implant development, or prosthetics, and immunology. These facilities serve as containment and secure experimentation labs to complement those in Barranquilla and other undisclosed locations within the coast territories.

The Insular Region is considered by some as a geopolitical region of Colombia. It comprises the areas outside the continental territories of Colombia and includes the San Andrés y Providencia Department in the Caribbean Sea and the Malpelo and Gorgona islands in the Pacific Ocean. Its subregions include other groups of islands:

* Archipiélago de San Bernardo (in the Morrosquillo Gulf, Caribbean).
* Islas del Rosario (Caribbean)
* Isla Fuerte (Caribbean)
* Isla Barú (Caribbean)
* Isla Tortuguilla (Caribbean)
* Isla Tierra Bomba (Caribbean)

===Pacific region===
The western third of the country is the most geographically complex. Starting at the shore of the Pacific Ocean in the west and moving eastward at a latitude of 5 degrees north, a diverse sequence of features is encountered. In the extreme west are the very narrow and discontinuous Pacific coastal lowlands, which are backed by the Serranía de Baudó, the lowest and narrowest of Colombia&#x27;s mountain ranges. Next is the broad region of the Río Atrato/Río San Juan lowland.

In 1855, William Kennish, an engineer and veteran of the British Royal Navy, who had immigrated to the United States and was working for a New York City firm, studied the area and proposed an inter-oceanic river aqueduct and tunnel to connect the Rio Atrato, with its mouth at the Atlantic Ocean, with tributaries and through a tunnel and aqueduct through Nerqua Pass, to flow into Bahía Humboldt at the Pacific Ocean.

This was his alternative to the canal that was eventually built further west on the isthmus of what became Panama after it gained independence in the early 20th century. Although the US sent an expedition to explore Kennish&#x27;s proposal, the concept was not developed at the time. Colombia refused a later US offer to build a canal. After independence, in 1903 Panama made a treaty with the US to support construction of the Panama Canal. Colombia occupies most of the Andes mountain range northern extremity, sharing a bit with Venezuela; the range splits into three branches between the Colombia-Ecuador border.

In the 1980s, only three percent of all Colombians resided in the Pacific lowlands, a region of jungle and swamp with considerable but little-exploited potential in minerals and other resources. Later in the 20th century, it was threatened by mining-related deforestation, as gold mining proceeded by both major companies and artisan miners. Buenaventura is the only port of any size on the coast. To the east, the Pacific lowlands are bounded by the Cordillera Occidental, from which numerous streams run. Most of the streams flow westward to the Pacific, but the largest, the navigable Río Atrato, flows northward to the Golfo de Urabá. Its river settlements have access to the major Atlantic ports and consequently are commercially related primarily to the Caribbean lowlands hinterland. To the west of the Río Atrato rises the Serranía de Baudó, an isolated chain of low mountains that occupies a large part of the region. Its highest elevation is less than 1,800 meters, and its vegetation resembles that of the surrounding tropical forest.

The Atrato Swamp, in Chocó Department adjoining the border with Panama, is a deep muck sixty-five kilometers in width. For years it has challenged engineers seeking to complete the Pan-American Highway. This stretch, near Turbo, where the highway is interrupted, is known as the Tapón del Chocó (Chocon Plug).

A second major transportation project in Chocó Department has been proposed. A second inter-oceanic canal would be constructed by dredging the Río Atrato and tributary streams and digging short access canals. Completion of either of these projects would do much to transform this region, although it could have devastating consequences on the fragile, tropical forest environment.

===Orinoquía region===
The area east of the Andes includes about 699,300 square kilometers or three-fifths of the country&#x27;s total area, but Colombians view it almost as an alien land. The entire area, known as the eastern plains, was home to only two percent of the country&#x27;s population in the late 1980s. The Spanish term for plains (&quot;llanos&quot;) can be applied only to the open plains in the northern part, particularly the Piedmont areas near the Cordillera Oriental, where extensive cattle raising is practiced.

The region is unbroken by highlands except in Meta Department, where the Serranía de la Macarena, an outlier of the Andes has unique vegetation and wildlife believed to be reminiscent of those that once existed throughout the Andes.

===Amazon region===
Many of the numerous large rivers of eastern Colombia are navigable. The Río Guaviare and the streams to its north flow eastward and drain into the basin of the Río Orinoco, a river that crosses into Venezuela and flows into the Atlantic Ocean. Those south of the Río Guaviare flows into the Amazon Basin. The Río Guaviare divides eastern Colombia into the llanos subregion in the north and the tropical rainforest, or selva, subregion in the south.

==Climate==


The striking variety in temperature and precipitation results principally from differences in elevation. Temperatures range from very hot at sea level to relatively cold at higher elevations but vary little with the season. At Bogotá, for example, the average annual temperature is , and the difference between the average of the coldest and the warmest months is less than 1 °C (1.8 °F). More significant, however, is the daily variation in temperature, from at night to during the day.

Colombians customarily describe their country in terms of the climatic zones: the area under in elevation is called the hot zone (tierra caliente), elevations between are the temperate zone (tierra templada), and elevations from to about constitute the cold zone (tierra fría). The upper limit of the cold zone marks the tree line and the approximate limit of human habitation. The treeless regions adjacent to the cold zone and extending to approximately are high, bleak areas (usually referred to as the páramos), above which begins the area of permanent snow (nevado).

About 86% of the country&#x27;s total area lies in the hot zone. Included in the hot zone and interrupting the temperate area of the Andean highlands are the long and narrow extension of the Magdalena Valley and a small extension in the Cauca Valley. Temperatures, depending on elevation, vary between , and there are alternating dry and wet seasons corresponding to summer and winter, respectively. Breezes on the Caribbean coast, however, reduce both heat and precipitation.

Rainfall in the hot zone is heaviest in the Pacific lowlands and in parts of eastern Colombia, where rain is almost a daily occurrence and rain forests predominate. Precipitation exceeds annually in most of the Pacific lowlands, making this one of the wettest regions in the world. The highest average annual precipitation in the world is estimated to be in Lloro, Colombia, with . In eastern Colombia, it decreases from in portions of the Andean Piedmont to eastward. Extensive areas of the Caribbean interior are permanently flooded, more because of poor drainage than because of the moderately heavy precipitation during the rainy season from May through October.

The temperate zone covers about 8% of the country. This zone includes the lower slopes of the Cordillera Oriental and the Cordillera Central and most of the intermontane valleys. The important cities of Medellín () and Cali () are located in this zone, where rainfall is moderate and the mean annual temperature varies between , depending on the elevation. In the higher elevations of this zone, farmers benefit from two wet and two dry seasons each year; January through March and July through September are the dry seasons.

The cold or cool zone constitutes about 6% of the total area, including some of the most densely populated plateaus and terraces of the Colombian Andes; this zone supports about one fourth of the country&#x27;s total population. The mean temperature ranges between , and the wet seasons occur in April and May and from September to December, as in the high elevations of the temperate zone.

Precipitation is moderate to heavy in most parts of the country; the heavier rainfall occurs in the low-lying hot zone. Considerable variations occur because of local conditions that affect wind currents, however, and areas on the leeward side of the Guajira Peninsula receive generally light rainfall; the annual rainfall of recorded at the Uribia station there is the lowest in Colombia. Considerable year-to-year variations have been recorded, and Colombia sometimes experiences droughts.

Colombia&#x27;s geographic and climatic variations have combined to produce relatively well-defined &quot;ethnocultural&quot; groups among different regions of the country: the Costeño from the Caribbean coast; the Caucano in the Cauca region and the Pacific coast; the Antioqueño in Antioquia, Caldas, Risaralda, and Valle del Cauca departments; the Tolimense in Tolima and Huila departments; the Cundiboyacense in the interior departments of Cundinamarca and Boyacá in the Cordillera Oriental; the Santandereano in Norte de Santander and Santander departments; and the Llanero in the eastern plains. Each group has distinctive characteristics, accents, customs, social patterns, and forms of cultural adaptation to climate and topography that differentiates it from other groups. Even with rapid urbanization and modernization, regionalism and regional identification continued to be important reference points, although they were somewhat less prominent in the 1980s than in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.

Colombia&#x27;s proximity to the equator influences its climates. The lowland areas are continuously hot. Altitude affects temperature greatly. Temperatures decrease about for every increase in altitude above sea level. Rainfall varies by location in Colombia, tending to increase as one travels southward. This is especially true in the eastern lowlands. For example, rainfall in parts of the Guajira Peninsula seldom exceeds per year. Colombia&#x27;s rainy southeast, however, is often drenched by more than of rain per year. Rainfall in most of the rest of the country runs between these two extremes.

==Vegetation==
Altitude affects not only temperature, but also vegetation. In fact, altitude is one of the most important influences on vegetation patterns in Colombia. The mountainous parts of the country can be divided into several vegetation zones according to altitude, although the altitude limits of each zone may vary somewhat depending on the latitude.

The &quot;tierra caliente&quot; (hot land), below , is the zone of tropical crops such as bananas. The tierra templada (temperate land), extending from an altitude of , is the zone of coffee and maize. Wheat and potatoes dominate in the &quot;tierra fría&quot; (cold land), at altitudes from . In the &quot;zona forestada&quot; (forested zone), which is located between , many of the trees have been cut for firewood. Treeless pastures dominate the páramos, or alpine grasslands, at altitudes of . Above , where temperatures are below freezing, is the &quot;tierra helada&quot;, a zone of permanent snow and ice.

Vegetation also responds to rainfall patterns. A scrub woodland of scattered trees and bushes dominates the semiarid northeast. To the south, savannah (tropical grassland) vegetation covers the Colombian portion of the llanos. The rainy areas in the southeast are blanketed by tropical rainforest. In the mountains, the spotty patterns of precipitation in alpine areas complicate vegetation patterns. The rainy side of a mountain may be lush and green, while the other side, in the rain shadow, may be parched.

==Relief==
The Andean range is located in Colombia from the southwest (Ecuador border) toward the northeast (Venezuela border) and is divided in the Colombian Massif (&quot;Macizo Colombiano&quot;) in three ranges (East Andes, Central Andes and West Andes) that form two long valleys, Magdalena and Cauca follow by the rivers of the same name.

The eastern half of Colombia, comprising more than half its territory, is plain and composed by savanna and rainforest, crossed by rivers belonging to the Amazon and Orinoco basins. The northern part, called the Llanos, is a savanna region, mostly in the Orinoco basin (therefore called also Orinoquía). The southern part is covered by the Amazon rain forest and belongs mostly to the Amazon basin. It is usually called Amazonía.

At the north and west of the Andes range there are some coastal plains. The Caribbean plains at the north and the Pacific plains at the west.

A recent global remote sensing analysis suggested that there were 553km² of tidal flats in Colombia, making it the 46th ranked country in terms of tidal flat area.

Colombian Pacific Plains are among the most rainy parts in the world, chiefly at the north (Chocó).

The highest mountain in Colombia is not in the Andes but in the Caribbean plain: Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta with its highest points named Pico Cristobal Colon (5775 m) and Pico Simon Bolivar (same elevation). Other mountains in the Caribbean plain include the Montes de María and the Serranía de San Lucas.

In the Pacific Plains there are other mountain formations, chiefly the Serranía del Darién and the Serranía del Baudó.

In the eastern Region, there is the Serranía de la Macarena and there are formations belonging to the Guyana Shield.

==Protected areas==


==Natural resources==

The natural resources of Colombia are varied and extensive with most of its territory and oceans still unexplored. Colombia has one of the largest open pit coal mines in the world in the region of Cerrejon in the Guajira Peninsula. It also has oil rigs and natural gas extraction in the eastern plains. Colombia is the main producer of emeralds and an important participant in gold, silver, iron, salt, platinum, petroleum, nickel, copper, hydropower and uranium extraction.

==Environmental issues==

The main environmental issues affecting Colombia are deforestation; soil and water quality damage from overuse of pesticides; air pollution, especially in Bogota, from vehicle emissions and other main cities. The collateral damaged produced by attacks against oil pipeline infrastructure by rebel guerrillas in the Colombian armed conflict has produced long term damage to the environment. The armed groups also deforest large areas to cultivate illegal crops and open unauthorized highways in protected areas.

==Extreme points==

;Highest points:

Snowfields and glaciers in Colombia are limited to the highest peaks and ranges in the Cordillera Central and Cordillera Oriental and above the elevation on the Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta. The total area of snowfields and glaciers was estimated to be about 104 square kilometers in the early 1970s.

Historical, geographical, and pictorial records point toward a consistent and progressive depletion of ice-and-snow masses in the Colombian Andes since the end of the &quot;Little Ice Age&quot; in the late 1800s. Many glaciers have disappeared during the 20th century, and others are expected to disappear in the coming decades.

==Facts==
Land size: 
total: 

Land boundaries: 
total: 6,672 km

Coastline: 
3,208 km (Caribbean Sea 1,760 km, North Pacific Ocean 1,448 km)

Exclusive Economic Zone: 
total: 

Climate: 
tropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in highlands

Terrain: 
flat coastal lowlands, central highlands, high Andes Mountains, eastern lowland plains

Elevation extremes: 
lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m 
highest point: Pico Cristobal Colon 5,975 m 
note: nearby Pico Simon Bolivar also has the same elevation

Natural resources: 
petroleum, natural gas, coal, iron ore, nickel, gold, copper, emeralds, hydropower

Land use: 
arable land: 1.43% 
permanent crops: 1.68% 
other: 96.89% (2012)

Irrigated land: 
10,870 km2 (2011)

Total renewable water resources:
2,132 km3 (2011)

Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):
total: 12.65 km3 (55%/4%/41%)
per capita: 308 m3/yr (2010)

Natural hazards: 
highlands subject to volcanic eruptions; occasional earthquakes; periodic droughts

Environment - international agreements: 
party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands 
signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

==Hydrology==
Colombia has four main drainage systems: the Pacific drain, the Caribbean drain, the Orinoco Basin and the Amazon Basin.

The Orinoco and Amazon Rivers mark limits with Colombia to Venezuela and Peru respectively.

===Lakes===

*Ciénaga Grande de Santa Marta
*La Cocha Lagoon
*Lake Tota

==See also==
* Valleys and Plateaus of Colombia
* Environmental issues in Colombia

==References==
*

==External links==
* Colombian Ministry of Environment 
* Map of the Republic of Colombia from 1891 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="4" end="24" title="Colombia" label="Republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="66" end="79" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="136" end="151" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="189" end="195" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="212" end="218" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="223" end="232" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="250" end="257" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="262" end="266" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="303" end="313" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="315" end="324" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="326" end="334" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="336" end="343" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="349" end="367" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="373" end="378" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q260023" start="423" end="442" title="List of countries and outlying territories by total area" label="25th largest nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="511" end="517" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="519" end="528" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="534" end="538" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="769" end="775" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="1103" end="1126" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970725" start="1196" end="1211" title="natural regions" label="natural regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="1222" end="1242" title="Andes" label="Andes mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="1265" end="1272" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="1274" end="1283" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="1289" end="1302" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q430265" start="1303" end="1310" title="Pacific Coast" label="coastal"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="1331" end="1337" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="1342" end="1349" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="1355" end="1368" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="1429" end="1435" title="Llanos" label="Llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="1482" end="1499" title="Amazon Rainforest" label="Amazon Rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1530" end="1536" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1538" end="1542" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q11191" start="1700" end="1718" title="The World Factbook" label="The World Factbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="1760" end="1766" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="2255" end="2270" title="Andes" label="Andes Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q278057" start="2311" end="2332" title="Cordillera Occidental (Colombia)" label="Cordillera Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2408" end="2426" title="Cauca River Valley" label="Cauca River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q143982" start="2556" end="2574" title="Cordillera Central, Colombia" label="Cordillera Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="2702" end="2717" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="3089" end="3095" title="llanos" label="llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="3289" end="3317" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="3504" end="3521" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="Guajira Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q578862" start="3789" end="3809" title="Pico Cristobal Colon" label="Pico Cristobal Colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="4005" end="4018" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="4341" end="4360" title="Hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q51103" start="5259" end="5263" title="Santiago de Cali" label="Cali"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="5286" end="5299" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="5573" end="5580" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q648551" start="6002" end="6018" title="Nevado del Huila" label="Nevado del Huila"/>
<link wikidata="Q233351" start="6083" end="6098" title="Nevado del Ruiz" label="Nevado del Ruiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="6330" end="6345" title="Magdalena River" label="Magdalena River"/>
<link wikidata="Q638260" start="6670" end="6675" title="Neiva, Huila" label="Neiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q232564" start="7039" end="7051" title="Cundinamarca Department" label="Cundinamarca"/>
<link wikidata="Q828578" start="7096" end="7103" title="Chibcha" label="Chibcha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841" start="7191" end="7197" title="Bogotá" label="Bogotá"/>
<link wikidata="Q951897" start="7295" end="7307" title="Chiquinquirá" label="Chiquinquirá"/>
<link wikidata="Q121233" start="7312" end="7318" title="Boyacá Department" label="Boyacá"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="7540" end="7549" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q235166" start="7645" end="7668" title="Santander Department" label="department of Santander"/>
<link wikidata="Q243766" start="7771" end="7782" title="Bucaramanga" label="Bucaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q216847" start="7828" end="7834" title="Cúcuta" label="Cúcuta"/>
<link wikidata="Q761784" start="8250" end="8264" title="Gulf of Urabá" label="Golfo de Urabá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="8359" end="8376" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="Guajira Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382910" start="8381" end="8413" title="Guajira–Barranquilla xeric scrub" label="Guajira–Barranquilla xeric scrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="8519" end="8547" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="8836" end="8845" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="8847" end="8859" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="8861" end="8872" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="9014" end="9020" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="9025" end="9031" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q657461" start="9146" end="9155" title="Cartagena, Colombia" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q209016" start="9243" end="9254" title="Santa Marta" label="Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q62823" start="9334" end="9346" title="Barranquilla" label="Barranquilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q131051" start="10240" end="10257" title="San Andres Island" label="San Andres Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="11141" end="11153" title="geopolitical" label="geopolitical"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="11164" end="11172" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11209" end="11232" title="continental territories" label="continental territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q26855" start="11262" end="11297" title="San Andrés y Providencia Department" label="San Andrés y Providencia Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="11305" end="11318" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q750683" start="11327" end="11334" title="Malpelo Island" label="Malpelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q982879" start="11339" end="11346" title="Gorgona, Colombia" label="Gorgona"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="11362" end="11375" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="11416" end="11422" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786925" start="11428" end="11456" title="Archipiélago de San Bernardo" label="Archipiélago de San Bernardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110248" start="11465" end="11482" title="Morrosquillo Gulf" label="Morrosquillo Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674250" start="11498" end="11515" title="Islas del Rosario" label="Islas del Rosario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472808" start="11530" end="11541" title="Isla Fuerte" label="Isla Fuerte"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071570" start="11556" end="11565" title="Isla Barú" label="Isla Barú"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922029" start="11580" end="11596" title="Isla Tortuguilla" label="Isla Tortuguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593242" start="11611" end="11628" title="Isla Tierra Bomba" label="Isla Tierra Bomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q663028" start="11824" end="11839" title="5th parallel north" label="5 degrees north"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479954" start="11996" end="12013" title="Baudó Mountains" label="Serranía de Baudó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363972" start="12108" end="12118" title="Atrato River" label="Río Atrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097778" start="12119" end="12131" title="San Juan River (Colombia)" label="Río San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013941" start="12151" end="12166" title="William Kennish" label="William Kennish"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12199" end="12217" title="British Royal Navy" label="British Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="12669" end="12675" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="12990" end="13002" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q996581" start="13522" end="13534" title="Buenaventura, Valle del Cauca" label="Buenaventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363972" start="13768" end="13778" title="Río Atrato" label="Río Atrato"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479954" start="14011" end="14028" title="Baudó Mountains" label="Serranía de Baudó"/>
<link wikidata="Q917276" start="14231" end="14243" title="Darién Gap" label="Atrato Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q271839" start="14408" end="14428" title="Pan-American Highway" label="Pan-American Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q727559" start="14449" end="14454" title="Turbo, Colombia" label="Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="15257" end="15262" title="plain" label="plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q238629" start="15500" end="15515" title="Meta Department" label="Meta Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q368819" start="15527" end="15550" title="Serranía de la Macarena" label="Serranía de la Macarena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047596" start="15781" end="15793" title="Río Guaviare" label="Río Guaviare"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="15869" end="15880" title="Río Orinoco" label="Río Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="16000" end="16012" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="21212" end="21229" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="Guajira Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3066648" start="23061" end="23077" title="Colombian Massif" label="Colombian Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q143014" start="23127" end="23137" title="Cordillera Oriental (Colombia)" label="East Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q143982" start="23139" end="23152" title="Cordillera Central (Colombia)" label="Central Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q278057" start="23157" end="23167" title="Cordillera Occidental (Colombia)" label="West Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191829" start="23197" end="23206" title="Magdalena River Valley" label="Magdalena"/>
<link wikidata="Q13990" start="23211" end="23216" title="Valle del Cauca" label="Cauca"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="23353" end="23360" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q9444" start="23365" end="23375" title="rainforest" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="23412" end="23418" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="23423" end="23430" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q141501" start="23469" end="23475" title="Llanos" label="Llanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q230584" start="24088" end="24093" title="Department of Chocó" label="Chocó"/>
<link wikidata="Q26728" start="24178" end="24206" title="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta" label="Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479948" start="24359" end="24374" title="Montes de María" label="Montes de María"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479950" start="24383" end="24404" title="Serranía de San Lucas" label="Serranía de San Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479953" start="24478" end="24497" title="Serranía del Darién" label="Serranía del Darién"/>
<link wikidata="Q3479954" start="24506" end="24524" title="Serranía del Baudó" label="Serranía del Baudó"/>
<link wikidata="Q368819" start="24563" end="24586" title="Serranía de la Macarena" label="Serranía de la Macarena"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309106" start="24629" end="24642" title="Guyana Shield" label="Guyana Shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323960" start="24887" end="24895" title="Cerrejon" label="Cerrejon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056122" start="24903" end="24920" title="Guajira Peninsula" label="Guajira Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56240808" start="24934" end="24941" title="oil rig" label="oil rig"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="24947" end="24969" title="natural gas extraction" label="natural gas extraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q43513" start="25026" end="25033" title="emerald" label="emerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q202008" start="26517" end="26540" title="Exclusive Economic Zone" label="Exclusive Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="27453" end="27467" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q47359" start="27469" end="27498" title="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol" label="Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q183481" start="27500" end="27515" title="Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="27621" end="27639" title="Tropical Timber 83" label="Tropical Timber 83"/>
<link wikidata="Q26837533" start="27641" end="27659" title="Tropical Timber 94" label="Tropical Timber 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="27697" end="27711" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="27853" end="27860" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783" start="27865" end="27871" title="Amazon River" label="Amazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="27908" end="27917" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="27922" end="27926" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051411" start="27956" end="27985" title="Ciénaga Grande de Santa Marta" label="Ciénaga Grande de Santa Marta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27987" end="28002" title="La Cocha Lagoon" label="La Cocha Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720776" start="28004" end="28013" title="Lake Tota" label="Lake Tota"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28030" end="28062" title="Valleys and Plateaus of Colombia" label="Valleys and Plateaus of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381278" start="28065" end="28097" title="Environmental issues in Colombia" label="Environmental issues in Colombia"/>
</links>
</doc>
