<doc id="8063" wikidata="Q125775" url="?curid=8063" title="History of the Dominican Republic">
<text>The recorded history of the Dominican Republic began in 1492 when Christopher Columbus, working for the Crown of Castile, arrived at a large island in the western Atlantic Ocean, later known as the Caribbean. The native Taíno people, an Arawakan people, had inhabited the island during the pre-Columbian era, dividing it into five chiefdoms. They referred to the eastern part of the island as &quot;Quisqueya&quot;, meaning &#x27;mother of all lands.&#x27; Columbus claimed the island for Castile, naming it (&#x27;the Spanish Island&#x27;), which was later Latinized to Hispaniola.

Following 25 years of Spanish occupation, the Taíno population in the Spanish-controlled regions of the island drastically decreased due to the Taíno genocide. With fewer than 50,000 survivors, those remaining intermixed with Spaniards, Africans, and others, leading to the formation of the present-day tripartite Dominican population. The area that would become the Dominican Republic remained the Captaincy General of Santo Domingo until 1821, except during the &quot;Era de Francia&quot;, when it was a French colony from 1795 to 1815. It briefly became an independent state in 1821, known as the Republic of Spanish Haiti, until it was annexed and merged by Haiti into Republic of Haiti from 1822 to 1844.

In 1844, the Dominican Republic declared its independence, establishing the First Dominican Republic. The republic maintained its independence except for a brief annexation by Spain from 1861 to 1865, after which the Second Dominican Republic was established. The country later experienced its first occupation by the United States from 1916 to 1924, followed by the establishment of the Third Dominican Republic.

During the 19th century, the Dominican Republic frequently engaged in conflicts involving the French, Haitians, Spanish, and internal factions. This period was characterized by a society heavily influenced by &quot;caudillos&quot;, who exercised control over the nation as a personalised dictatorship. Between 1844 and 1914, the Dominican Republic underwent numerous leadership transitions, with 53 individuals assuming the presidency, although only three completed their terms. The country also saw the adoption of 19 constitutions, with many leaders obtaining power through military force. During this period, three presidents were assassinated: José Antonio Salcedo in 1864, Ulises Heureaux in 1899, and Ramón Cáceres in 1911.

In 1930, the Dominican Republic came under the rule of Rafael Trujillo, a dictator who maintained control until his assassination in 1961. Following Trujillo&#x27;s regime, Juan Bosch was democratically elected president in 1962 but was removed from office in a military coup d&#x27;état in 1963. The Dominican Civil War in 1965 lead to a U.S.-led intervention prompted by an uprising to restore Bosch to power and allegations of communist support for the coup. In 1966, Joaquín Balaguer, a &quot;caudillo&quot;, defeated Bosch in the presidential election and remained in power for 30 years. Due to U.S. pressure in response to flawed elections, Balaguer was compelled to shorten his term in 1996.

Subsequent to this period, the Dominican Republic has conducted regular competitive elections, with opposition candidates successfully assuming the presidency, showing a transition towards more stable democracy.

==Pre-European history==

The islands of the Caribbean were first settled around 6,000 years ago by hunter-gatherer peoples originating from Central America or northern South America. The Arawakan-speaking ancestors of the Taíno moved into the Caribbean from South America during the 1st millennium BC, reaching Hispaniola by around 600 AD. These Arawakan peoples engaged in farming, fishing, hunting and gathering, and the widespread production of ceramic goods. The estimates of Hispaniola&#x27;s population in 1492 vary widely, including tens of thousands, 100,000, 300,000, and 400,000-2,000,000. Estimating how many people lived on the island in pre-Columbian times is challenging, as no accurate records exist. At the time of Columbus&#x27; arrival in 1492, the island&#x27;s territory consisted of five Taíno chiefdoms: Marién, Maguá, Maguana, Jaragua, and Higüey. These were ruled respectively by &quot;caciques&quot; Guacanagarix, Guarionex, Caonabo, Bohechío, and Cayacoa. The Taíno name for the entire island was either &quot;Ayiti&quot; (land of high mountains) or &quot;Quisqueya&quot; (mother of all lands).

==Spanish colony (1492–1795)==
===Arrival of the Spanish===
Christopher Columbus reached the island of Hispañola on his first voyage, in December 1492. Guacanagarí, the chief who hosted Columbus and his men, treated them kindly and provided them with everything they desired. However, the Taínos&#x27; egalitarian social system clashed with the Europeans&#x27; feudalist system, which had more rigid class structures. The Europeans believed the Taínos to be either weak or misleading, and they began to treat the tribes with violence. Columbus successfully tempered this trend, and he and his men departed from Quisqueya, the Taínos&#x27; name for the island, on good terms.

After the sinking of the &quot;Santa María&quot;, Columbus established a small fort to support his claim to the island. The fort was called La Navidad because the shipwrecking and the founding of the fort occurred on Christmas Day. While Columbus was away, the garrison manning the fort was wracked by divisions that evolved into conflict. The more rapacious men began to terrorize the Taíno, the Ciguayo, and the Macorix peoples, which included attempts to take their women. Guacanagarix tried to reach an accommodation with the Spaniards; however, the Spaniards and some of his own people viewed him as weak. The Spaniards treated him with contempt, including the kidnapping of some of his wives. Fed up, the powerful Cacique Caonabo of the Maguana Chiefdom attacked the Europeans and destroyed La Navidad. Guacanagarix was dismayed by these events but did not try hard to aid the Europeans, probably hoping that the troublesome outsiders would never return.

In 1493, Columbus came back to the island on his second voyage and founded the first Spanish colony in the New World, the city of La Isabela. Isabela nearly failed because of hunger and disease. In 1496, Santo Domingo was built and became the new capital, and remains the oldest continuously inhabited European city in the Americas.

An estimated 400,000 Tainos living on the island were soon enslaved to work in gold mines. By 1508, their numbers had decreased to around 60,000 because of forced labor, hunger, disease, and the Taíno genocide. By 1535, only a few dozen were still alive.

During this period, the colony&#x27;s Spanish leadership changed several times. When Columbus departed on another exploration, Francisco de Bobadilla became governor. Settlers&#x27; allegations of mismanagement by Columbus helped create a tumultuous political situation. In 1502, Nicolás de Ovando replaced de Bobadilla as governor, with an ambitious plan to expand Spanish influence in the region. It was he who dealt most brutally with the Taíno people. The Taino population declined by up to 95% in the century after the Spanish arrival, from a pre contact population of tens of thousands to 8,000,000. Many authors have described the treatment of the Taino in Hispaniola under the Spanish Empire as genocide.
One rebel, however, successfully fought back. Enriquillo led a group who fled to the mountains and attacked the Spanish repeatedly for fourteen years. The Spanish ultimately offered him a peace treaty and gave Enriquillo and his followers their own town in 1534.

===Sixteenth century===
In 1501, the Spanish monarchs, Ferdinand I and Isabella, first granted permission to the colonists of the Caribbean to import African slaves, who began arriving to the island in 1503. In 1510, the first sizable shipment, consisting of 250 Black Ladinos, arrived in Hispaniola from Spain. Eight years later African-born slaves arrived in the West Indies. The Colony of Santo Domingo was organized as the Royal Audiencia of Santo Domingo in 1511. Sugar cane was introduced to Hispaniola from the Canary Islands, and the first sugar mill in the New World was established in 1516, on Hispaniola. The need for a labor force to meet the growing demands of sugar cane cultivation led to an exponential increase in the importation of slaves over the following two decades. The sugar mill owners soon formed a new colonial elite and convinced the Spanish king to allow them to elect the members of the Real Audiencia from their ranks. Poorer colonists subsisted by hunting the herds of wild cattle that roamed throughout the island and selling their hides.

The first major slave revolt in the Americas occurred in Santo Domingo on December 25, 1521, when enslaved Muslims of the Wolof nation led an uprising in the sugar plantation of admiral Don Diego Colon, son of Christopher Columbus. Many of these insurgents managed to escape to the mountains where they formed independent maroon communities, but the Admiral had a lot of the captured rebels hanged.

While sugar cane dramatically increased Spain&#x27;s earnings on the island, large numbers of the newly imported slaves fled into the nearly impassable mountain ranges in the island&#x27;s interior, joining the growing communities of &quot;cimarrónes&quot;—literally, &#x27;wild animals&#x27;. By the 1530s, &quot;cimarrón&quot; bands had become so numerous that in rural areas the Spaniards could only safely travel outside their plantations in large armed groups. When Archdeacon Alonso de Castro toured Hispaniola in 1542, he estimated the maroon population at 2,000–3,000 persons, living mainly on the Cape of San Nicolas, in the Ciguayos, on the Samana peninsular, and on the Cape of Iguey. Latter that decade, there were also rebellions of enslaved people, led by Diego de Guzman, Diego de Campo, and Captain Lemba.

Beginning in the 1520s, the Caribbean Sea was raided by increasingly numerous French pirates. In 1541, Spain authorized the construction of Santo Domingo&#x27;s fortified wall, and in 1560 decided to restrict sea travel to enormous, well-armed convoys. In another move, which would destroy Hispaniola&#x27;s sugar industry, in 1561 Havana, more strategically located in relation to the Gulf Stream, was selected as the designated stopping point for the merchant &quot;flotas,&quot; which had a royal monopoly on commerce with the Americas. In 1564, the island&#x27;s main inland cities Santiago de los Caballeros and Concepción de la Vega were destroyed by an earthquake. In the 1560s, English privateers joined the French in regularly raiding Spanish shipping in the Americas.

With the conquest of the American mainland, Hispaniola quickly declined. Most Spanish colonists left for the silver-mines of Mexico and Peru, while new immigrants from Spain bypassed the island. Agriculture dwindled, new imports of slaves ceased, and white colonists, free blacks, and slaves alike lived in poverty, weakening the racial hierarchy and aiding &quot;intermixing,&quot; resulting in a population of predominantly mixed Spaniard, African, and Taíno descent. Except for the city of Santo Domingo, which managed to maintain some legal exports, Dominican ports were forced to rely on contraband trade, which, along with livestock, became the sole source of livelihood for the island dwellers.

In 1586, the privateer Francis Drake of England captured the city of Santo Domingo, collecting a ransom for its return to Spanish rule. In 1592, Christopher Newport of England attacked the town of Azua on the bay of Ocoa, which was taken and plundered.

In 1595, the Spanish, frustrated by the twenty-year rebellion of their Dutch subjects, closed their home ports to rebel shipping from the Netherlands cutting them off from the critical salt supplies necessary for their herring industry. The Dutch responded by sourcing new salt supplies from Spanish America where colonists were more than happy to trade. So large numbers of Dutch traders and buccaneers joined their English and French counterparts on the Spanish Main.

===Seventeenth century===

In 1605, Spain was infuriated that Spanish settlements on the northern and western coasts of the island were carrying out large scale and illegal trade with the Dutch, who were at that time fighting a war of independence against Spain in Europe, and the English, a very recent enemy state, and so decided to forcibly resettle the colony&#x27;s inhabitants closer to the city of Santo Domingo. This action, known as the &quot;Devastaciones de Osorio&quot;, proved disastrous; more than half of the resettled colonists died of starvation or disease, over 100,000 cattle were abandoned, and many slaves escaped. Five of the existing thirteen settlements on the island were brutally razed by Spanish troops – many of the inhabitants fought, escaped to the jungle, or fled to the safety of passing Dutch ships. The settlements of La Yaguana, and Bayaja, on the west and north coasts respectively of modern-day Haiti were burned, as were the settlements of Monte Cristi and Puerto Plata on the north coast and San Juan de la Maguana in the southwestern area of the modern-day Dominican Republic.

French and English buccaneers took advantage of Spain&#x27;s retreat into a corner of Hispaniola to settle the island of Tortuga, off the northwest coast of Hispaniola, in 1629. France established direct control in 1640, reorganizing it into an official colony and expanding to the north coast of Hispaniola itself, whose western end Spain ceded to France in 1697 under the Treaty of Ryswick.

In 1655, Oliver Cromwell of England dispatched a fleet, commanded by Admiral Sir William Penn, to capture Santo Domingo. After meeting heavy resistance, the English retreated. Despite the fact that the English were defeated in their attempt to capture the island, they nevertheless captured the nearby Spanish colony of Jamaica, and other foreign strongholds subsequently began to be established throughout the West Indies. Madrid sought to contest such encroachments on its own imperial control by using Santo Domingo as a forward military base, but Spanish power was by now too depleted to recapture lost colonies. The city itself was furthermore subjected to a smallpox epidemic, cacao blight, and hurricane in 1666; another storm two years later; a second epidemic in 1669; a third hurricane in September 1672; plus an earthquake in May 1673 that killed twenty-four residents.

===Eighteenth century===

The House of Bourbon replaced the House of Habsburg in Spain in 1700 and introduced economic reforms that gradually began to revive trade in Santo Domingo. The crown progressively relaxed the rigid controls and restrictions on commerce between Spain and the colonies and among the colonies. The last &quot;flotas&quot; sailed in 1737; the monopoly port system was abolished shortly thereafter. By the middle of the century, the population was bolstered by emigration from the Canary Islands, resettling the northern part of the colony and planting tobacco in the Cibao Valley, and importation of slaves was renewed. The population of Santo Domingo grew from about 6,000 in 1737 to approximately 125,000 in 1790. Of this number, about 40,000 were white landowners, about 25,000 were mulatto freedmen, and some 60,000 were slaves. However, it remained poor and neglected, particularly in contrast with its western, French neighbor Saint-Domingue, which became the wealthiest colony in the New World and had half a million inhabitants.

As restrictions on colonial trade were relaxed, the colonial elites of St. Domingue offered the principal market for Santo Domingo&#x27;s exports of beef, hides, mahogany, and tobacco. With the outbreak of the Haitian Revolution in 1791, the rich urban families linked to the colonial bureaucracy fled the island, while most of the rural &quot;hateros&quot; (cattle ranchers) remained, even though they lost their principal market. Spain saw in the unrest an opportunity to seize all, or part, of the western third of the island in an alliance of convenience with the rebellious slaves. But after the slaves and French reconciled, the Spanish suffered a setback, and in 1795, France gained control of the whole island under the Treaty of Basel.

==French occupation (1795–1809)==

In 1801, Toussaint Louverture arrived in Santo Domingo, proclaiming the abolition of slavery on behalf of the French Republic. Shortly afterwards, Napoleon dispatched an army which subdued the whole island and ruled it for a few months. Mulattoes and blacks again rose up against these French in October 1802 and finally defeated them in November 1803. On 1 January 1804, the victors declared Saint-Domingue to be the independent republic of Haiti, the Taíno name for the entire island. Even after their defeat by the Haitians, a small French garrison remained in Santo Domingo. Slavery was reestablished and many of the émigré Spanish colonists returned. In 1805, after crowning himself Emperor, Jean-Jacques Dessalines invaded, reaching Santo Domingo before retreating in the face of a French naval squadron. In their retreat through the Cibao, the Haitians sacked the towns of Santiago and Moca, slaughtering most of their residents.

The French held on to the eastern part of the island until dealt a serious blow by the Dominican General Juan Sánchez Ramírez at the Battle of Palo Hincado on November 7, 1808. With help from the British Navy, Ramírez laid siege to the city of Santo Domingo. The French in the besieged city finally capitulated on July 9, 1809, initiating a twelve-year period of Spanish rule, known in Dominican history as &quot;España Boba&quot; (&#x27;the Foolish Spain&#x27;).

==Spanish colony (1809–1821)==
The population of the new Spanish colony stood at approximately 104,000. Of this number, about 30,000 were slaves, working predominantly on cattle ranches, and the rest a mixture of Spanish, taino and black. The European Spaniards were few, and consisted principally of Catalans and Canary Islanders.
During this period in time, the Spanish crown wielded little to no influence in the colony of Santo Domingo. Some wealthy cattle ranchers had become leaders, and sought to bring control and order in the southeast of the colony where the &quot;law of machete&quot; ruled the land. On December 1, 1821, the former Captain general in charge of the colony, José Núñez de Cáceres, influenced by all the Revolutions that were going on around him, finally decided to overthrow the Spanish government and proclaimed the independence of &quot;Spanish Haiti&quot;.

The white and mulatto slave owners on the eastern part of the island—recognizing their vulnerability both to Spanish and to Haitian attack and also seeking to maintain their slaves as property—attempted to annex themselves to Gran Colombia. While this request was in transit, Jean-Pierre Boyer, the ruler of Haiti, invaded Santo Domingo on February 9, 1822, with a 10,000-strong army. Having no capacity to resist, Núñez de Cáceres surrendered the capital.

==Haitian occupation (1822–1844)==
The twenty-two-year Haitian occupation that followed is recalled by Dominicans as a period of brutal military rule, though the reality is more complex. It led to large-scale land expropriations and failed efforts to force production of export crops, impose military services, restrict the use of the Spanish language, and eliminate traditional customs such as cockfighting. It reinforced Dominicans&#x27; perceptions of themselves as different from Haitians in &quot;language, race, religion and domestic customs&quot;. Yet, this was also a period that definitively ended slavery as an institution in the eastern part of the island.

Haiti&#x27;s constitution forbade whites from owning land, and the major landowning families were forcibly deprived of their properties. Most emigrated to the Spanish colonies of Cuba and Puerto Rico, or to independent Gran Colombia, usually with the encouragement of Haitian officials, who acquired their lands. The Haitians, who associated the Catholic Church with the French slave-masters who had exploited them before independence, confiscated all church property, deported all foreign clergy, and severed the ties of the remaining clergy to the Vatican. Santo Domingo&#x27;s university, the oldest in the Western Hemisphere, lacking students, teachers, and resources, closed down. In order to receive diplomatic recognition from France and end the threat of a French invasion, Haiti was forced to pay an indemnity of 150 million francs to the former French colonists, which was subsequently lowered to 60 million francs, and Haiti imposed heavy taxes on the eastern part of the island. Since Haiti was unable to adequately provision its army, the occupying forces largely survived by commandeering or confiscating food and supplies at gunpoint.

Attempts to redistribute land conflicted with the system of communal land tenure (&quot;terrenos comuneros&quot;), which had arisen with the ranching economy, and newly emancipated slaves resented being forced to grow cash crops under Boyer&#x27;s &quot;Code Rural&quot;. In rural areas, the Haitian administration was usually too inefficient to enforce its own laws. It was in the city of Santo Domingo that the effects of the occupation were most acutely felt, and it was there that the movement for independence originated.

==Independence: First Republic (1844–1861)==
On July 16, 1838, Juan Pablo Duarte together with Pedro Alejandrino Pina, Juan Isidro Pérez, Felipe Alfau, Benito González, Félix María Ruiz, Juan Nepumoceno Ravelo and Jacinto de la Concha founded a secret society called &quot;La Trinitaria&quot; to win independence from Haiti. A short time later, they were joined by Ramón Matías Mella, and Francisco del Rosario Sánchez. In 1843, they allied with a Haitian movement in overthrowing Boyer. Because they had revealed themselves as revolutionaries working for Dominican independence, the new Haitian president, Charles Rivière-Hérard, exiled or imprisoned the leading &quot;Trinitarios&quot; (Trinitarians). At the same time, Buenaventura Báez, an Azua mahogany exporter and deputy in the Haitian National Assembly, was negotiating with the French Consul-General for the establishment of a French protectorate. In an uprising timed to preempt Báez, on February 27, 1844, the Trinitarios declared independence from Haiti, expelling all Haitians and confiscating their property. The Trinitarios were backed by Pedro Santana, a wealthy cattle-rancher from El Seibo who commanded a private army of peons who worked on his estates.

===War of Independence===

On March 10, 1844, Rivière-Hérard sent three columns totaling 30,000 troops into the Dominican Republic, but the Dominicans defeated the Haitian army by March 30. On April 15, three Dominican schooners defeated a Haitian brigantine and two Haitian schooners off the coast of Azua. As a result of these Haitian defeats, Rivière-Hérard was overthrown on May 3, leading to a temporary suspension of Haitian military operations. On June 17, 1845, Dominican troops invaded Haitian territory in retaliation for border raids, capturing two Haitian towns and establishing a fortified position. The Haitian army counterattacked on July 22, driving the invaders back across the frontier.

On August 6, 1845, Haitian President Luis Pierrot ordered an invasion of the Dominican Republic. On September 17, Dominican troops defeated the Haitian vanguard on the southern frontier, repelling a cavalry charge. Pierrot issued &quot;letters of marque&quot; against ships trading with the Dominican Republic and declared all Dominican ports closed on September 27, but lacked a navy to enforce this. Haitian privateers attacked Dominican merchant ships, damaging their trade.

On September 27, 1845, Dominican troops defeated a Haitian army at the battle of &quot;Beler,&quot; a frontier fortification, resulting in the deaths of three Haitian generals, including the army’s commander. On October 28, another Haitian force attacked the frontier fort &quot;El Invencible&quot; but was repulsed after five hours of fighting. A Haitian squadron carrying troops to Puerto Plata was driven aground by bad weather on December 21, and the admiral and 148 others were taken prisoner. Shortly after announcing a new campaign for 1846, Pierrot was overthrown on February 27.

Faustin Soulouque, now governing Haiti, launched a new invasion of the Dominican Republic. On March 21, 1849, Haitian soldiers attacked the Dominican garrison at Las Matas. Soulouque then captured San Juan, leaving Azua as the last Dominican stronghold before the capital. Since a Dominican flotilla dominated the coastal road with its cannons, he had to take a longer route to Azua and could not receive supplies from the sea. On April 2, President Manuel Jimenes called upon former President Santana to lead the defense. Azua fell to the Haitians on April 6, and a Dominican counterattack failed. On April 22, Santana defeated the Haitian army personally commanded by Soulouque during the two-day Battle of Las Carreras. The battle opened with a cannon barrage and devolved into hand-to-hand combat, with neither side taking prisoners.

In November 1849, President Báez launched a naval offensive against Haiti. Entire villages along the Haitian coast were plundered and burned, and the crews of captured enemy ships were butchered without regard to age or gender. By late 1854, the Hispaniolan nations were at war again. In November, two Dominican ships captured a Haitian warship and bombarded two Haitian ports.

In November 1855, a force of 30,000 Haitian troops invaded the Dominican Republic along three routes: one from the north, one through the center, and one from the south. The Dominican frontier forces retreated in good order and the Dominican navy prevented the Haitians from receiving supplies by sea. On December 22, Dominican troops defeated the southern column at the Battle of Santomé, killing 695 Haitians, including General Antoine Pierrot. On January 27, 1856, some 8,000 Dominicans defeated 22,000 Haitians at the Battle of Sabana Larga near Dajabón after eight hours of fighting, which came down to hand-to-hand combat. Thousands of Haitian dead or dying were abandoned on the battlefield as their forces retreated back across the border.

===First Republic===

In July 1844, Pedro Santana seized power from the liberal president Francisco del Rosario Sánchez in a military coup after Rosario Sánchez ousted the conservative Tomás Bobadilla from power. Santana inaugurated a military dictatorship with Bobadilla as a member of his junta.

The Dominican Republic&#x27;s first constitution was adopted on November 6, 1844. The state was commonly known as Santo Domingo in English until the early 20th century. It featured a presidential form of government with many liberal tendencies, but it was marred by Article 210, imposed by Santana on the constitutional assembly by force, giving him the privileges of a dictatorship until the war of independence was over. These privileges not only served him to win the war but also allowed him to persecute, execute and drive into exile his political opponents, among which Duarte was the most important. Santana imprisoned and ultimately exiled Duarte to Germany. Santana made the first martyr of the republic when he had María Trinidad Sánchez executed for refusing to name &quot;conspirators&quot; against him.

Santana used the ever-present threat of Haitian invasion as a justification for consolidating dictatorial powers. For the Dominican elite—mostly landowners, merchants and priests—the threat of re-annexation by more populous Haiti was sufficient to seek protection from a foreign power. Offering the deepwater harbor of Samaná bay as bait, over the next two decades, negotiations were made with Britain, France, the United States and Spain to declare a protectorate over the country.

Without adequate roads, the regions of the Dominican Republic developed in isolation from one another. In the south, the economy was dominated by cattle-ranching (particularly in the southeastern savannah) and cutting mahogany and other hardwoods for export. This region retained a semi-feudal character, with little commercial agriculture, the &quot;hacienda&quot; as the dominant social unit, and the majority of the population living at a subsistence level. In the Cibao Valley, the nation&#x27;s richest farmland, peasants supplemented their subsistence crops by growing tobacco for export, mainly to Germany. Tobacco required less land than cattle ranching and was mainly grown by smallholders, who relied on itinerant traders to transport their crops to Puerto Plata and Monte Cristi. Santana antagonized the Cibao farmers, enriching himself and his supporters at their expense by resorting to multiple peso printings that allowed him to buy their crops for a fraction of their value.

In 1848, Santana was forced to resign and was succeeded by his vice-president, Manuel Jimenes. After returning to lead Dominican forces against a new Haitian invasion in 1849, Santana marched on Santo Domingo, deposing Jimenes. At his behest, Congress elected Buenaventura Báez as president. In 1853, Santana was elected president for his second term, forcing Báez into exile. After repulsing the last Haitian invasion, Santana negotiated a treaty leasing a portion of Samaná Peninsula to a U.S. company; popular opposition forced him to abdicate, enabling Báez to return and seize power. With the treasury depleted, Báez printed eighteen million uninsured pesos, purchasing the 1857 tobacco crop with this currency and exporting it for hard cash at immense profit to himself and his followers. The Cibanian tobacco planters, who were ruined when inflation ensued, revolted and formed a new government headed by José Desiderio Valverde and headquartered in Santiago de los Caballeros. In July 1857, General Juan Luis Franco Bidó besieged Santo Domingo. The Cibao-based government declared an amnesty to exiles and Santana returned and managed to replace Franco Bidó in September 1857. After a year of civil war, Santana captured Santo Domingo in June 1858, overthrew both Báez and Valverde and installed himself as president.

==Spanish colony (1861–1865)==
Pedro Santana inherited a bankrupt government on the brink of collapse and initiated negotiations with Queen Isabella II of Spain to have the eastern two-thirds of the island reconverted into a Spanish overseas territory. The U.S. Civil War rendered the United States incapable of enforcing the Monroe Doctrine. In March 1861, Santana officially restored the Dominican Republic to Spain. This move was widely rejected and there were several failed uprisings against Spanish rule. On July 4, 1861, former President Francisco del Rosario Sánchez was captured and executed by Santana after leading a failed invasion of Santo Domingo from Haiti. 

Santana, who had been given the title of Marquess of Las Carreras by Queen Isabella II, thought he could perpetrate a fraud on the Spaniards similar to those he had carried out in the Cibao. When negotiations concluded and Spain agreed on an amortization rate for Dominican pesos, Santana printed 33 million more, so Spain would be forced to provide far more money to him and his associates, to whom he distributed the pesos as gifts. Under the annexation terms, General Santana retained military command of the new Spanish province, answering only to Spain&#x27;s regional commander in Puerto Rico, but it soon became obvious that Spanish authorities planned to deprive him of his power. His associates were removed from military positions, the 33 million pesos he printed were refused for amortization, and he was ultimately deposed in July 1862 and replaced with Felipe Ribero y Lemoine.

By 1863, uprisings had spread throughout the colony, leading to the outbreak of guerrilla warfare. In February, the Spanish authorities declared a state of siege in the territory. In April, the Spanish Army defeated the Dominican forces led by General Lucas de Peña at Cibao. In order to reinforce their position with an auxiliary force to keep public order in the cities, a militia named Volunteers was created in Santo Domingo City, following the example of the militia of the same name previously created in Cuba and Puerto Rico.

===War of Restoration===

On August 16, 1863, fourteen Dominican dissidents led by Santiago Rodríguez crossed the northeastern border into Spanish-held territory and called for the population to rise against the invaders. They defeated a small Spanish detachment, and the insurrection quickly spread to the outskirts of the capital. On September 9, Spanish reinforcements consisting of two battalions arrived in Puerto Plata. The Spanish garrison of Santiago evacuated Fort San Luis on September 13 and marched toward Puerto Plata. During their three-day march, they were attacked by the Dominicans, resulting in 1,200 Spanish troops killed and wounded. Santana returned and led an army mostly composed of mercenaries against the rebels at Cibao.

On September 14, the insurgents established a provisional government in Santiago led by General José Antonio Salcedo, which declared Santana a traitor and ordered that he be shot on sight. Santana&#x27;s march stalled at Monte Plata, where rebel forces under General Gregorio Luperón harassed his troops, depleting their strength. The Dominicans captured Santana&#x27;s entire supply train, along with two Spanish generals and about one hundred Spanish soldiers at Yamasá. Many of Santana&#x27;s troops deserted, and the Spanish authorities refused to send reinforcements. Santana subsequently withdrew to El Seibo.

The Spanish soldiers in the forts of Puerto Plata and Samaná faced deteriorating conditions. The onset of the rainy season brought widespread sickness. Meanwhile, the Dominicans bombarded Puerto Plata. On October 4, 1863, both the Spaniards and Dominicans pillaged the town. A fight ensued, with 600 Spaniards ultimately driving the Dominicans out of the town, aided by the fort&#x27;s cannons. In December, a Spanish expedition was launched along the southern seacoast to expel rebel groups weakened by internal conflicts. The Spanish forces successfully drove the rebels from several towns; however, the capture of Azua proved costly, resulting in significant Spanish casualties over two months of fighting. Ultimately, the rebels retreated into Haiti, executing 35 Spanish prisoners during their withdrawal. The Captain-General of Santo Domingo, José de la Gándara, adopted a strategy of occupying the northern ports to isolate the dissident Dominican government in Santiago from outside support. However, he overlooked his forces&#x27; lack of supplies and poor equipment, as many rifles and cannons were obsolete, and several warships were unseaworthy.

In May 1864, a 6,000-strong Spanish force captured the town of Monte Cristi on the northern coast, which was fortified with forts and trenches. Next, La Gándara attempted to subdue the rebels between Monte Cristi and Santiago, but the Dominicans resorted to hit-and-run tactics and intercepted many supplies intended for La Gándara. The only victory in the campaign was the capture of Monte Cristi, achieved at the cost of heavy casualties, including the wounding of Field Marshal Primo de Rivera. On December 4, 1864, southern forces led by José María Cabral defeated the Spanish in an engagement at Neiba, marking the first time that the Dominicans achieved victory against the Spanish in a conventional battle.

Confined to the major towns, the Spanish Army was unable to defeat the guerillas or contain the insurrection, and suffered heavy losses due to yellow fever; by the end of the occupation, over 12,000 Spanish troops had died from the disease. Spanish colonial authorities encouraged Queen Isabella II to abandon the island, seeing the occupation as a nonsensical waste of troops and money. However, the rebels were in a state of political disarray and proved unable to present a cohesive set of demands.

In October 1864, the first president of the provisional government, Pepillo Salcedo (allied with Báez), was assassinated. He had been deposed by General Gaspar Polanco in September 1864, who, in turn, was deposed by General Antonio Pimentel three months later after a failed attack on the Spanish at Monte Cristi. The rebels formalized their provisional rule by holding a national convention in February 1865, which enacted a new constitution, but the new government exerted little authority over the various regional guerrilla &quot;caudillos&quot;, who were largely independent of one another. Unable to extract concessions from the disorganized rebels, when the American Civil War ended, in March 1865, Queen Isabella annulled the annexation and independence was restored, with the last Spanish troops departing by July.

==Restoration: Second Republic (1865–1916)==
By the time the Spanish departed, most of the main towns lay in ruins and the island was divided among several dozen &quot;caudillos&quot;. José María Cabral controlled most of Barahona and the southwest with the support of Báez&#x27;s mahogany-exporting partners, while cattle rancher Cesáreo Guillermo assembled a coalition of former &quot;Santanista&quot; generals in the southeast, and Gregorio Luperón controlled the north coast.

From the Spanish withdrawal to 1879, there were twenty-one changes of government and at least fifty military uprisings. In the course of these conflicts, two parties emerged. The Partido Rojo (Literally &quot;Red Party&quot;) represented the southern cattle ranching latifundia and mahogany-exporting interests, as well as the artisans and laborers of Santo Domingo, and was dominated by Báez, who continued to seek annexation by a foreign power. The Partido Azul (literally &quot;Blue Party&quot;), led by Luperón, represented the tobacco farmers and merchants of the Cibao and Puerto Plata and was nationalist and liberal in orientation. During these wars, the small and corrupt national army was far outnumbered by militias organized and maintained by local &quot;caudillos&quot; who set themselves up as provincial governors. These militias were filled out by poor farmers or landless plantation workers impressed into service who usually took up banditry when not fighting in revolution.
Within a month of the nationalist victory, Cabral, whose troops were the first to enter Santo Domingo, ousted Pimentel, but a few weeks later General Guillermo led a rebellion in support of Báez, forcing Cabral to resign and allowing Báez to retake the presidency in October. Báez was overthrown by the Cibao farmers under Luperón, leader of the Partido Azul, the following spring, but Luperón&#x27;s allies turned on each other and Cabral reinstalled himself as president in a coup in 1867. After bringing several &quot;Azules&quot; (&quot;Blues&quot;) into his cabinet the &quot;Rojos&quot; (&quot;Reds&quot;) revolted, returning Báez to power. In 1869, Báez negotiated a treaty of annexation with the United States. Supported by U.S. Secretary of State William Seward, who hoped to establish a Navy base at Samaná, in 1871 the treaty was defeated in the United States Senate through the efforts of abolitionist Senator Charles Sumner.

In 1874, the &quot;Rojo&quot; governor of Puerto Plata, Ignacio Maria González Santín, staged a coup in support of an &quot;Azul&quot; rebellion but was deposed by the &quot;Azules&quot; two years later. In February 1876, Ulises Espaillat, backed by Luperón, was named president, but ten months later troops loyal to Báez returned him to power. One year later, a new rebellion allowed González to seize power, only to be deposed by Cesáreo Guillermo in September 1878, who was in turn deposed by Luperón in December 1879. Ruling the country from his hometown of Puerto Plata, enjoying an economic boom due to increased tobacco exports to Germany, Luperón enacted a new constitution setting a two-year presidential term limit and providing for direct elections, suspended the semi-formal system of bribes and initiated construction on the nation&#x27;s first railroad, linking the town of La Vega with the port of Sánchez on Samaná Bay.

The Ten Years&#x27; War in Cuba brought Cuban sugar planters to the country in search of new lands and security from the insurrection that freed their slaves and destroyed their property. Most settled in the southeastern coastal plain, and, with assistance from Luperón&#x27;s government, built the nation&#x27;s first mechanized sugar mills. They were later joined by Italians, Germans, Puerto Ricans and Americans in forming the nucleus of the Dominican sugar bourgeoisie, marrying into prominent families to solidify their social position. Disruptions in global production caused by the Ten Years&#x27; War, the American Civil War and the Franco-Prussian War allowed the Dominican Republic to become a major sugar exporter. Over the following two decades, sugar surpassed tobacco as the leading export, with the former fishing hamlets of San Pedro de Macorís and La Romana transformed into thriving ports. To meet their need for better transportation, over 300 miles of private rail-lines were built by and serving the sugar plantations by 1897.

An 1884 slump in prices led to a wage freeze, and a subsequent labor shortage was filled by migrant workers from the Leeward Islands—the Virgin Islands, St. Kitts and Nevis, Anguilla, and Antigua (referred to by Dominicans as &quot;cocolo&quot;s). These English-speaking blacks were often victims of racism, but many remained in the country, finding work as stevedores and in railroad construction and sugar refineries.

=== Ulises Heureaux and U.S. protectorate ===

Allying with the emerging sugar interests, the dictatorship of General Ulises Heureaux, who was popularly known as Lilís, brought unprecedented stability to the island through an iron-fisted rule that lasted almost two decades. The son of a Haitian father and a mother from St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, Lilís was distinguished by his blackness from most Dominican political leaders, with the exception of Luperón. He served as President 1882–1883, 1887, and 1889–1899, wielding power through a series of puppet presidents when not occupying the office. Incorporating both &quot;Rojos&quot; and &quot;Azules&quot; into his government, he developed an extensive network of spies and informants to crush potential opposition. His government undertook a number of major infrastructure projects, including the electrification of Santo Domingo, the beginning of telephone and telegraph service, the construction of a bridge over the Ozama River, and the completion of a single-track railroad linking Santiago and Puerto Plata, financed by the Amsterdam-based Westendorp Co.

Lilís&#x27;s dictatorship was dependent upon heavy borrowing from European and American banks to enrich himself, stabilize the existing debt, strengthen the bribe system, pay for the army, finance infrastructural development and help set up sugar mills. However, sugar prices underwent a steep decline in the last two decades of the 19th century. When the Westendorp Co. went bankrupt in 1893, he was forced to mortgage the nation&#x27;s customs fees, the main source of government revenues, to a New York financial firm called the San Domingo Improvement Co. (SDIC), which took over its railroad contracts and the claims of its European bondholders in exchange for two loans, one of $1.2 million and the other of £2 million.

As the growing public debt made it impossible to maintain his political machine, Heureaux relied on secret loans from the SDIC, sugar planters and local merchants. In 1897, with his government virtually bankrupt, Lilís printed five million uninsured pesos, known as &quot;papeletas de Lilís&quot;, ruining most Dominican merchants and inspiring a conspiracy that ended in his death. In 1899, when Lilís was assassinated by the Cibao tobacco merchants whom he had been begging for a loan, the national debt was over $35 million, fifteen times the annual budget.
The six years after Lilís&#x27;s death witnessed four revolutions and five different presidents. The Cibao politicians who had conspired against Heureaux—Juan Isidro Jimenes, the nation&#x27;s wealthiest tobacco planter, and General Horacio Vásquez—after being named president and vice-president, quickly fell out over the division of spoils among their supporters, the &quot;Jimenistas&quot; and &quot;Horacistas&quot;.

Troops loyal to Vásquez overthrew Jimenes in 1903, but Vásquez was deposed by Jimenista General Alejandro Woss y Gil, who seized power for himself. The Jimenistas toppled his government, but their leader, Carlos Morales, refused to return power to Jimenes, allying with the Horacistas, and he soon faced a new revolt by his betrayed Jimenista allies. During the revolt, American warships bombarded insurgents in Santo Domingo after they insulted the United States flag and killed a U.S. Navy sailor.

With the nation on the brink of defaulting, France, Germany, Italy and the Netherlands sent warships to Santo Domingo to press the claims of their nationals. In order to preempt military intervention, United States president Theodore Roosevelt introduced the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine, declaring that the United States would assume responsibility for ensuring that the nations of Latin America met their financial obligations.

In January 1905, under this corollary, the United States assumed administration of the Dominican Republic&#x27;s customs. Under the terms of this agreement, a Receiver-General, appointed by the U.S. president, kept 55% of total revenues to pay off foreign claimants, while remitting 45% to the Dominican government. After two years, the nation&#x27;s external debt was reduced from $40 million to $17 million. In 1907, this agreement was converted into a treaty, transferring control over customs receivership to the U.S. Bureau of Insular Affairs and providing a loan of $20 million from a New York bank as payment for outstanding claims, making the United States the Dominican Republic&#x27;s only foreign creditor. In 1905, the Dominican Peso was replaced by the U.S. Dollar.
In 1906, Morales resigned, and Horacista vice-president Ramón Cáceres became president. After suppressing a rebellion in the northwest by Jimenista General Desiderio Arias, his government brought political stability and renewed economic growth, aided by new American investment in the sugar industry.

However, his assassination in 1911, for which Morales and Arias were at least indirectly responsible, once again plunged the republic into chaos. For two months, executive power was held by a civilian junta dominated by the chief of the army, General Alfredo Victoria. The surplus of more than 4 million pesos left by Cáceres was quickly spent to suppress a series of insurrections. He forced Congress to elect his uncle, Eladio Victoria, as president, but the latter was soon replaced by the neutral Archbishop Adolfo Nouel. After four months, Nouel resigned and was succeeded by Horacista Congressman José Bordas Valdez, who aligned with Arias and the Jimenistas to maintain power. 

In 1913, Vásquez returned from exile in Puerto Rico to lead a new rebellion. In June 1914, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson issued an ultimatum for the two sides to end hostilities and agree on a new president, or have the United States impose one. After the provisional presidency of Ramón Báez, Jimenes was elected in October, and soon faced new demands, including the appointment of an American director of public works and financial advisor and the creation of a new military force commanded by U.S. officers. The Dominican Congress rejected these demands and began impeachment proceedings against Jimenes.

The United States occupied Haiti in July 1915, with the implicit threat that the Dominican Republic might be next. Jimenes&#x27;s Minister of War Desiderio Arias staged a coup d&#x27;état in April 1916, providing a pretext for the United States to occupy the Dominican Republic.

==United States occupation (1916–24)==

===Conventional campaign===

United States Marines landed in Santo Domingo on May 5, 1916, and seized Fort San Gerónimo. Jimenes resigned on May 7 rather than comply with U.S. demands for more political and economic control. On May 13, an admiral demanded that Arias, entrenched in Fort Ozama, disband his army and surrender his weapons, but Arias and his supporters chose to leave the city rather than comply. On June 1, following a bombardment, Marines occupied Monte Cristi and Puerto Plata. The Marines faced opposition at the second port from supporters of General Arias and fought their way ashore, capturing Fort San Felipe.

On June 26, a column of Marines under Colonel Joseph H. Pendleton marched from Monte Cristi toward Arias&#x27;s stronghold in Santiago. The following day, the column encountered a strong defensive position on Las Trencheras Ridge. Supported by artillery, the Marines attacked and overran the position. The rebels fell back to a second defensive line but could not hold that either. A week later, the Marines encountered another entrenched rebel force at Guayacanas, where the rebels maintained single-shot fire against the Marines&#x27; automatic weapons before being driven off. On July 5, a peace delegation from Santiago met with the Marines and handed over the city, while General Arias surrendered to the Dominican governor of Santiago. Three Marines were killed and fifteen wounded. The U.S. then extended the occupation to the inland cities of Moca and La Vega.

===Occupation===

The Dominican Congress elected Dr. Francisco Henríquez y Carvajal as president, but in November, after he refused to meet the U.S. demands, Wilson announced the imposition of a U.S. military government, with Rear Admiral Harry Shepard Knapp as Military Governor.

At San Francisco de Macorís, Governor Juan Pérez, a supporter of Arias, refused to recognize the U.S. military government. Using released prisoners, he prepared to defend the old Spanish fort. On November 29, U.S. Marine Lt. Ernest C. Williams, whose detachment was billeted in San Francisco, charged the closing gates of the fort at nightfall with twelve Marines. Eight were shot down; the others, including Williams, forced their way in and seized the old structure. Another Marine detachment seized the police station, and reinforcements soon suppressed the uprising.

The American military government implemented many of the institutional reforms carried out in the United States during the Progressive Era, including reorganization of the tax system, accounting and administration, expansion of primary education, the creation of a nationwide police force to unify the country, and the construction of a national system of roads, including a highway linking Santiago to Santo Domingo.

The military government, unable to win the backing of any prominent Dominican political leaders, imposed strict censorship laws and imprisoned critics of the occupation. In 1920, U.S. authorities enacted a Land Registration Act, which broke up the &quot;terrenos comuneros&quot; and dispossessed thousands of peasants who lacked formal titles to the lands they occupied, while legalizing false titles held by the sugar companies. 

In the southeast, dispossessed peasants formed armed bands, called &quot;gavilleros&quot;, engaging in guerrilla warfare for years in Hato Mayor and El Seibo. At any given time, the Marines faced eight to twelve such bands each composed of several hundred followers. The guerrillas benefited from a superior knowledge of the terrain and the support of the local population, and the Marines relied on superior firepower. However, rivalries between various gavilleros often led them to fight against one another, and even cooperate with occupation authorities. In addition, cultural schisms between the &quot;campesinos&quot; (i.e. rural people, or peasants) and city dwellers prevented the guerrillas from cooperating with the urban middle-class nationalist movement.
In what was referred to as &quot;la danza de los millones&quot;, with the destruction of European sugar-beet farms during World War I, sugar prices rose to their highest level in history, from $5.50 in 1914 to $22.50 per pound in 1920. Dominican sugar exports increased from 122,642 tons in 1916 to 158,803 tons in 1920, earning a record $45.3 million. However, European beet sugar production quickly recovered, which, coupled with the growth of global sugar cane production, glutted the world market, causing prices to plummet to only $2.00 by the end of 1921. This crisis drove many of the local sugar planters into bankruptcy, allowing large U.S. conglomerates to dominate the sugar industry. By 1926, only twenty-one major estates remained, occupying an estimated . Of these, twelve U.S.-owned companies owned more than 81% of this total area. While the foreign planters who had built the sugar industry integrated into Dominican society, these corporations expatriated their profits to the United States. As prices declined, sugar estates increasingly relied on Haitian laborers. This was facilitated by the military government&#x27;s introduction of regulated contract labor, the growth of sugar production in the southwest, near the Haitian border, and a series of strikes by &quot;cocolo&quot; cane cutters organized by the Universal Negro Improvement Association.

===Withdrawal===

In the 1920 United States presidential election Republican candidate Warren Harding criticized the occupation and promised eventual U.S. withdrawal. While Jimenes and Vásquez sought concessions from the United States, the collapse of sugar prices discredited the military government and gave rise to a new nationalist political organization, the Dominican National Union, led by Dr. Henríquez from exile in Santiago de Cuba, Cuba, which demanded unconditional withdrawal. They formed alliances with frustrated nationalists in Puerto Rico and Cuba, as well as critics of the occupation in the United States itself, most notably &quot;The Nation&quot; and the Haiti-San Domingo Independence Society. In May 1922, a Dominican lawyer, Francisco Peynado, went to Washington, D.C. and negotiated what became known as the Hughes–Peynado Plan. It stipulated the immediate establishment of a provisional government pending elections, approval of all laws enacted by the U.S. military government, and the continuation of the 1907 treaty until all the Dominican Republic&#x27;s foreign debts had been settled. On October 1, Juan Bautista Vicini, the son of a wealthy Italian immigrant sugar planter, was named provisional president, and the process of U.S. withdrawal began. 

U.S. forces withdrew on September 18, 1924. The principal legacy of the occupation was the creation of a National Police Force, used by the Marines to help fight against the various guerrillas, and later the main vehicle for the rise of Rafael Trujillo. Hundreds of Dominicans and 144 U.S. Marines were killed during the occupation. (Forty U.S. sailors died separately when a hurricane wrecked their armored cruiser on Santo Domingo&#x27;s rocky shore.)

==The rise and fall of Trujillo: Third Republic (1924–65)==
=== Horacio Vásquez 1924–1930===
The occupation ended in 1924, with a democratically elected government under president Vásquez. The Vásquez administration brought great social and economic prosperity to the country and respected political and civil rights. Rising export commodity prices and government borrowing allowed the funding of public works projects and the expansion and modernization of Santo Domingo.
Though considered to be a relatively principled man, Vásquez had risen amid many years of political infighting. In a move directed against his chief opponent Federico Velasquez, in 1927 Vásquez agreed to have his term extended from four to six years. The change was approved by the Dominican Congress, but was of debatable legality; &quot;its enactment effectively invalidated the constitution of 1924 that Vásquez had previously sworn to uphold.&quot; Vásquez also removed the prohibition against presidential reelection and postulated himself for another term in elections to be held in May 1930. However, his actions had by then led to doubts that the contest could be fair. Furthermore, these elections took place amid economic problems, as the Great Depression had dropped sugar prices to less than one dollar per pound.

In February, a revolution was proclaimed in Santiago by a lawyer named Rafael Estrella Ureña. When the commander of the &quot;Guardia Nacional Dominicana&quot; (the new designation of the armed force created under the Occupation), Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina, ordered his troops to remain in their barracks, the sick and aging Vásquez was forced into exile and Estrella proclaimed provisional president. In May, Trujillo was elected with 95% of the vote, having used the army to harass and intimidate electoral personnel and potential opponents. After his inauguration in August, at his request, the Dominican Congress proclaimed the beginning of the &#x27;Era of Trujillo&#x27;.

===The era of Trujillo 1931–1961===

Trujillo established absolute political control while promoting economic development—from which mainly he and his supporters benefitted—and severe repression of domestic human rights. Trujillo treated his political party, &quot;El Partido Dominicano&quot; (The Dominican Party), as a rubber-stamp for his decisions. The true source of his power was the &quot;Guardia Nacional&quot;—larger, better armed, and more centrally controlled than any military force in the nation&#x27;s history. By disbanding the regional militias, the Marines eliminated the main source of potential opposition, giving the Guard &quot;a virtual monopoly on power&quot;. By 1940, Dominican military spending was 21% of the national budget. At the same time, he developed an elaborate system of espionage agencies. By the late 1950s, there were at least seven categories of intelligence agencies, spying on each other as well as the public. All citizens were required to carry identification cards and good-conduct passes from the secret police.

Obsessed with adulation, Trujillo promoted an extravagant cult of personality. When a hurricane struck Santo Domingo in 1930, killing 8,000 people, he rebuilt the city and renamed it &quot;Ciudad Trujillo&quot;: &quot;Trujillo City&quot;; he also renamed the country&#x27;s and the Caribbean&#x27;s highest mountain, Pico Duarte (Duarte Peak), &quot;Pico Trujillo&quot;. Over 1,800 statues of Trujillo were built, and all public works projects were required to have a plaque with the inscription &quot;Era of Trujillo, Benefactor of the Fatherland&quot;.

As sugar estates turned to Haiti for seasonal migrant labor, increasing numbers settled in the Dominican Republic permanently. The census of 1920, conducted by the U.S. occupation government, gave a total of 28,258 Haitians living in the country; by 1935 there were 52,657. In October 1937, Trujillo ordered the massacre of an estimated 17,000 to 35,000 Haitian men, women, and children living in the border region of the Dominican Republic. Over the course of five days, Dominican troops killed Haitians with guns, machetes, clubs, and knives. The massacre was the result of a new policy which Trujillo called the &#x27;Dominicanisation of the frontier&#x27;. Place names along the border were changed from Creole and French to Spanish, the practice of Voodoo was outlawed, quotas were imposed on the percentage of foreign workers that companies could hire, and a law was passed preventing Haitian workers from remaining after the sugar harvest.

Although Trujillo sought to emulate Generalissimo Francisco Franco, he welcomed Spanish Republican refugees following the Spanish Civil War. During the Holocaust in the Second World War, the Dominican Republic took in many Jews fleeing Hitler who had been refused entry by other countries. The Jews settled in Sosua. These decisions arose from a policy of &quot;blanquismo&quot;, closely connected with anti-Haitian xenophobia, which sought to add more light-skinned individuals to the Dominican population by promoting immigration from Europe. As part of the Good Neighbor policy, in 1940, the U.S. State Department signed a treaty with Trujillo relinquishing control over the nation&#x27;s customs.

When the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor, Trujillo followed the United States in declaring war on the Axis powers, although the Dominican Republic did not have any participation in the war. Nazi submarines operating in the Caribbean torpedoed and sank two Dominican merchant vessels that Trujillo had named after himself—the steamers &quot;San Rafael&quot; and &quot;Presidente Trujillo&quot;, killing twenty-six Dominican sailors. Nazi submarines also destroyed four Dominican schooners. After the war, Trujillo sought military aid from the United States but was denied. Trujillo decided to establish his own arms factory. This move allowed the Dominican Republic to become self-sufficient in producing firearms. In the 1950s, Trujillo&#x27;s air force had 156 aircraft, including fighters, B-17 bombers, and B-26 Marauder bombers. His navy comprised two destroyers and eight frigates. During the Cold War, he maintained close ties to the United States, declaring himself the world&#x27;s &quot;Number One Anticommunist&quot; and becoming the first Latin American President to sign a Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement with the United States.

Trujillo and his family established a near-monopoly over the national economy. By the time of his death, he had accumulated a fortune of around $800 million ($8.2 billion in today&#x27;s money); he and his family owned 50–60% of the arable land, some , and Trujillo-owned businesses accounted for 80% of the commercial activity in the capital. He exploited nationalist sentiment to purchase most of the nation&#x27;s sugar plantations and refineries from U.S. corporations; operated monopolies on salt, rice, milk, cement, tobacco, coffee, and insurance; owned two large banks, several hotels, port facilities, an airline and shipping line; deducted 10% of all public employees&#x27; salaries (ostensibly for his party); and received a portion of prostitution revenues.

World War II brought increased demand for Dominican exports, and the 1940s and early 1950s witnessed economic growth and considerable expansion of the national infrastructure. During this period, the capital city was transformed from merely an administrative center to the national center of shipping and industry, although &quot;it was hardly coincidental that new roads often led to Trujillo&#x27;s plantations and factories, and new harbors benefited Trujillo&#x27;s shipping and export enterprises.&quot; Mismanagement and corruption resulted in major economic problems. By the end of the 1950s, the economy was deteriorating because of a combination of overspending on a festival to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the regime, overspending to purchase privately owned sugar mills and electricity plants, and a decision to make a major investment in state sugar production that proved economically unsuccessful.

On June 14, 1959, Dominican exiles, sponsored by the Cuban government, launched an invasion of the Dominican Republic from Cuba, landing by plane at Constanza, where they were quickly defeated by the Anti-Communist Foreign Legion of the Caribbean. A week later, another group of invaders in two yachts were intercepted on the north coast, where Trujillo&#x27;s planes killed most of the invaders. A few survivors managed to swim to the shore and escape into the forest, but the military employed napalm to get them out. Of a count of 224 invaders, 217 were killed and seven captured. The leaders of the invasion were taken aboard a Dominican Air Force plane and then pushed out in mid-air, falling to their deaths. The invasion force consisted of Dominicans, Cubans, Venezuelans, Spaniards, Guatemalans, and Americans. In October 1960, Trujillo supported 1,000 Cuban insurgents in the Escambray Rebellion, but they were defeated by the Cuban government.

In 1957, Trujillo created S.I.M. (Military Intelligence Service), a secret police and death squad, headed by Johnny Abbes García, who briefly operated in Cuba, Mexico, Guatemala, New York, Costa Rica, and Venezuela. On June 24, 1960, as Venezuelan president Rómulo Betancourt was en route to preside over a military parade in Caracas, S.I.M. agents detonated nearly 30 kg of explosives packed into two suitcases within a parked car nearby; Betancourt was injured, and Colonel Ramón Armas Perez, the chauffeur, and a bystander were killed. Investigation revealed that the ammonium nitrate bomb had been assembled in Ciudad Trujillo and that the operation was orchestrated by Abbes. In August 1960, the Organization of American States (OAS) imposed economic sanctions against the Dominican Republic as a result of Trujillo&#x27;s complicity in the nearly successful assassination attempt.

The United States broke diplomatic relations with the Dominican Republic on August 26, 1960, and in January 1961 suspended the export of trucks, parts, crude oil, gasoline and other petroleum products. U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower also took advantage of OAS sanctions to cut drastically purchases of Dominican sugar. This action ultimately cost the Dominican Republic almost $22,000,000 in lost revenues at a time when its economy was in a rapid decline. Trujillo threatened to align with the Communist world in response to U.S. and Latin American rejection of his regime. La Voz Dominicana and Radio Caribe began attacking the U.S. in Marxian terms, and the Dominican Communist Party was legalized. The United States government enlisted the CIA to devise a plan to kill Trujillo.

A group of Dominican dissidents killed Trujillo in a car chase on the way to his country villa near San Cristóbal on May 30, 1961. The group, led by General Juan Tomás Díaz Quezada, fired nearly thirty bullets into Trujillo&#x27;s blue 1957 Chevrolet Bel Air. Trujillo&#x27;s chauffeur attempted to return fire with a machine gun. Badly wounded, Trujillo exited the car, searching for the assassins, and was shot dead on the spot. The sanctions remained in force after Trujillo&#x27;s assassination. His son Ramfis took charge and rounded up the conspirators, who were executed. Among the victims was General René Román Fernández, secretary of the armed forces and an in-law of Trujillo, who was tortured in the electric chair before being executed with a submachine gun.

In November 1961, the military plot of the Rebellion of the Pilots forced the Trujillo family into exile, fleeing to France, and the heretofore puppet-president Joaquín Balaguer assumed effective power.

===The post-Trujillo instability 1961–1965===
At the insistence of the United States, Balaguer was forced to share power with a seven-member Council of State, established on January 1, 1962, and including moderate members of the opposition. OAS sanctions were lifted January 4, and, after an attempted coup, Balaguer resigned and went into exile on January 16. The reorganized Council of State, under President Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly headed the Dominican government until elections could be held. These elections, in December 1962, were won by Juan Bosch, a scholar and poet who had founded the opposition &quot;Partido Revolucionario Dominicano&quot; (Dominican Revolutionary Party, or PRD) in exile, during the Trujillo years. His leftist policies, including land redistribution, nationalization of certain foreign holdings, and attempts to bring the military under civilian control, antagonized the military officer corps, the Catholic hierarchy, and the upper-class, who feared &quot;another Cuba&quot;.

In September 1963, Bosch was overthrown by a right-wing military coup led by Colonel Elías Wessin and was replaced by a three-man military junta. Bosch went into exile to Puerto Rico. Afterwards, a supposedly civilian triumvirate established a de facto dictatorship.

==Dominican Civil War and second United States occupation 1965–66==
On April 16, 1965, growing dissatisfaction generated another military rebellion on April 24, 1965, that demanded Bosch&#x27;s restoration. The insurgents, reformist officers and civilian combatants loyal to Bosch commanded by Colonel Francisco Caamaño, and who called themselves the Constitutionalists, staged a coup, seizing the national palace. Immediately, conservative military forces, led by Wessin and calling themselves Loyalists, struck back, strafing the rebel-held national palace with four World War II–vintage P-51 Mustangs, losing one to ground machine-gun fire.

On April 27, Colonel Caamaño ordered his troops to cross the Duarte Bridge, where they defeated General Wessin&#x27;s tanks attempting to cross from San Isidro. Meanwhile, rebels took control of downtown Santo Domingo, seizing the Ozama Fortress and an arms cache. In the western residential areas, rebel paramilitary groups harassed U.S. citizens at a hotel, lining them up outside and firing shots over their heads.

On April 28, the anti-Bosch army elements requested U.S. military intervention and U.S. forces landed, ostensibly to protect U.S. citizens and to evacuate U.S. and other foreign nationals. The first U.S. casualty occurred when a Dominican sniper killed a Marine near the U.S. embassy. U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson, convinced of the defeat of the Loyalist forces and fearing the creation of &quot;a second Cuba&quot; on America&#x27;s doorstep, ordered U.S. forces to restore order. In what was initially known as Operation Power Pack, 27,677 U.S. troops were ultimately ordered to the Dominican Republic.

Denied a military victory, the Constitutionalist rebels quickly had a Constitutionalist congress elect Caamaño president of the country. U.S. officials countered by backing General Antonio Imbert. On May 7, Imbert was sworn in as president of the Government of National Reconstruction. The next step in the stabilization process, as envisioned by Washington and the OAS, was to arrange an agreement between President Caamaño and President Imbert to form a provisional government committed to early elections. However, Caamaño refused to meet with Imbert until several of the Loyalist officers, including Wessin y Wessin, were made to leave the country.

The American forces attempted to jam Radio Santo Domingo, which the Constitutionalist rebels were using to broadcast messages inciting nationwide rebellion. Despite jamming operations and attacks on relay sites, the rebel broadcasts persisted. On May 13, Imbert launched an eight-day offensive to eliminate rebel resistance in the northern sector. He also directed the Dominican Air Force to target Radio Santo Domingo and its primary transmitter sites near the Peynado Bridge, north of the city. On May 14, Dominican special forces attacked and destroyed the alternate studio and transmitter site north of the Duarte Bridge. These collective actions managed to weaken Radio Santo Domingo to the point that it could no longer broadcast beyond the capital. Alongside this, the Americans realized the significant challenge of effectively conducting jamming operations against a robust commercial broadcasting complex, especially using military jammers designed for military frequencies.

Imbert&#x27;s forces captured Radio Santo Domingo along with the northern part of the capital, destroying buildings and killing civilians. A cease-fire was negotiated by May 21, marking the beginning of neutrality for U.S. forces. At this time, 18 Americans had been killed in action and 117 wounded.

By May 14, the Americans had established a &quot;safety corridor&quot; connecting the San Isidro Air Base and the &quot;Duarte&quot; Bridge to the Embajador Hotel and United States Embassy in the center of Santo Domingo, essentially sealing off the Constitutionalist area of Santo Domingo. Roadblocks were established and patrols ran continuously. Some 6,500 people from many nations were evacuated to safety. In addition, the US forces airlifted in relief supplies for Dominican nationals.
By mid-May, a majority of the OAS voted for Operation &quot;Push Ahead&quot;, the reduction of United States forces and their replacement by an Inter-American Peace Force (IAPF). The Inter-American Peace Force was formally established on May 23. The following troops were sent by each country: Brazil – 1,130, Honduras – 250, Paraguay – 184, Nicaragua – 160, Costa Rica – 21 military police, and El Salvador – 3 staff officers. The first contingent to arrive was a rifle company from Honduras which was soon backed by detachments from Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Nicaragua. Brazil provided the largest unit, a reinforced infantry battalion. Brazilian General Hugo Panasco Alvim assumed command of the OAS ground forces, and on May 26 the U.S. forces began to withdraw.

On June 15, the Constitutionalists—supported by heavy machine guns, mortars, and a few light 37mm gun tanks—attacked American positions. The ensuing two days of fighting in Ciudad Nueva resulted in 5 U.S. soldiers killed and 36 wounded. The Brazilians, who had orders to remain on the defensive, suffered five wounded. The Constitutionalists lost 67 killed and 165 wounded. A truce was declared on August 31, 1965. However, a U.S. paratrooper in the corridor was killed by a rifle grenade fired from the rebel zone on the night of September 2. Most American troops left shortly afterwards as policing and peacekeeping operations were turned over to Brazilian troops, but some U.S. military presence remained until September 1966. On September 14, two members of a support unit attached to the 82nd were ambushed by civilians riding motorcycles. Both were shot in the back. One G.I. died instantly; the other died at a hospital.

American and OAS peacekeeping forces departed by September 21, 1966. A total of 48 American soldiers and marines died, 27 in action (nine marines and 18 soldiers); 189 were wounded in action, as were six Brazilians and five Paraguayans. Between 2,850 and 4,275 Dominicans, mostly civilians, were killed, and 3,000 were wounded during the civil war.

==Fourth Republic 1966–present==
=== Balaguer&#x27;s second Presidency 1966–1978 ===

In June 1966, Joaquín Balaguer, leader of the Reformist Party (which later became the Social Christian Reformist Party (PRSC)), was elected and then re-elected to office in May 1970 and May 1974, both times after the major opposition parties withdrew late in the campaign because of the high degree of violence by pro-government groups. On November 28, 1966, a constitution was created, signed, and put into effect. The constitution stated that the president was elected to a four-year term. If there was a close election there would be a second round of voting to decide the winner. The voting age was eighteen, but married people under eighteen could also vote.
On one hand, Balaguer was considered to be a &quot;caudillo&quot; who led a regime of terror where 11,000 victims were either tortured or forcibly disappeared and killed. However, Balaguer was also considered to be a major reformer who was instrumental in the liberalization of the Dominican government. During his time as President of the Dominican Republic, the country saw major changes such as legalized political activities, surprise army promotions and demotions, promoting health and education improvements and the instituting of modest land reforms.
Balaguer led the Dominican Republic through a thorough economic restructuring, based on opening the country to foreign investment while protecting state-owned industries and certain private interests. This distorted, dependent development model produced uneven results. For most of Balaguer&#x27;s first nine years in office the country experienced high growth rates (e.g., an average GDP growth rate of 9.4% between 1970 and 1975), to the extent that people talked about the &quot;Dominican miracle&quot;. Foreign, mostly U.S. investment, as well as foreign aid, flowed into the country. Sugar, then the country&#x27;s main export product, enjoyed good prices in the international market, and tourism grew tremendously. As part of Balaguer&#x27;s land reform policies, land was dished out to peasants among the country&#x27;s rural population.

However, this excellent macroeconomic performance was not accompanied by an equitable distribution of wealth in some other areas of the country. While a group of new millionaires flourished during Balaguer&#x27;s administrations, some of the poor simply became poorer. Moreover, some of the poor were commonly the target of state repression, and their socioeconomic claims were labeled &#x27;communist&#x27; and dealt with accordingly by the state security apparatus. In the May 1978 election, Balaguer was defeated in his bid for a fourth successive term by Antonio Guzmán Fernández of the PRD. Balaguer then ordered troops to storm the election centre and destroy ballot boxes, declaring himself the victor. U.S. President Jimmy Carter refused to recognize Balaguer&#x27;s claim, and, faced with the loss of foreign aid, Balaguer stepped down.

===Guzmán / Blanco interregnum 1978–1986===

Guzmán&#x27;s inauguration on August 16 marked the country&#x27;s first peaceful transfer of power from one freely elected president to another.

Hurricane David hit the Dominican Republic in August 1979, which caused over $1 billion in damage.

By the late 1970s, economic expansion slowed considerably as sugar prices declined and oil prices rose. Rising inflation and unemployment diminished support for the government and helped trigger a wave of mass emigration from the Dominican Republic to New York, coming on the heels of the similar migration of Puerto Ricans in the preceding decades.

Guzmán committed suicide on July 5, 1982, a month before he would have left office. He was confronted with evidence of his daughter Sonia Guzmán&#x27;s husband&#x27;s corruption using her father&#x27;s position for monetary gain. Guzmán was known as a serious man who never stole money. After being confronted with this, he entered his bathroom and shot himself.

Elections were again held in 1982. Salvador Jorge Blanco of the Dominican Revolutionary Party defeated Bosch and a resurgent Balaguer.

===Balaguer&#x27;s third Presidency 1986–1996===

Balaguer completed his return to power in 1986 when he won the Presidency again and remained in office for the next ten years. Elections in 1990 were marked by violence and suspected electoral fraud. The 1994 election too saw widespread pre-election violence, often aimed at intimidating members of the opposition. Balaguer won in 1994 but most observers felt the election had been stolen. Under pressure from the United States, Balaguer agreed to hold new elections in 1996. He himself would not run.

===Fernández: First administration 1996–2000===
In 1996, U.S.-raised Leonel Fernández Reyna of Bosch&#x27;s &quot;Partido de la Liberación Dominicana&quot; (Dominican Liberation Party) secured more than 51% of the vote, through an alliance with Balaguer. The first item on the president&#x27;s agenda was the partial sale of some state-owned enterprises. Fernández was praised for ending decades of isolationism and improving ties with other Caribbean countries, but he was criticized for not fighting corruption or alleviating the poverty that affected 60% of the population.

===Mejía&#x27;s administration 2000–2004===
In May 2000 the center-left Hipólito Mejía of the PRD was elected president amid popular discontent over power outages in the recently privatized electric industry. His presidency saw major inflation and instability of the peso in 2003 because of the bankruptcy of three major commercial banks in the country due to the bad policies of the principal managers. During his remaining time as president, he took action to save most savers of the closed banks, avoiding a major crisis. The relatively stable currency fell from about 16 Dominican pesos to 1 United States dollar to about 60 DOP to US$1 and was in the 40s to the dollar when he left office in August 2004. In the May 2004 presidential elections, he was defeated by former president Leonel Fernández.

===Fernández: Second administration 2004–2012===
Fernández instituted austerity measures to deflate the peso and rescue the country from its economic crisis, and in the first half of 2006, the economy grew 11.7%. The peso is currently (2019) at the exchange rate of c. 52 DOP to US$1.

Over the last three decades, remittances (&quot;remesas&quot;) from Dominicans living abroad, mainly in the United States, have become increasingly important to the economy. From 1990 to 2000, the Dominican population of the U.S. doubled in size, from 520,121 in 1990 to 1,041,910, two-thirds of whom were born in the Dominican Republic itself. More than half of all Dominican Americans live in New York City, with the largest concentration in the neighborhood of Washington Heights in northern Manhattan. Over the past decade, the Dominican Republic has become the largest source of immigration to New York City, and today the metropolitan area of New York has a larger Dominican population than any city except Santo Domingo. Dominican communities have also developed in New Jersey (particularly Paterson), Miami, Boston, Philadelphia, Providence, Rhode Island, and Lawrence, Massachusetts. In addition, tens of thousands of Dominicans and their descendants live in Puerto Rico. Many Dominicans arrive in Puerto Rico illegally by sea across the Mona Passage, some staying and some moving on to the mainland U.S. (See Dominican immigration to Puerto Rico.) Dominicans living abroad sent an estimated $3 billion in remittances to relatives at home, in 2006. In 1997, a new law took effect, allowing Dominicans living abroad to retain their citizenship and vote in presidential elections. President Fernández, who grew up in New York, was the principal beneficiary of this law.

The Dominican Republic was involved in the US-led coalition in Iraq, as part of the Spain-led Latin-American Plus Ultra Brigade. But in 2004, the nation pulled its 300 or so troops out of Iraq.

===Danilo Medina&#x27;s administration 2012–2020===
Danilo Medina began his tenure with a series of controversial tax reforms so as to deal with the government&#x27;s troublesome fiscal situation encountered by the new administration. In 2012, he had won presidency as the candidate of ruling Dominican Liberation Party (PLD).
In 2016, President Medina won re-election, defeating the main opposition candidate businessman Luis Abinader, with a wide margin.

=== Luis Abinader 2020–present ===
In 2020 Luis Abinader, the presidential candidate for the opposition Modern Revolutionary Party (PRM) won the election and he became the new president, ending the 16-year rule of PLD since 2004. In May 2024, President Luis Abinader won a second term in elections. Especially his tough attitude towards migration from neighbouring Haiti was popular among voters.

==See also==
*Conchoprimo
*History of Haiti
*History of Latin America
*History of North America
*History of the Americas
*History of the Caribbean
*List of presidents of the Dominican Republic
*Politics of the Dominican Republic
*Spanish colonization of the Americas
*Timeline of Santo Domingo (city)

== Notes ==
==References==
===Bibliography===
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Betances, Emelio. &quot;State and society in the Dominican Republic&quot; (Routledge, 2018).
* Derby, Robin. &quot;The Dictator&#x27;s Seduction: Politics and the Popular Imagination in the Era of Trujillo&quot;. Durham: Duke University Press 2008.
* Padilla Angulo, Fernando J. &quot;Volunteers of the Empire. War, Identity, and Spanish Imperialism, 1855-1898&quot; (Bloomsbury Academic, 2023).
* Pons, Frank Moya. &quot;The Dominican Republic: a national history&quot; (Markus Wiener Publishers, 2010).
* Tillman, Ellen D. &quot;Dollar Diplomacy by Force: Nation-Building and Resistance in the Dominican Republic&quot; (UNC Press Books, 2016).
* Turits, Richard Lee. &quot;Foundations of Despotism: Peasants, the Trujillo Regime, and Modernity in Dominican History&quot;. Stanford: Stanford University Press 2003.
* Wiarda, Howard J., and Michael J. Kryzanek. &quot;The Dominican Republic: A Caribbean Crucible.&quot; (Routledge, 2019).
* &quot;The Dominican Republic,&quot; &quot;History Today&quot; (Nov 1965) 15#11 pp 770–779, diplomatic history 1482–1965.

==External links==
*Map of the Dominican Republic from 1910
*Betances, Emelio. &quot;The Dominican Grassroots Movement and the Organized Left, 1978–1986&quot;. Science &amp; Society 79.3 (July 2015), 388–413.
*&quot;The Political Force of Images&quot;, &quot;Vistas: Visual Culture in Spanish America&quot;, 1520–1820.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q125775" start="13" end="46" title="History of the Dominican Republic" label="history of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="66" end="86" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="104" end="120" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="163" end="177" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="198" end="207" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="220" end="225" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="237" end="243" title="Arawak" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="290" end="307" title="pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932558" start="326" end="340" title="Chiefdoms of Hispaniola" label="five chiefdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="571" end="581" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q122950203" start="728" end="742" title="Taíno genocide" label="Taíno genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044295" start="898" end="918" title="Demographics of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican population"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="951" end="969" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919465" start="983" end="1017" title="Captaincy General of Santo Domingo" label="Captaincy General of Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5502314" start="1054" end="1068" title="Era de Francia" label="Era de Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681694" start="1184" end="1209" title="Republic of Spanish Haiti" label="Republic of Spanish Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q95408244" start="1257" end="1274" title="Republic of Haiti (1820–1849)" label="Republic of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545918" start="1371" end="1395" title="First Dominican Republic" label="First Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933273" start="1457" end="1476" title="Annexation of the Dominican Republic to Spain" label="annexation by Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123742" start="1512" end="1537" title="Second Dominican Republic" label="Second Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744619" start="1589" end="1626" title="United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1916–1924)" label="first occupation by the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547013" start="1683" end="1707" title="Third Dominican Republic" label="Third Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="1925" end="1933" title="caudillo" label="caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="1985" end="2010" title="Personalist dictator" label="personalised dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291505" start="2358" end="2378" title="José Antonio Salcedo" label="José Antonio Salcedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q722921" start="2388" end="2403" title="Ulises Heureaux" label="Ulises Heureaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q887594" start="2417" end="2430" title="Ramón Cáceres" label="Ramón Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="2496" end="2511" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q439980" start="2614" end="2624" title="Juan Bosch (politician)" label="Juan Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q110970039" start="2703" end="2736" title="1963 Dominican coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="military coup d&amp;#x27;état in 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q955457" start="2742" end="2761" title="Dominican Civil War" label="Dominican Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2871" end="2880" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q147989" start="2912" end="2928" title="Joaquín Balaguer" label="Joaquín Balaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290789" start="2972" end="2997" title="1966 Dominican Republic general election" label="the presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="3342" end="3351" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q626753" start="3542" end="3559" title="Arawakan languages" label="Arawakan-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="3577" end="3582" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="3803" end="3810" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="4005" end="4024" title="Pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6159468" start="4205" end="4212" title="Jaragua, Hispaniola" label="Jaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="4265" end="4272" title="cacique" label="cacique"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="4537" end="4557" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="4597" end="4609" title="Voyages of Christopher Columbus" label="first voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q741356" start="4629" end="4640" title="Guacanagarí" label="Guacanagarí"/>
<link wikidata="Q107900" start="5184" end="5195" title="Santa María (ship)" label="Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798978" start="5293" end="5303" title="La Navidad" label="La Navidad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5550" end="5557" title="Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean#Ciguayo" label="Ciguayo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5567" end="5574" title="Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean#Macorix" label="Macorix"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="5873" end="5880" title="Cacique" label="Cacique"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5896" end="5912" title="Chiefdoms of Hispaniola#Chiefdom of Maguana" label="Maguana Chiefdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543031" start="6245" end="6255" title="La Isabela" label="La Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470834" start="6319" end="6332" title="Ciudad Colonial (Santo Domingo)" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q122950203" start="6644" end="6658" title="Taíno genocide" label="Taíno genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q545606" start="6832" end="6854" title="Francisco de Bobadilla" label="Francisco de Bobadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="6985" end="7002" title="Nicolás de Ovando" label="Nicolás de Ovando"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="7369" end="7379" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="7390" end="7404" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344189" start="7464" end="7474" title="Enriquillo" label="Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="7737" end="7748" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="7753" end="7761" title="Isabella of Castille" label="Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922359" start="7945" end="7958" title="Black Ladinos" label="Black Ladinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="8047" end="8058" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2400549" start="8109" end="8141" title="Royal Audiencia of Santo Domingo" label="Royal Audiencia of Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="8151" end="8161" title="Sugar cane" label="Sugar cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="8200" end="8214" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695783" start="8599" end="8613" title="Real Audiencia" label="Real Audiencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="8812" end="8825" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="8862" end="8869" title="Muslims" label="Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q217397" start="8877" end="8882" title="Wolof people" label="Wolof"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="8945" end="8956" title="Diego Colon" label="Diego Colon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="8965" end="8985" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q445485" start="9077" end="9083" title="maroons" label="maroon"/>
<link wikidata="Q445485" start="9469" end="9477" title="maroon (people)" label="cimarrón"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="10006" end="10019" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="10268" end="10278" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="10310" end="10316" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="10364" end="10375" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q702252" start="10446" end="10452" title="flota system" label="flotas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42763" start="10564" end="10590" title="Santiago de los Caballeros" label="Santiago de los Caballeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="10595" end="10616" title="Concepción de la Vega" label="Concepción de la Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="10882" end="10888" title="New Spain" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="10893" end="10897" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758553" start="11350" end="11360" title="contraband" label="contraband"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="11483" end="11496" title="Francis Drake" label="Francis Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086874" start="11605" end="11624" title="Christopher Newport" label="Christopher Newport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11766" end="11799" title="European wars of religion#Low Countries" label="rebellion of their Dutch subjects"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385654" start="12170" end="12182" title="Spanish Main" label="Spanish Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q16027301" start="12637" end="12660" title="Devastaciones de Osorio" label="Devastaciones de Osorio"/>
<link wikidata="Q850220" start="13322" end="13331" title="buccaneer" label="buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q208345" start="13424" end="13431" title="Tortuga (Haiti)" label="Tortuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q164393" start="13677" end="13694" title="Treaty of Ryswick" label="Treaty of Ryswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="13706" end="13721" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q656629" start="13774" end="13790" title="Sir William Penn" label="Sir William Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510378" start="13930" end="13959" title="Siege of Santo Domingo (1655)" label="attempt to capture the island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148521" start="14017" end="14024" title="Colony of Santiago" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509344" start="14221" end="14242" title="power projection" label="forward military base"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="14361" end="14369" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q58389" start="14609" end="14625" title="House of Bourbon" label="House of Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65968" start="14639" end="14656" title="House of Habsburg" label="House of Habsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="15081" end="15095" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="15168" end="15180" title="Cibao Valley" label="Cibao Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q861551" start="15534" end="15548" title="Saint-Domingue" label="Saint-Domingue"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="15849" end="15867" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q667080" start="16367" end="16382" title="Peace of Basel" label="Treaty of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205783" start="16429" end="16449" title="Toussaint Louverture" label="Toussaint Louverture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510383" start="17141" end="17172" title="Siege of Santo Domingo (1805)" label="invaded, reaching Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="17260" end="17265" title="Cibao" label="Cibao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241374" start="17313" end="17317" title="Moca, Dominican Republic" label="Moca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2889578" start="17491" end="17513" title="Battle of Palo Hincado" label="Battle of Palo Hincado"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="17554" end="17566" title="Royal Navy" label="British Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q31389" start="17771" end="17782" title="España Boba" label="España Boba"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="18045" end="18050" title="taino" label="taino"/>
<link wikidata="Q244504" start="18124" end="18132" title="Catalans" label="Catalans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031141" start="18137" end="18153" title="Canary Islanders" label="Canary Islanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963507" start="18508" end="18529" title="José Núñez de Cáceres" label="José Núñez de Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691908" start="18553" end="18564" title="Age of Revolution" label="Revolutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681694" start="18689" end="18702" title="Republic of Spanish Haiti" label="Spanish Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="18937" end="18950" title="Gran Colombia" label="Gran Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q449421" start="18987" end="19004" title="Jean-Pierre Boyer" label="Jean-Pierre Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q319771" start="19564" end="19576" title="cockfighting" label="cockfighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="20184" end="20199" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="20388" end="20395" title="Holy See" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883867" start="20397" end="20428" title="Universidad Santo Tomás de Aquino" label="Santo Domingo&amp;#x27;s university"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="20572" end="20578" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q188122" start="21580" end="21597" title="Juan Pablo Duarte" label="Juan Pablo Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173864" start="21790" end="21803" title="La Trinitaria (Dominican Republic)" label="La Trinitaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q59885" start="21882" end="21900" title="Ramón Matías Mella" label="Ramón Matías Mella"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397833" start="21906" end="21935" title="Francisco del Rosario Sánchez" label="Francisco del Rosario Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q605428" start="22124" end="22146" title="Charles Rivière-Hérard" label="Charles Rivière-Hérard"/>
<link wikidata="Q330837" start="22239" end="22256" title="Buenaventura Báez" label="Buenaventura Báez"/>
<link wikidata="Q794239" start="22261" end="22265" title="Azua Province" label="Azua"/>
<link wikidata="Q742110" start="22302" end="22327" title="National Assembly of Haïti" label="Haitian National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q887185" start="22621" end="22634" title="Pedro Santana" label="Pedro Santana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774831" start="22666" end="22674" title="El Seibo" label="El Seibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q117280" start="22707" end="22711" title="peon" label="peon"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="22960" end="22968" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q189418" start="22989" end="22999" title="brigantine" label="brigantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q255546" start="23599" end="23607" title="vanguard" label="vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414906" start="23683" end="23700" title="letters of marque" label="letters of marque"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="23857" end="23867" title="privateers" label="privateers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871539" start="25214" end="25236" title="Battle of Las Carreras" label="Battle of Las Carreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q23640829" start="26104" end="26121" title="Battle of Santomé" label="Battle of Santomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247448" start="26255" end="26277" title="Battle of Sabana Larga" label="Battle of Sabana Larga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969407" start="26283" end="26290" title="Dajabón" label="Dajabón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530964" start="26667" end="26682" title="Tomás Bobadilla" label="Tomás Bobadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164250" start="26817" end="26829" title="Constitution of the Dominican Republic" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439047" start="27174" end="27193" title="Dominican War of Independence" label="war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296473" start="27506" end="27528" title="María Trinidad Sánchez" label="María Trinidad Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345203" start="27869" end="27882" title="Power (international relations)" label="foreign power"/>
<link wikidata="Q579950" start="27917" end="27923" title="Samaná (town)" label="Samaná"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="28433" end="28441" title="hacienda" label="hacienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="28550" end="28562" title="Cibao Valley" label="Cibao Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="28657" end="28664" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q988413" start="28842" end="28854" title="San Felipe de Puerto Plata" label="Puerto Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130701" start="28859" end="28871" title="San Fernando de Monte Cristi" label="Monte Cristi"/>
<link wikidata="Q880165" start="29153" end="29167" title="Manuel Jimenes" label="Manuel Jimenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q330837" start="29334" end="29351" title="Buenaventura Báez" label="Buenaventura Báez"/>
<link wikidata="Q887625" start="29986" end="30009" title="José Desiderio Valverde" label="José Desiderio Valverde"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="30541" end="30561" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Isabella II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="30658" end="30672" title="American Civil War" label="U.S. Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q181026" start="30727" end="30742" title="Monroe Doctrine" label="Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933273" start="30778" end="30818" title="Annexation of the Dominican Republic to Spain" label="restored the Dominican Republic to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772551" start="31117" end="31141" title="Marquess of Las Carreras" label="Marquess of Las Carreras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5858401" start="31942" end="31965" title="Felipe Ribero y Lemoine" label="Felipe Ribero y Lemoine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836680" start="34484" end="34488" title="Azua, Dominican Republic" label="Azua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130701" start="35089" end="35101" title="Monte Cristi, Dominican Republic" label="Monte Cristi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="35493" end="35506" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107258" start="35627" end="35632" title="Neiba" label="Neiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q154874" start="35884" end="35896" title="yellow fever" label="yellow fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291505" start="36312" end="36327" title="José Antonio Salcedo" label="Pepillo Salcedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16303353" start="36397" end="36411" title="Gaspar Polanco" label="Gaspar Polanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="36778" end="36786" title="caudillo" label="caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293202" start="37254" end="37271" title="José María Cabral" label="José María Cabral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137551" start="37291" end="37299" title="Barahona Province" label="Barahona"/>
<link wikidata="Q887829" start="37400" end="37417" title="Cesáreo Guillermo" label="Cesáreo Guillermo"/>
<link wikidata="Q888631" start="37504" end="37520" title="Gregorio Luperón" label="Gregorio Luperón"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980741" start="37729" end="37741" title="Red Party (Dominican Republic)" label="Partido Rojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q428382" start="37817" end="37827" title="latifundia" label="latifundia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682525" start="38001" end="38013" title="Blue Party (Dominican Republic)" label="Partido Azul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769143" start="39217" end="39260" title="The Annexation of Santo Domingo" label="treaty of annexation with the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="39275" end="39298" title="United States Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q297308" start="39299" end="39313" title="William Henry Seward, Sr." label="William Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="39340" end="39344" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="39400" end="39420" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853205" start="39444" end="39456" title="Abolitionism in the United States" label="abolitionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066198" start="39465" end="39479" title="Charles Sumner" label="Charles Sumner"/>
<link wikidata="Q887887" start="39538" end="39567" title="Ignacio María González (politician)" label="Ignacio Maria González Santín"/>
<link wikidata="Q372442" start="39704" end="39720" title="Ulises Espaillat" label="Ulises Espaillat"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="40370" end="40377" title="Concepción de La Vega" label="La Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q516965" start="40395" end="40402" title="Sánchez, Dominican Republic" label="Sánchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q184637" start="40423" end="40442" title="Ten Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Ten Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46083" start="41061" end="41080" title="Franco-Prussian War" label="Franco-Prussian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q680596" start="41260" end="41280" title="San Pedro de Macorís" label="San Pedro de Macorís"/>
<link wikidata="Q40508" start="41285" end="41294" title="La Romana, Dominican Republic" label="La Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q29971" start="41586" end="41601" title="Leeward Islands" label="Leeward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="41606" end="41620" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q763" start="41622" end="41641" title="St. Kitts and Nevis" label="St. Kitts and Nevis"/>
<link wikidata="Q25228" start="41643" end="41651" title="Anguilla" label="Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q781" start="41657" end="41664" title="Antigua and Barbuda" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139799" start="41701" end="41707" title="cocolo" label="cocolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537445" start="41827" end="41836" title="stevedore" label="stevedore"/>
<link wikidata="Q722921" start="42008" end="42023" title="Ulises Heureaux" label="Ulises Heureaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="42178" end="42183" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="42211" end="42237" title="St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="St. Thomas, Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980741" start="42514" end="42519" title="Los Coludos" label="Rojos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682525" start="42536" end="42542" title="Blue Party (Dominican Republic)" label="Azules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634730" start="42863" end="42874" title="Ozama River" label="Ozama River"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="42973" end="42982" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q887824" start="44447" end="44466" title="Juan Isidro Jimenes" label="Juan Isidro Jimenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q436482" start="44526" end="44541" title="Horacio Vásquez" label="Horacio Vásquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q887708" start="44811" end="44831" title="Alejandro Woss y Gil" label="Alejandro Woss y Gil"/>
<link wikidata="Q887654" start="44920" end="44934" title="Carlos Felipe Morales" label="Carlos Morales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420505" start="45113" end="45140" title="Santo Domingo Affair" label="insurgents in Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="45260" end="45266" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="45268" end="45275" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="45277" end="45282" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="45291" end="45302" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="45441" end="45459" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143231" start="45475" end="45494" title="Roosevelt Corollary" label="Roosevelt Corollary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998384" start="46183" end="46208" title="Bureau of Insular Affairs" label="Bureau of Insular Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q887594" start="46496" end="46509" title="Ramón Cáceres" label="Ramón Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q5804174" start="46596" end="46611" title="Desiderio Arias" label="Desiderio Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q16573193" start="47098" end="47123" title="Dominican Civil War (1911–12)" label="a series of insurrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q887835" start="47164" end="47179" title="Eladio Victoria" label="Eladio Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q163612" start="47254" end="47266" title="Adolfo Nouel" label="Adolfo Nouel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6291727" start="47345" end="47363" title="José Bordas Valdez" label="José Bordas Valdez"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641794" start="47490" end="47503" title="Dominican Civil War (1914)" label="new rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="47534" end="47548" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130464" start="47710" end="47720" title="Ramón Báez" label="Ramón Báez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298759" start="48055" end="48069" title="United States occupation of Haiti" label="occupied Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5804174" start="48183" end="48198" title="Desiderio Arias" label="Desiderio Arias"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="48386" end="48407" title="United States Marine Corps" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q592624" start="48821" end="48833" title="Monte Cristi Province" label="Monte Cristi"/>
<link wikidata="Q988413" start="48838" end="48850" title="Puerto Plata (city)" label="Puerto Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q131470908" start="48972" end="48987" title="Battle of Puerto Plata" label="Fort San Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q115605459" start="49199" end="49213" title="Battle of Las Trencheras" label="Las Trencheras"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020260" start="49444" end="49454" title="Battle of Guayacanas" label="Guayacanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310130" start="49484" end="49495" title="single-shot" label="single-shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241374" start="49841" end="49845" title="Moca, Dominican Republic" label="Moca"/>
<link wikidata="Q538953" start="49850" end="49857" title="La Vega, Dominican Republic" label="La Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892356" start="49913" end="49943" title="Francisco Henríquez y Carvajal" label="Francisco Henríquez y Carvajal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="50086" end="50098" title="Rear admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258994" start="50099" end="50118" title="Harry Shepard Knapp" label="Harry Shepard Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930992" start="50145" end="50169" title="Battle of San Francisco de Macoris" label="San Francisco de Macorís"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="50329" end="50333" title="Fortification" label="fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="50837" end="50852" title="Progressive Era" label="Progressive Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q937217" start="51699" end="51709" title="Hato Mayor Province" label="Hato Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774831" start="51714" end="51722" title="El Seibo" label="El Seibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139799" start="53621" end="53627" title="cocolo" label="cocolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781637" start="53664" end="53703" title="Universal Negro Improvement Association" label="Universal Negro Improvement Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="53772" end="53782" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="53793" end="53807" title="Warren Harding" label="Warren Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q117040" start="54131" end="54147" title="Santiago de Cuba" label="Santiago de Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897630" start="54357" end="54367" title="The Nation" label="The Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710374" start="54837" end="54857" title="Juan Bautista Vicini" label="Juan Bautista Vicini"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="55227" end="55242" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="56667" end="56683" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q887837" start="56816" end="56837" title="Rafael Estrella Ureña" label="Rafael Estrella Ureña"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="56976" end="57007" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael Leonidas Trujillo Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q783742" start="58806" end="58817" title="Pico Duarte" label="Pico Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q33491" start="59753" end="59759" title="Haitian Creole" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q177764" start="59799" end="59805" title="West African Vodun" label="Voodoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q191079" start="60029" end="60042" title="Generalissimo" label="Generalissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="60043" end="60059" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="60073" end="60091" title="Spanish Second Republic" label="Spanish Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="60115" end="60132" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="60145" end="60154" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="60229" end="60235" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515876" start="60553" end="60573" title="Good Neighbor policy" label="Good Neighbor policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="60588" end="60609" title="U.S. State Department" label="U.S. State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q52418" start="60704" end="60734" title="attack on Pearl Harbor" label="Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="60796" end="60807" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q97280709" start="61061" end="61080" title="SS Presidente Trujillo" label="Presidente Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="61486" end="61498" title="Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress" label="B-17 bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q836438" start="61504" end="61525" title="Martin B-26 Marauder" label="B-26 Marauder bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q174736" start="61550" end="61559" title="destroyer" label="destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="61571" end="61578" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="61592" end="61600" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q459801" start="63679" end="63688" title="Constanza, Dominican Republic" label="Constanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821610" start="63730" end="63776" title="Anti-Communist Legion of the Caribbean" label="Anti-Communist Foreign Legion of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q181822" start="64026" end="64032" title="napalm" label="napalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507413" start="64415" end="64434" title="Escambray rebellion" label="Escambray Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6126118" start="64519" end="64548" title="Servicio de Inteligencia Militar" label="Military Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q324026" start="64594" end="64613" title="Johnny Abbes García" label="Johnny Abbes García"/>
<link wikidata="Q332081" start="64743" end="64760" title="Rómulo Betancourt" label="Rómulo Betancourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="65186" end="65217" title="Organization of American States" label="Organization of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="65590" end="65610" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165861" start="66039" end="66064" title="Dominican Communist Party" label="Dominican Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q37230" start="66122" end="66125" title="CIA" label="CIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q373759" start="66262" end="66275" title="San Cristóbal, Dominican Republic" label="San Cristóbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071074" start="66403" end="66420" title="Chevrolet Bel Air" label="Chevrolet Bel Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q185639" start="66874" end="66888" title="electric chair" label="electric chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q28502993" start="66978" end="67001" title="Rebellion of the Pilots" label="Rebellion of the Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q147989" start="67096" end="67112" title="Joaquín Balaguer" label="Joaquín Balaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q887593" start="67550" end="67575" title="Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly" label="Rafael Filiberto Bonnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q439980" start="67686" end="67696" title="Juan Bosch (politician)" label="Juan Bosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q31284" start="67795" end="67824" title="Dominican Revolutionary Party" label="Dominican Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q458504" start="68236" end="68248" title="Elías Wessin" label="Elías Wessin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25424534" start="68281" end="68295" title="military junta" label="military junta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="68322" end="68333" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q785325" start="68721" end="68738" title="Francisco Caamaño" label="Francisco Caamaño"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="69009" end="69022" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="P-51 Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9640" start="69783" end="69800" title="Lyndon B. Johnson" label="Lyndon B. Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q955457" start="70000" end="70020" title="Operation Power Pack" label="Operation Power Pack"/>
<link wikidata="Q602500" start="70274" end="70288" title="Antonio Imbert" label="Antonio Imbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545302" start="72121" end="72140" title="San Isidro Air Base" label="San Isidro Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681985" start="72670" end="72696" title="Inter-American Peace Force" label="Inter-American Peace Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="72836" end="72844" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="72852" end="72860" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="72868" end="72877" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="72885" end="72895" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="72922" end="72933" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q14932551" start="73470" end="73482" title="Ciudad Nueva" label="Ciudad Nueva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485700" start="74174" end="74178" title="G.I." label="G.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q147989" start="74676" end="74692" title="Joaquín Balaguer" label="Joaquín Balaguer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153476" start="74748" end="74780" title="Social Christian Reformist Party" label="Social Christian Reformist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q973658" start="75377" end="75385" title="caudillo" label="caudillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="75452" end="75459" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="75464" end="75484" title="forcibly disappeared" label="forcibly disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="76269" end="76272" title="GDP" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q602428" start="77289" end="77313" title="Antonio Guzmán Fernández" label="Antonio Guzmán Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="77455" end="77467" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q100235323" start="77694" end="77720" title="peaceful transition of power" label="peaceful transfer of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048258" start="77768" end="77783" title="Hurricane David" label="Hurricane David"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="78178" end="78191" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q562002" start="78618" end="78639" title="Salvador Jorge Blanco" label="Salvador Jorge Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q151944" start="79341" end="79363" title="Leonel Fernández Reyna" label="Leonel Fernández Reyna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511535" start="79386" end="79421" title="Dominican Liberation Party" label="Partido de la Liberación Dominicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q653611" start="79922" end="79936" title="Hipólito Mejía" label="Hipólito Mejía"/>
<link wikidata="Q242922" start="80425" end="80439" title="Dominican peso" label="Dominican peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="80446" end="80466" title="United States dollar" label="United States dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q151944" start="80636" end="80652" title="Leonel Fernández" label="Leonel Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="80970" end="80981" title="remittances" label="remittances"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290725" start="81308" end="81327" title="Dominican Americans" label="Dominican Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370292" start="81405" end="81423" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="81436" end="81445" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q683705" start="81569" end="81598" title="New York metropolitan area" label="metropolitan area of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="81714" end="81724" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="81739" end="81747" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="81750" end="81755" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="81757" end="81763" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="81765" end="81777" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18383" start="81779" end="81803" title="Providence, Rhode Island" label="Providence, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q49163" start="81809" end="81832" title="Lawrence, Massachusetts" label="Lawrence, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418401" start="81988" end="82000" title="Mona Passage" label="Mona Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q501732" start="82060" end="82096" title="Dominican immigration to Puerto Rico" label="Dominican immigration to Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="82462" end="82486" title="Iraq War" label="US-led coalition in Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q4096422" start="82528" end="82546" title="Plus Ultra Brigade" label="Plus Ultra Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q57429" start="82666" end="82679" title="Danilo Medina" label="Danilo Medina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511535" start="82907" end="82933" title="Dominican Liberation Party" label="Dominican Liberation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16303160" start="82971" end="82982" title="2016 Dominican Republic general election" label="re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16594097" start="83036" end="83049" title="Luis Abinader" label="Luis Abinader"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515858" start="83176" end="83202" title="Modern Revolutionary Party" label="Modern Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q99008931" start="83360" end="83369" title="2024 Dominican Republic general election" label="elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q21001917" start="83484" end="83495" title="Conchoprimo" label="Conchoprimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q846445" start="83497" end="83513" title="History of Haiti" label="History of Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365406" start="83515" end="83539" title="History of Latin America" label="History of Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q149527" start="83541" end="83565" title="History of North America" label="History of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q690256" start="83567" end="83590" title="History of the Americas" label="History of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q457898" start="83592" end="83616" title="History of the Caribbean" label="History of the Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q24057525" start="83618" end="83662" title="List of presidents of the Dominican Republic" label="List of presidents of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154060" start="83664" end="83698" title="Politics of the Dominican Republic" label="Politics of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047607" start="83700" end="83736" title="Spanish colonization of the Americas" label="Spanish colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16930928" start="83738" end="83763" title="Timeline of Santo Domingo" label="Timeline of Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433474" start="85070" end="85091" title="Science &amp;amp; Society" label="Science &amp;amp; Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8064" wikidata="Q2462085" url="?curid=8064" title="Geography of the Dominican Republic">
<text>The Dominican Republic (Spanish: &quot;República Dominicana&quot;) is a country in the West Indies that occupies the eastern five-eighths of Hispaniola. It has an area of 48,670 km2, including offshore islands. The land border shared with Haiti, which occupies the western three-eighths of the island, is 376 km long. The maximum length, east to west, is 390 km from Punta de Agua to Las Lajas, on the border with Haiti. The maximum width, north to south, is 265 km from Cape Isabela to Cape Beata. The capital, Santo Domingo, is located on the south coast.

The Dominican Republic&#x27;s shores are washed by the Atlantic Ocean to the north and the Caribbean Sea to the south. The Mona Passage, a channel about 130 km wide, separates the country (and Hispaniola) from Puerto Rico.

== Physical features ==

The Dominican Republic is a country with many mountains, and the highest peaks of the West Indies are found here. The chains of mountains show a direction northwest–southeast, except in the Southern peninsula (in Haiti) where they have a direction west–east. The mountains are separated by valleys with the same general direction.

From north to south, the mountain ranges and valleys are:
* &quot;Cordillera Septentrional&quot; (in English, &quot;Northern Range&quot;). It runs parallel to the north coast, with extensions to the northwest, the Tortuga Island, and to the southeast, the Samaná Peninsula (with its &quot;Sierra de Samaná&quot;). Its highest mountain is Diego de Ocampo, close to Santiago, with 1,249 m. There are several small plains between this range and the Atlantic Ocean. Rivers are short and most of them flow to the north.
* The &quot;Cibao&quot; Valley (Dominican Republic) is the largest and the most important valley of the country. This long valley stretches from North Haiti, where is called &quot;Plaine du Nord&quot;, to Samaná Bay. It can be divided in two sections: the northwestern part is the &quot;Yaque del Norte Valley&quot; (or &quot;Línea Noroeste&quot;) and the eastern &quot;Yuna Valley&quot; (or &quot;Vega Real&quot;, English: &quot;Royal Valley&quot;). The &quot;Vega Real&quot; is the most fertile area in the country, with a high population density.
* The &quot;Cordillera Central&quot; (also called &quot;Sierra del Cibao&quot;) is the island&#x27;s most rugged and imposing feature and is known in Haiti as the &quot;Massif du Nord&quot; (&quot;Northern Massif&quot;). The highest mountains of the West Indies are in this range: Pico Duarte, 3,098 m, and others above 3,000 m. Near the center of the island, this range turns southward and is called &quot;Sierra de Ocoa&quot;, finishing near the city of Azua de Compostela, on the Caribbean coast. Another branch, &quot;Cordillera Oriental&quot; or &quot;Sierra del Seibo&quot;, is separated from the main chain by a karstic region (&quot;Los Haitises&quot;) and with a west–east direction; it is located south of Samaná Bay.

* The &quot;San Juan Valley&quot; and &quot;Plain of Azua&quot; are big valleys south of the &quot;Cordillera Central&quot; with altitude from 0 to 600 m.
* The &quot;Sierra de Neiba&quot;, with Mount Neiba the highest mountain with 2,279 m. An extension to the southeast of &quot;Sierra de Neiba&quot; is the &quot;Sierra Martín García&quot; (&quot;Loma Busú&quot;, 1,350 m).
* The &quot;Hoya de Enriquillo&quot; or &quot;Neiba Valley&quot; is a remarkable valley, with a west–east direction, of low altitude (on average 50 m with some points below sea level) and with a great salt lake: the &quot;Enriquillo Lake&quot;.
* The &quot;Sierra de Bahoruco&quot;, called &quot;Massif de la Selle&quot; in Haiti. This southern group of mountains have a geology very different from the rest of the island.
* &quot;Llano Costero del Caribe&quot; (in English, &quot;Caribbean Coastal Plain&quot;) is in the southeast of the island (and of the Dominican Republic). It is a large savanna east of Santo Domingo.

==Climate==

The Dominican Republic is a tropical, maritime nation. Owing to its diverse mountainous topography, the country&#x27;s climate shows considerable variation for its size, and has the most diverse climate zones of all the Caribbean islands, including subtropical highland climates (&quot;Cwb&quot;), oceanic climates (&quot;Cfb&quot;) and hot semi-arid climates (&quot;BSh&quot;) along the usual tropical savanna (&quot;Aw&quot;), monsoon (&quot;Am&quot;), and rainforest (&quot;Af&quot;) climates typical of a Caribbean nation. Conditions are ameliorated in many areas by elevation and by the northeast trade winds, which blow steadily from the Atlantic all year long. The annual mean temperature is ; regional mean temperatures range from in the heart of the Cordillera Central (Constanza) to as high as in arid regions. Temperatures rarely rise above , and freezing temperatures only occur in winter in the highest mountains. The average temperature in Santo Domingo in January is , and in July.

The rain season for the northern coast is from November to January. For the rest of the country, the rain season is from May to November. The average annual rainfall is , with extremes of or more in the mountainous northeast (the windward side of the island) and in the southwestern valleys. The western valleys, along the Haitian border, remain relatively dry, with less than of annual precipitation, due to the rain shadow effect caused by the central and northern mountain ranges. The northwestern and southeastern extremes of the country are also arid.

The Dominican Republic is occasionally damaged by tropical storms and hurricanes, which originate in the mid-Atlantic and southeastern Caribbean from June until November (mainly from August to October) each year.
== Islands ==

There are several smaller islands and cays that are part of Dominican territory. The largest islands are:
#&quot;Saona&quot;, close to the southeastern coast of Hispaniola, in the Caribbean Sea. It has an area of 117 km2. Its Taíno name was &quot;Iai&quot; or &quot;Adamanay&quot;. Columbus named this island as Savona, after the Italian city of the same name, but the use during years has eliminated the letter &quot;v&quot;.
#&quot;Beata&quot;, also on the southern coast. It has an area of 27 km2. Its Taíno name is unknown. Columbus named this island &quot;Madama Beata&quot;.
#&quot;Catalina&quot;, very close to the southeastern coast. It has an area of 9.6 km2. Its Taíno name was &quot;Iabanea&quot; but some writers, including poets, say that it was called &quot;Toeya&quot; or &quot;Toella&quot;.

== Rivers and lakes ==

The 8 longest rivers of the Dominican Republic are:
# &quot;Yaque del Norte&quot;. At 296 km, it is the longest river in the Dominican Republic. Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the Atlantic Ocean. Its watershed has an area of 7,044 km2.
# &quot;Yuna&quot;. It is 185 km long. Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the east into Samaná Bay. Its watershed has an area of 5,498 km2.
# &quot;Yaque del Sur&quot;. It is 183 km long and its sources are in the Cordillera Central. It flows to the south into the Caribbean Sea. Its watershed has an area of 4,972 km2.
# &quot;Ozama&quot;. It is 148 km long. Its sources are in Sierra de Yamasá (a branch of the Cordillera Central). It flows into the Caribbean Sea. Its watershed has an area of 2,685 km2.
# &quot;Camú&quot;. It is 137 km long. Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows into the Yuna River. Its watershed has 2,655 km2.
# &quot;Nizao&quot;. It is 133 km long. Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the south into the Caribbean Sea. Its watershed has an area of 974 km2.
# &quot;San Juan&quot;. It is 121 km long. Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the south into the Yaque del Sur River. Its watershed has an area of 2,005 km2.
# &quot;Mao&quot;. It is 105 km long. Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the north into the Yaque del Norte River. Its watershed has an area of 864 km2.

The Artibonite River is the longest river of the island, but only 68 km flows through the Dominican Republic.

The largest lake of Hispaniola, and of the Caribbean, is Lake Enriquillo. It is located in the &quot;Hoya de Enriquillo&quot; with an area of 265 km2. There are three small islands within the lake. It is around 40 meters below sea level, and is a hypersaline lake, with a higher concentration of salt than seawater.

Other lakes are &quot;Rincón&quot; (fresh water, area of 28.2 km2), &quot;Oviedo&quot; (brackish water, area of 28 km2), &quot;Redonda&quot;, and &quot;Limón&quot;.

== Statistics ==

; Location:
: Caribbean, it occupies five-eighths of the island of Hispaniola, between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, east of Haiti
; Geographic coordinates:
; Area:
:* Total: 48,670 km²
:* Land: 48,320 km²
:* Water: 350 km²
; Land boundaries:
:* Total: 376 km
:* Border countries: Haiti 
; Coastline:
: 1,288 km
; Maritime claims:
:* Territorial sea: 
:* Contiguous zone: 
:* Exclusive economic zone: with 
:* Continental shelf: or to the edge of the continental margin
; Climate:
: Tropical maritime; little seasonal temperature variation; seasonal variation in rainfall
; Rivers:
: Significant rivers include the Jimani River, Río Yaque del Norte, Río Jamao del Norte, Río Isabela and the Ozama River

; Terrain:
: Rugged highlands and mountains with fertile valleys interspersed
; Geographical extremes
:* Northernmost point – Cabo Isabela
:* Southernmost point – Alto Velo Island, Jaragua National Park
:* Southernmost point (mainland) – south of Oviedo, Pedernales in Jaragua National Park
:* Westernmost point – Las Lajas, border with Haiti, Independencia Province
:* Easternmost point – Punta de Agua, La Altagracia Province
; Elevation extremes
:* Lowest point – Lago Enriquillo: -46 m
:* Highest point – Pico Duarte: 3,098 m
; Natural resources:
: Nickel, bauxite, gold, silver
; Land use:
:* Arable land: 16.56%
:* Permanent crops: 10.35%
:* Other: 73.10% (2012 est.)
; Irrigated land:
: 3,241 km² (2018)
; Total renewable water resources:
: 21 km3 (2011)
; Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):
:* total: 5.47 km3/yr (26%/1%/72%)
:* per capita: 574.2 m3/yr (2005)
; Natural hazards:
: Lies in the middle of the hurricane belt and subject to severe storms from June to October; occasional flooding; periodic droughts
; Environment - current issues:
: Water shortages; soil eroding into the sea damages coral reefs; deforestation; damage caused by Hurricane Georges
; Environment - international agreements:
:* Party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
:* Signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea
; Geography - note:
: Shares island of Hispaniola with Haiti (eastern five-eighths is the Dominican Republic, western three-eighths is Haiti)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2462085" start="4" end="22" title="Geography of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="87" end="98" title="Caribbean" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="141" end="151" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="239" end="244" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="503" end="510" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="512" end="525" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="563" end="581" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="614" end="628" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="650" end="663" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418401" start="682" end="694" title="Mona Passage" label="Mona Passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="769" end="780" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="854" end="862" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="894" end="905" title="Caribbean" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="1098" end="1104" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049917" start="1206" end="1230" title="Cordillera Septentrional" label="Cordillera Septentrional"/>
<link wikidata="Q208345" start="1354" end="1361" title="Tortuga (Haiti)" label="Tortuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279055" start="1396" end="1412" title="Samaná Peninsula" label="Samaná Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q288021" start="1478" end="1493" title="Diego de Ocampo" label="Diego de Ocampo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="1667" end="1672" title="Cibao" label="Cibao"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="1835" end="1840" title="Plain" label="Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83788" start="2217" end="2235" title="Cordillera Central, Dominican Republic" label="Cordillera Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q783742" start="2486" end="2497" title="Pico Duarte" label="Pico Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="2824" end="2829" title="Karst topography" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q160091" start="2978" end="2983" title="Plain" label="Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464758" start="3533" end="3548" title="Enriquillo Lake" label="Enriquillo Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q42320" start="3904" end="3911" title="savanna" label="savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="3920" end="3933" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="3977" end="3985" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112553" start="3987" end="4002" title="maritime nation" label="maritime nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="4198" end="4226" title="subtropical highland climate" label="subtropical highland climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="4247" end="4262" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="4286" end="4307" title="hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="4343" end="4359" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q863882" start="4378" end="4385" title="tropical monsoon climate" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209531" start="4408" end="4418" title="Tropical rainforest climate" label="rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="4551" end="4562" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="4593" end="4601" title="Atlantic" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11466" start="4633" end="4644" title="temperature" label="temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q83788" start="4708" end="4726" title="Cordillera Central, Dominican Republic" label="Cordillera Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q459801" start="4728" end="4737" title="Constanza, Dominican Republic" label="Constanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="4903" end="4916" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q747173" start="5360" end="5371" title="rain shadow" label="rain shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339113" start="5846" end="5851" title="Saona Island" label="Saona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="5913" end="5926" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="5959" end="5964" title="Taíno people" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="6015" end="6023" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13320" start="6063" end="6092" title="Savona" label="Italian city of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q34765" start="6167" end="6172" title="Beata Island" label="Beata"/>
<link wikidata="Q477915" start="6321" end="6329" title="Catalina Island, Dominican Republic" label="Catalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q776071" start="6625" end="6640" title="Yaque del Norte River" label="Yaque del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="6769" end="6783" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="6789" end="6798" title="drainage basin" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850466" start="6833" end="6837" title="Yuna River" label="Yuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037402" start="6933" end="6943" title="Samaná Bay" label="Samaná Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q147326" start="6993" end="7006" title="Yaque del Sur River" label="Yaque del Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="7110" end="7123" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634730" start="7173" end="7178" title="Ozama River" label="Ozama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4211765" start="7360" end="7364" title="Camú River" label="Camú"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="7607" end="7620" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q48245" start="8016" end="8032" title="Artibonite River" label="Artibonite River"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="8166" end="8175" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464758" start="8180" end="8195" title="Lake Enriquillo" label="Lake Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912558" start="8370" end="8386" title="hypersaline lake" label="hypersaline lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="8476" end="8487" title="fresh water" label="fresh water"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="8528" end="8536" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="8638" end="8647" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="8691" end="8701" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="8715" end="8728" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="8743" end="8757" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="8767" end="8772" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q22664" start="8775" end="8797" title="Geographic coordinates" label="Geographic coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="8923" end="8928" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290577" start="9093" end="9111" title="continental margin" label="continental margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q489692" start="9257" end="9269" title="Jimani River" label="Jimani River"/>
<link wikidata="Q776071" start="9271" end="9290" title="Río Yaque del Norte" label="Río Yaque del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9292" end="9311" title="Río Jamao del Norte" label="Río Jamao del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9313" end="9324" title="Río Isabela" label="Río Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634730" start="9333" end="9344" title="Ozama River" label="Ozama River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9472" end="9484" title="Cabo Isabela" label="Cabo Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674017" start="9509" end="9525" title="Alto Velo Island" label="Alto Velo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q9055961" start="9527" end="9548" title="Jaragua National Park" label="Jaragua National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770802" start="9593" end="9599" title="Oviedo, Dominican Republic" label="Oviedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628384" start="9601" end="9611" title="Pedernales, Dominican Republic" label="Pedernales"/>
<link wikidata="Q9055961" start="9615" end="9636" title="Jaragua National Park" label="Jaragua National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9660" end="9669" title="Las Lajas, Dominican Republic" label="Las Lajas"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="9683" end="9688" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424401" start="9690" end="9712" title="Independencia Province" label="Independencia Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9736" end="9749" title="Punta de Agua" label="Punta de Agua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323353" start="9751" end="9773" title="La Altagracia Province" label="La Altagracia Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464758" start="9813" end="9828" title="Lago Enriquillo" label="Lago Enriquillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q783742" start="9855" end="9866" title="Pico Duarte" label="Pico Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="9899" end="9905" title="Nickel" label="Nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="9907" end="9914" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="9916" end="9920" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="9922" end="9928" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q169940" start="10487" end="10500" title="deforestation" label="deforestation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10519" end="10536" title="1998 Atlantic hurricane season#Hurricane Georges" label="Hurricane Georges"/>
<link wikidata="Q152805" start="10592" end="10604" title="Convention on biological diversity" label="Biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q208645" start="10606" end="10620" title="United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change" label="Climate Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q331520" start="10622" end="10637" title="United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification" label="Desertification"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="10639" end="10657" title="CITES" label="Endangered Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156234" start="10659" end="10673" title="Marine Dumping" label="Marine Dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166287" start="10675" end="10699" title="Marine Life Conservation" label="Marine Life Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q521306" start="10701" end="10717" title="Nuclear Test Ban" label="Nuclear Test Ban"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="10719" end="10741" title="Ozone Layer Protection" label="Ozone Layer Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q651219" start="10743" end="10757" title="MARPOL 73/78" label="Ship Pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088099" start="10797" end="10811" title="Law of the Sea" label="Law of the Sea"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8065" wikidata="Q3044295" url="?curid=8065" title="Demographics of the Dominican Republic">
<text>This is a demography of the population of the Dominican Republic including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.

==Population size and structure==
The area was first included in world trade in 1492 when Christopher Columbus docked on the island of Hispaniola.
When Spain occupied the country in 1496, the population consisted of Arawak (Taíno Indians). When Spain returned in 1496, they founded the current capital, Santo Domingo, as the first European city in America. The country came under Spanish rule. France took over the part of Hispaniola that is today Haiti. During the colony era, The Dominican Republic acted as a sugar supplier to Spain and France. Many whites moved to the country during this period.
In 1496, Santo Domingo was built and became the new capital, and remains the oldest continuously inhabited European city in the Americas.
Today, two other large groups have joined, while the indigenous population has mostly disappeared. 45% of Dominicans consider themselves to have some significant Indigenous/Endemic ancestry, 18% are white, 7.8% are fully or predominantly black and 74% are mixed (Mestizo/Mulatto/&quot;Indio&quot;/Trigueño).
About 9.2% of the Dominican population claims a European immigrant background, according to the 2021 Fondo de Población de las Naciones Unidas survey. During the many years that have passed since the great immigration, the races have been mixed and it can be difficult to distinguish. In terms of race, they are all similar to the other Caribbean islands. The Spaniards brought Christianity to the Dominican Republic, and today about 50% of the population reports as being Catholic. One clear remnant of the Spanish colonial era on the population is the official and widespread use of the Spanish language.



According to the total population was in , compared to 2,380,000 in 1950. The proportion of the population aged below 15 in 2010 was 31.2%, 62.8% were aged between 15 and 65 years of age, while 6% were aged 65 years or older.


=== Structure of the population ===



==Vital statistics==
===UN estimates===

Registration of vital events is not universal in the Dominican Republic. The Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates:

===Registered births and deaths===

===Demographic and Health Surveys===
Total Fertility Rate (TFR) (Wanted Fertility Rate) and Crude Birth Rate (CBR):

==Ethnic groups==
Dominicans of full or predominant European descent: 17.8%, Mixed (Mestizo, Mulatto, &quot;Indio&quot;, Triracial) descent: 74.4%, Afro descent: 7.8%
:note: respondents self-identified their race; the term &quot;indio&quot; in the Dominican Republic is not associated with people of indigenous ancestry but people of mixed ancestry or skin color between light and dark

==Religion==
Roman Catholic 51.3%, Evangelical 13%, Protestant 7.9%, Adventist 1.4%, other 1.8%, atheist 0.2%, none 22.4%, unspecified 2% (2018 est.)
==Languages==
*Spanish (official)
==See also==
*Health in the Dominican Republic
*Youth in the Dominican Republic

:Census information:
*1920 Santo Domingo Census
*1950 Dominican Republic Census
*1960 Dominican Republic Census
*1970 Dominican Republic Census
*2010 Dominican Republic Census

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37732" start="10" end="20" title="demographics" label="demography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="28" end="38" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="46" end="64" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="75" end="93" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q5404323" start="95" end="104" title="Ethnic group" label="ethnicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359135" start="164" end="186" title="Religion in the Dominican Republic" label="religious affiliations"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="377" end="382" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699" start="407" end="411" title="1496" label="1496"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="441" end="447" title="Arawak" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="470" end="475" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="528" end="541" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="556" end="564" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="573" end="580" title="America" label="America"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="619" end="625" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="648" end="658" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="673" end="678" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q133156" start="691" end="697" title="colony" label="colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="737" end="742" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470834" start="835" end="848" title="Ciudad Colonial (Santo Domingo)" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254959" start="1495" end="1500" title="Race (human categorization)" label="races"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834414" start="1609" end="1626" title="Caribbean islands" label="Caribbean islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1650" end="1662" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1745" end="1753" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="1861" end="1877" title="Spanish (language)" label="Spanish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="3051" end="3058" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q60521468" start="3084" end="3116" title="Health in the Dominican Republic" label="Health in the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204901" start="3118" end="3149" title="Youth in the Dominican Republic" label="Youth in the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20680076" start="3173" end="3198" title="1920 Santo Domingo Census" label="1920 Santo Domingo Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q20680069" start="3200" end="3230" title="1950 Dominican Republic Census" label="1950 Dominican Republic Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22091949" start="3232" end="3262" title="1960 Dominican Republic Census" label="1960 Dominican Republic Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q22091980" start="3264" end="3294" title="1970 Dominican Republic Census" label="1970 Dominican Republic Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q28401723" start="3296" end="3326" title="2010 Dominican Republic Census" label="2010 Dominican Republic Census"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8067" wikidata="Q62790" url="?curid=8067" title="Economy of the Dominican Republic">
<text>The economy of the Dominican Republic is the seventh largest
in Latin America, and is the largest in the Caribbean and Central American region. The Dominican Republic is an upper-middle income developing country with important sectors including mining, tourism, manufacturing (medical devices, electrical equipment, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals), energy, real estate, infrastructure, telecommunications and agriculture. The Dominican Republic is on track to achieve its goal of becoming a high-income country by 2030, and is expected to grow 79% in this decade. The country is the site of the single largest gold mine in Latin America, the Pueblo Viejo mine. Although the service sector is currently the leading employer of Dominicans (due principally to growth in tourism and free-trade zones), agriculture remains an important sector in terms of the domestic market and is in second place (behind mining) in terms of export earnings. Tourism accounts for more than $7.4 billion in annual earnings in 2019. Free-trade zone earnings and tourism are the fastest-growing export sectors. A leading growth engine in the Free-trade zone sector is the production of medical equipment for export having a value-added per employee of , total revenue of billion, and a growth rate of 7.7% in 2019. The medical instrument export sector represents one of the highest-value added sectors of the country&#x27;s economy, a true growth engine for the country&#x27;s emerging market. Remittances are an important sector of the economy, contributing billion in 2020. Most of these funds are used to cover household expenses, such as housing, food, clothing, health care and education. Secondarily, remittances have financed businesses and productive activities. Thirdly, this combined effect has induced investment by the private sector and helps fund the public sector through its value-added tax. The combined import market including the free-trade-zones amounts to a market of $20 billion a year in 2019. The combined export sector had revenues totaling $11 billion in 2019. The consumer market is equivalent to $61 billion in 2019. An important indicator is the average commercial loan interest rate, which directs short-term investment and stimulates long-term investment in the economy. It is currently 8.30%, as of June 2021.

The Dominican Republic&#x27;s most important trading partner is the United States (over 40% of total commercial exchange; over $12 billion in trade). Other major trade partners are China (over $3 billion in trade), Switzerland (over $1 billion), Puerto Rico (over $800 million), Mexico (over $700 million), Haiti (over $700 million), Spain (over $700 million), the Netherlands (over $700 million), Canada (over $600 million), Brazil (over $500 million), and Germany (over $500 million), in that quantitative order. The country exports free-trade-zone manufactured products (medical devices, electrical equipment, pharmaceuticals, and chemicals), gold, nickel, agricultural products, liquor, cocoa beans, silver, and sauces and seasonings. It imports petroleum, industrial raw materials, capital goods, and foodstuffs. On 5 September 2005, the Congress of the Dominican Republic ratified a free trade agreement with the U.S. and five Central American countries, the Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR). CAFTA-DR entered into force for the Dominican Republic on 1 March 2007. The total stock of U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in Dominican Republic as of 2019 was U.S. $42 billion, much of it directed to the energy, tourism, real estate, manufacturing, infrastructure and the telecommunications sectors. In 2019 the foreign direct investment stock amounted to $42 billion a significant growth in the last decade and a half. In 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, foreign direct investment flows in the Dominican Republic had remained strong at $2.5 billion added to the stock in that year. Having grown to an estimated $44.5 billion, and growing more than ten-fold since 2006 when the liberalization efforts began.

An important aspect of the Dominican economy is the Free Trade Zone industry (FTZ), which made up U.S. $6.2 billion in Dominican exports for 2019. Reports show, however, that the FTZs lost approximately 60,000 between 2005 and 2007 and suffered a 4% decrease in total exports in 2006. The textiles sector experienced an approximate 17% drop in exports in 2006 due in part to the appreciation of the Dominican peso against the dollar, Asian competition following expiration of the quotas of the Multi-Fiber Arrangement, and a government-mandated increase in salaries, which should have occurred in 2005 but was postponed to January 2006. Lost Dominican business was captured by firms in Central America and Asia. The tobacco, jewelry, medical, and pharmaceutical sectors in the FTZs all reported increases for 2006, which offset textile and garment losses. Industry experts from the FTZs expected that entry into force of the CAFTA-DR agreement would promote substantial growth in the FTZ sector in 2007. By the end of the last decade-and-a-half the free-trade-zone sector has rebounded and surpassed the former amounts of $4.5 billion in 2006 to grow to $6.2 billion by 2019.

==Primary Industries==
===Agriculture===
In 2018, the Dominican Republic produced 644 thousand tons of avocado (it is the 2nd largest producer in the world), 1 million tons of papaya (it is the 4th largest producer in the world), 5.2 million tons of sugarcane, 2.1 million tons of banana, 85 thousand tons of cocoa, 442 thousand tons of palm oil, 407 thousand tons of pineapple, 403 thousand tons of coconut, 627 thousand tons of rice, 160 thousand tons of cassava, 136 thousand tons of orange, in addition to from smaller productions of other agricultural products such as potato, lemon, melon, onion and yam.

With almost 80% of the total land area suitable for crop production and about 17% of the labor force engaged in farming, agriculture remains the primary occupation, accounting for 11% of GDP in 2001. Value of agricultural output grew at an average annual rate of 7.1% during 1968–73, but since 1975 the sector has been hampered by droughts (1975, 1977, and 1979), hurricanes (in 1979 and 1980), and slumping world prices and quota allocations for sugar (since 1985). In 1999, agricultural production was 0.4% higher than during 1989–91. The fertile Cibao Valley is the main agricultural center. In 1998, arable land totaled ; with land under permanent crops at .

After Cuba, the Dominican Republic is the second-largest Caribbean producer of sugarcane, the nation&#x27;s most important crop. The State Sugar Council operates 12 sugar mills and accounts for about half of total production. Other large producers are the privately owned Vicini, with three mills, and Central Romana Corporation, whose mill is the largest in the country. Sugar is grown in the southeastern plains, around Barahona &amp; on the North Coast Plain. In 1999, sugar production was 4.4 million tons, down from an average of 7.1 million tons during 1989–1991. Output of sugar has declined annually since 1982, and land is gradually being taken out of sugar production and switched to food crops. Production of raw sugar rose from 636,000 tons in 1990 to 813,000 tons in 1997 but fell to 374,000 tons in 1999.

Part of the crop was destroyed by hurricanes in 1979 and 1980, and 1979–80 production was only 670,000 bags (40,200 tons). Although production was usually about 57,000–59,000 tons annually in the 1980s, the acreage harvested declined from in the early 1980s to in 1999, indicating a greater yield per acre. Coffee production in 1999 was estimated at 35,000 tons; exports of coffee in 2001 generated $11 million. Cocoa and tobacco are also grown for export. Dominican Republic is one of the top 10 major producer and exporter of cocoa in the world. Cocoa is also grown in the Cibao Valley around San Francisco de Macoris. Tobacco is also grown in the Cibao Valley, but around Santiago. In 1999, production of cocoa beans was 26,000 tons and of tobacco, 35,000 tons. Rice is grown around Monte Cristi &amp; San Francisco de Macoris. Banana production in 1999 was 432,000 tons. Production of other crops in 1999 (in thousands of tons) included rice, 563; coconuts, 184; cassava, 127; tomatoes, 281; pulses, 69; dry beans, 26; eggplants, 7; and peanuts, 2.

===Livestock farming===
In 2001, Dominican livestock included 187,000 goats and 106,000 sheep. There were also about 2.1 million head of cattle, 60% for beef and 40% for dairy. The hog population was decimated by African swine fever in 1978, decreasing from 400,000 in 1978 to 20,000 in 1979; by 2001, however, it was 565,000. Poultry is the main meat source because it is cheaper than beef or pork. Poultry production relies on imports of feed grain from the United States. In 2001, 203,000 tons of poultry meat were produced, along with 71,000 tons of beef and 420,000 tons of milk.

===Fishing===
In 2017 the total marine production was 18,000 metric tons. Marlin, barracuda, kingfish, mackerel, tuna, sailfish, and tarpon are found in the Monte Cristi Bank and Samaná Bay, which also supports bonito, snapper, and American grouper.

===Forestry===
About 28.4% of the total land area consisted of forests and woodlands in 2000. Round wood production in 2000 totaled 562,000 cu m (19.8 million cu ft). Timber is cut for land clearing for the use of agriculture. There are important national parks protecting the natural resources and aquifers of the country.

===Mining===
In 2019, the country was the 9th largest world producer of nickel. The country had almost zero production of gold until 2011, where it grew exponentially. In 2016 the country produced almost 38 tons. The country had almost zero production of silver until 2008, where it grew exponentially. In 2017 the country produced 147 tons.

Ferronickel was the country&#x27;s leading export commodity and third-leading industry. Nickel is mined at Bonao. In 2000, nickel production was 39,943 tons, ranking tenth in the world, a decrease from 49,152 in 1997. Currently the most important mineral export is gold.

Production of gold in the Pueblo Viejo mine is the largest gold producing mine in Latin America, and fourth most productive mine in the world producing a total of 30,100 kg of gold in 2018. The extraction by a foreign company of gold at one of the largest mines in the Western Hemisphere has startled and concerned a part of the country who believe that the natural resource should be extracted by local companies and not foreign. Some groups began to protest against Barrick Gold in 2009 and 2010. In 2019 gold is one of the largest exports of the country totaling $1.6 billion and has helped to balance the commodity current account balance.

Production of bauxite, traditionally the principal mining product, ceased in 1992. The Aluminum Co. of America (Alcoa) mined bauxite between 1959 and 1983, when it turned its concession over to the state. Production in 1991 dropped 92% from the previous year, as a presidential decree suspended mining operations at the largest mine, in response to increasing fears of deforestation, although reforestation of mined areas was in progress. Output averaged 1 million tons each year.

The country was one of the few sources of amber in the Western Hemisphere. Salt Mountain, a 16 km block of almost solid salt west of Barahona, was the world&#x27;s largest known salt deposit. There were also large deposits of gypsum near Salt Mountain, making the Dominican Republic one of three sources of gypsum in the Caribbean. The country also produced hydraulic cement, limestone, marble, and sand and gravel. Substantial lignite deposits were found in the early 1980s. Deposits of copper and platinum are also found in the country.

==Industry==
The industrial sector contributed an estimated 31.1% to the country&#x27;s GDP in 2023, led by mining and the manufacture of goods for export to the United States, Europe and Asia. To a lesser extent, there is the manufacture of food products, consumer non-durables, and building materials for the local market. The sector employed 20.8% of the workforce in 2014.

About 500 companies in the Dominican Republic manufacture goods primarily for the North American market. Situated in 50 industrial free zones around the country, these mostly foreign-owned corporations take advantage of generous tax and other financial inducements offered by the government to businesses that operate within the zones. Approximately 200,000 people, or about 8% of the workforce, are employed in this sector. They mostly produce clothing, electronic components, footwear, and leather goods, which are assembled. The raw materials or semi-manufactured goods are usually imported duty-free from other emerging markets (electronic parts are imported from industrialized Puerto Rico) and assembled in the free trade zones. Products include cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, textiles, perfumes &amp; foodstuffs. The value of free-trade-zone exports amounted to billion in 2019, while their imports of intermediate products amounted to billion.

Other, more traditional manufacturing is based on sugar refining, cement, iron and steel production, and food processing. Rum is a significant export commodity, and beer and cigarettes are manufactured for local consumption. Most industry of this sort is located around the working-class perimeter of Santo Domingo and other large towns. Metaldom is the main steel manufacturer in the country, with production of 1 million tons per year, most of which is exported.

==Services==
Services were estimated to contribute 56% of the GDP in 2023 and employs 64.7% of the population.

===Tourism===

Since the mid-1980s the tourism sector has become one of the country&#x27;s most important sources of foreign exchange, and more popular tourist destinations. The country is famous for its favorable location in the Caribbean, tropical climate, beaches, and the restored Spanish colonial architecture. Many foreign investors have and continue to be encouraged to invest here to build and expand resorts and airports around the coasts. During this same period, tourism displaced sugar as the main source of the country&#x27;s earnings, and by 1997 it was generating more than half of the country&#x27;s total foreign exchange. In 2019 it generated one-third of the total foreign exchange for the country.

Tourism is the single biggest revenue earner, growing from humble beginnings in 1980 to more than $7.4 billion by 2019. Successive governments have invested heavily in tourism development, creating upgraded airports and other infrastructure. The number of tourist amounted to 6.4 million tourists arriving in the country in 2019. Most come from Europe, with about 25% originating from the United States or Canada. The country now has almost 70,000 hotel rooms, more than any other Caribbean country. About 50,000 Dominicans are directly employed in this sector, mostly working in hotels, and another 110,000 are indirectly employed as taxi drivers, tour guides, or tourist-shop staff. Most tourists visit the Dominican Republic on account of its beaches, but there is an expanding eco-tourism and outdoor activity sector, focused on the country&#x27;s mountains and wildlife.

Although tourism generates large revenues, some scholars and activists argue that the development of tourism also has high impacts on many socioeconomic aspects. For instance, they argue that it involves ecological deterioration, profit leakage, social displacement, disported cultural patterns, rising land values, drugs and prostitution.

===Retail===
Retail activity in the Dominican Republic takes many forms, from U.S.-style supermarkets and shopping malls in Santo Domingo to rural markets and tiny family-run corner stores in villages. A small but affluent middle class can afford to shop at the former, while the lower-income rural community resorts to buying small amounts of daily essentials from general stores (these small stores often double as pubs). In an attempt to regulate the retail sector, the government has recently reformed taxation laws, so that small shops pay taxes on a regular monthly basis. Many transactions, however, go unrecorded.

==Energy==

The electricity sector has had big investments in the last decade 2010 to 2020 diversifying the sector away from petroleum which decreased from 50% of energy generation to 7%. The largest generation sources as of 2021 are coal, natural gas and renewables representing together 93% of electricity generation. This has transformed a strategic sector of the economy into a stable and lower cost sector. The rate of electricity loss improved from 38% in 2005 to 30% in 2019 showing improvement in the infrastructure. Low collection rates, illegal connections, infrastructure problems and poor governance are the sources of the high level of electricity loss in the system. The government plans to continue providing subsidies. Congress passed a law in 2007 that criminalizes the act of illegal electric connections. The state subsidizes the cost of electricity, funding the cost via indirect taxation instead of direct price increases for lower-income households, therefore it is a redistributive policy and partly funded by the country as a whole instead of the direct consumers of electricity. The profit from renewables, natural gas, and coal is positive and considered the current and future of the system, given that petroleum derivatives are considered more volatile and expensive in running costs.

As of 2020 significant investments in the electricity sector have been realized with the construction of the Punta Catalina coal-fired plant. Significantly diversifying the electric sector&#x27;s away from the traditional mix to one with lower cost. The growth of the renewables sector and the natural gas power sector has made significant strides in this respect in the last few years, and is expected to continue to grow with foreign and local investment in the sector.

== Employment ==
Labor participation has improved over the last decade from 62.4% to 67.3%. Despite this growth, female labor participation rates lag more than 25 percentage points behind male labor participation rates, 52.7% and 77.9% respectively. This disparity highlights ongoing challenges in achieving gender equality in the workforce and indicates potential barriers that women face in accessing employment opportunities. Marginal real wage growth since the end of the 1990s suggests low quality jobs and low bargaining power of employees, which can further exacerbate economic inequality.

=== Informal Employment ===
In 2021, 45.5% of Dominicans lived in households where all workers were employed through informal jobs. This situation reflects a significant portion of the economy that operates outside formal regulations, leading to a lack of job security and access to social safety net resources. In rural areas informal employment was 69.1%, compared to 56.9% in urban areas, underscoring regional disparities in formal employment opportunities.

== Data ==
The following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980–2024 (with IMF staff estimates in 2025–2029). Inflation below 5% is in green.
==Other statistics==
GDP:
purchasing power parity – $293.365 billion (2024 est.)

GDP – real growth rate:
5.4% (2024 est.)

GDP – per capita:
purchasing power parity – $27,120 (2024 est.)

GDP – composition by sector:
&quot;agriculture:&quot;
5.5%
&quot;industry:&quot;
33.8%
&quot;services:&quot;
60.8% (2017 est.)

Inflation rate (consumer prices):
4.2% (2024 est.)

Labor force:
5.278 million (2022 est.)

Labor force – by occupation:
&quot;agriculture:&quot;
14.4%
&quot;industry:&quot;
20.8%
&quot;services:&quot;
64.7% (2014 est.)

Unemployment rate:
6.0% (2024 est.)

Population below poverty line:
23.9% (2021 est.)

Budget:
&quot;revenues:&quot;
$14.10 billion

&quot;expenditures:&quot;
$16.60 billion (2021 est.)

Industries:
tourism, sugar processing, ferronickel and gold mining, textiles, cement, tobacco, electrical components, medical devices

Electricity – production:
15.53 billion kWh (2015)

Electricity – consumption:
13.25 billion kWh (2015)

Electricity – exports:
0 kWh (2005)

Electricity – imports:
0 kWh (2005)

Oil – production: (2014)

Oil – consumption: (2012 est.)

Oil – exports: (2017)

Oil – imports: (2017)

Oil – proved reserves: (1 January 2006 est.)

Natural gas – production: 0 cu m (2005 est.)

Natural gas – consumption: 1.108 million cu m (2015 est).

Natural gas – exports: 0 cu m (2005 est.)

Natural gas – imports: 1.108 million cu m (2015)

Natural gas – proved reserves: 0 cu m (1 January 2006 est.)

Agriculture – products:
sugarcane, coffee, cotton, cocoa, tobacco, rice, beans, potatoes, corn, bananas; cattle, pigs, dairy products, beef, eggs

Exports:
$10.33 billion f.o.b. (2017 est.)

Exports – commodities:
ferro nickel, sugar, gold, silver, coffee, cocoa, tobacco, meats, consumer goods

Exports – partners:
United States 50.4%, United Kingdom 3.2%, Belgium 2.4% (2017)

Imports:
$19 billion f.o.b. (2017 est.)

Imports – commodities:
foodstuffs, petroleum, cotton and fabrics, chemicals and pharmaceuticals

Imports – partners:
United States 41.4%, China 13.9%, Mexico 4.5%, Brazil 4.3% (2017)

Debt – external:
$29.69 billion (31 December 2017 est.)

Economic aid – recipient:
$76.99 million (2005)

Currency:
Dominican peso (DOP)

Exchange rates:
Dominican pesos per US dollar – 33.113 (2007), 33.406 (2006), 30.409 (2005), 42.12 (2004), 30.831 (2003)

Fiscal year:
calendar year

==See also==

* List of companies of the Dominican Republic
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP growth
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)
* List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)

==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62790" start="4" end="37" title="Economy of the Dominican Republic" label="economy of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462848" start="45" end="60" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)" label="seventh largest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="64" end="77" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="105" end="114" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="119" end="134" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="148" end="166" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="277" end="291" title="medical device" label="medical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618851" start="294" end="314" title="electrical equipment" label="electrical equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="316" end="331" title="Medication" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="337" end="346" title="Chemical industry" label="chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="349" end="355" title="Electricity generation" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="357" end="368" title="real estate" label="real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="370" end="384" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q418" start="386" end="404" title="telecommunications" label="telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="409" end="420" title="Agribusiness" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994367" start="491" end="502" title="World Bank high-income economy" label="high-income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="610" end="619" title="gold mine" label="gold mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128312" start="642" end="659" title="Pueblo Viejo mine" label="Pueblo Viejo mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="779" end="794" title="free-trade zone" label="free-trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3929782" start="1010" end="1025" title="Free-trade zone" label="Free-trade zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351807" start="1470" end="1480" title="Remittance" label="Remittance"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2387" end="2400" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2500" end="2505" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2534" end="2545" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="2565" end="2576" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2598" end="2604" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="2626" end="2631" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="2653" end="2658" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="2684" end="2695" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2717" end="2723" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2745" end="2751" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2777" end="2784" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="2893" end="2907" title="medical device" label="medical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q107618851" start="2910" end="2930" title="electrical equipment" label="electrical equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="2932" end="2947" title="Medication" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q207652" start="2953" end="2962" title="Chemical industry" label="chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="2965" end="2969" title="Gold mining" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="2971" end="2977" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="2979" end="3000" title="Food" label="agricultural products"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139" start="3002" end="3008" title="liquor" label="liquor"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="3010" end="3020" title="cocoa bean" label="cocoa bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q178359" start="3035" end="3040" title="sauce" label="sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q773108" start="3046" end="3055" title="seasoning" label="seasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8137" start="3106" end="3118" title="capital good" label="capital good"/>
<link wikidata="Q595411" start="3162" end="3196" title="Congress of the Dominican Republic" label="Congress of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536928" start="3208" end="3228" title="free trade agreement" label="free trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155342" start="3284" end="3341" title="Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement" label="Dominican Republic – Central America Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q490812" start="3363" end="3381" title="Entry into force" label="entered into force"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="3450" end="3475" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="3800" end="3817" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37153" start="5352" end="5359" title="avocado" label="avocado"/>
<link wikidata="Q34887" start="5425" end="5431" title="papaya" label="papaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="5499" end="5508" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q503" start="5530" end="5536" title="banana" label="banana"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="5558" end="5563" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="5586" end="5594" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493" start="5617" end="5626" title="pineapple" label="pineapple"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187" start="5649" end="5656" title="coconut" label="coconut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="5679" end="5683" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q83124" start="5706" end="5713" title="cassava" label="cassava"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="5736" end="5742" title="Orange (fruit)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998" start="5823" end="5829" title="potato" label="potato"/>
<link wikidata="Q500" start="5831" end="5836" title="lemon" label="lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881191" start="5838" end="5843" title="melon" label="melon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23485" start="5845" end="5850" title="onion" label="onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047551" start="5855" end="5858" title="yam (vegetable)" label="yam"/>
<link wikidata="Q61996690" start="6827" end="6853" title="Central Romana Corporation" label="Central Romana Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q123478185" start="9059" end="9065" title="Marlin" label="Marlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193921" start="9067" end="9076" title="barracuda" label="barracuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064278" start="9088" end="9096" title="mackerel" label="mackerel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="9098" end="9102" title="tuna" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3473576" start="9196" end="9202" title="bonito" label="bonito"/>
<link wikidata="Q849160" start="9204" end="9211" title="Lutjanidae" label="snapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559352" start="9226" end="9233" title="grouper" label="grouper"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="9633" end="9639" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="9683" end="9687" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="9816" end="9822" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3128312" start="10202" end="10219" title="Pueblo Viejo mine" label="Pueblo Viejo mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078" start="10835" end="10842" title="bauxite" label="bauxite"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="11679" end="11688" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="11690" end="11696" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="11702" end="11706" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="11711" end="11717" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="11731" end="11738" title="lignite" label="lignite"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="11802" end="11810" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="12984" end="12999" title="pharmaceuticals" label="pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028078" start="13509" end="13517" title="Metaldom" label="Metaldom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244860" start="16052" end="16065" title="general store" label="general store"/>
<link wikidata="Q82135" start="19335" end="19358" title="purchasing power parity" label="purchasing power parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q907347" start="20073" end="20084" title="ferronickel" label="ferronickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11653" start="20129" end="20150" title="electrical components" label="electrical components"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="20152" end="20167" title="medical devices" label="medical devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="20781" end="20790" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="20808" end="20813" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q379813" start="20830" end="20834" title="bean" label="bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11575" start="20847" end="20851" title="Maize" label="corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="20898" end="20902" title="Egg (food)" label="eggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="20977" end="20983" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q208008" start="21014" end="21019" title="Cocoa bean" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="21115" end="21122" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79529" start="21243" end="21251" title="chemical" label="chemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="21257" end="21271" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="21621" end="21632" title="Fiscal year" label="Fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148686" start="21665" end="21708" title="List of companies of the Dominican Republic" label="List of companies of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q20716033" start="21711" end="21771" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP growth" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25242041" start="21774" end="21837" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (nominal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6462848" start="21840" end="21899" title="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)" label="List of Latin American and Caribbean countries by GDP (PPP)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8068" wikidata="Q7696069" url="?curid=8068" title="Telecommunications in the Dominican Republic">
<text>Telecommunications in the Dominican Republic include radio, television, fixed and mobile telephones, and the Internet.

Numerous television channels are available. Tricom, S.A, WIND Telecom, S.A., Viva (network operator), and Claro Codetel provide television services digitally, with channels from Latin America and elsewhere in the world. There are extensive mobile phone and land-line services. Internet access is available as Cable Internet, ADSL, WiMAX, EDGE, EV-DO and UMTS/HSDPA in most parts of the country. Projects to extend Wi-Fi (wireless internet) hot spots have been undertaken in Santo Domingo. Since 2015 the country has been actively extending its fiber optics network, to provide faster and more reliable internet to business and private users.

The Instituto Dominicano De Telecomunicaciones (INDOTEL) regulates and supervises the development of the country&#x27;s telecommunications market.

== Radio and television ==

* Radio stations: AM 146, FM 233, shortwave 14 (2013). A combination of state-owned and privately owned radio stations with more than 300 radio stations operating (2007).
* Radios: 1.44 million (1997).
* Television stations: 46 (2012). A combination of state-owned and privately owned broadcast media; 1 state-owned and a number of private TV networks; networks operate repeaters to extend signals throughout country (2007).
* Pay TV: 49,010 subscribers (2010).
* Television sets: 770,000 (1997).

Cable television in the Dominican Republic is provided by a variety of companies. These companies offer both English and Spanish language television, plus a range of channels in other languages, high definition channels, pay-per-view movies and events, sports packages, premium movies channels and adult channels such as HBO, Playboy TV, Cinecanal, MLB Extra Innings, etc. The channels are not only from the Dominican Republic, but also the United States and Europe.

In the Dominican Republic there are 46 in VHF and UHF channels free-to-air channels. The programming on the free of charge channels consists mainly of locally produced entertainment shows, news, and comedy shows; and foreign sitcoms, soap operas, movies, cartoons, and sports programs.

The main service provider in the Dominican Republic is Tricom. Aster is concentrated in Santo Domingo, but is expanding its service throughout the Dominican Republic. There are new companies using new technologies that are expanding quickly such as Claro TV (IPTV and Satellite TV), Wind Telecom (MMDS) and SKY (Satellite TV).

On election day in May 2012 government broadcast regulators took two popular national television channels (11 and 33) off the air on the grounds that they violated an electoral law prohibiting distribution of exit poll or other unofficial information regarding the final results of the electoral process. Both channels were closed on the afternoon of 20 May and reopened the next morning.

== Telephones ==
* Area codes: 809, 829, and 849.
* International call prefix: +1
* Fixed lines: 1.14 million lines in use, 70th in the world (2022).
* Fixed line teledensity: 10 per 100 people (2011).
* Mobile cellular: 9.0 million lines (2012).
* Mobile cellular teledensity: 90 per 100 people (2011).
* VoIP: 45,328 lines (2012).
* Domestic system: Relatively efficient system based on island-wide microwave radio relay network (2011) and fiber optics lines that cover many of the main cities.
* Communications cables: Landing point for the Americas Region Caribbean Ring System (ARCOS-1), ANTILLAS I, and the Fibralink submarine cables that provide links to South and Central America, parts of the Caribbean, and the US (2011). 
* Satellite earth station: 1, Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) (2011).

== Internet ==

* Top-level domain: .do
* Internet users: 9.35 million users, 62nd in the world; 85.0% of the population (2021).
* Fixed broadband: 446,420 subscriptions, 72nd in the world; 4.4% of the population, 108th in the world (2012).
* Wireless broadband: 1.6 million subscriptions, 65th in the world; 15.4% of the population, 80th in the world (2012).
* Internet hosts: 404,500 hosts, 55th in the world (2012).
* IPv4: 857,600 addresses allocated, less than 0.05% of the world total, 85 addresses per 1000 people (2012).
* Internet service providers (ISPs): 8: Claro (Fiber, ADSL and wireless), Tricom (Fiber, WiMAX, ADSL, and Cable), Aster (CABLE), VIVA (wireless), Orange (wireless), ONEMAX (Fiber GPON, Wireless PTP, Data Center), Wind Telecom (WiMAX) (2008).

===Broadband Internet access===

The Dominican Republic is considered one of the countries with the most advanced telecommunications infrastructures in Latin America, with over 8.9 million cell phones connected (on just about 10 million populants, with 3.5 million of them on extreme poverty conditions) and large companies like Codetel and Orange (FR) on the telecommunications market. Broadband Internet access is growing, with over 622,931 Internet accounts globally and 3,851,278 Internet users as of December 2010 according to INDOTEL (DR Telecommunications Institute). Broadband DSL represents about 56% of the total Internet subscribers. There is access to regular ADSL, G.SHDSL, and services only on metropolitan areas, costs are high and service is decent. Cable Internet is offered by a couple of cable companies at lower costs than ADSL but the service is very deficient and unreliable. WiFi is becoming more common. It is available in some universities. Most hotels also offer wi-fi internet. The implementation of the WiMAX and HSPA technology by some of the Cellphone service providers are resulting in the rapid investment by other providers in the market to match the new and faster platform of services. Mobile broadband users have seen their percentage grow from 14% in 2007 all the way to 39% in 2010, and will continue to grow as more and more users are opting for this type of technology in a country where Home Broadband speeds are more expensive and slower. Also the ongoing installation of a Fiber-Optic network structure in the National District and the City of Santiago (second largest in the country) will force other competitors into upgrading theirs to be able to compete in the markets they now lead.

===Pricing===

As of October 2018, not including taxes.

Key: DOP: Dominican peso, USD: United States dollar. Exchange rate ( $50 DOP : US$1 )

;Pricing – Home Internet Access (By ISP)

The following table shows the speeds/prices* available and designed for home usage. 

*Note: The pricing and speeds are subject to change since Altice, Claro and Wind have multi plans (Two or Three services combined), those plans have a discount on all services. Up to 25% discount for combined services.

;Pricing – Mobile Broadband (By ISP)

Currently the mobile internet market is governed by three aspects:

# The first is based on a contract where you are granted a certain amount of data (MB/GB) per month, after having consumed the data you can continue browsing at 512 kbit/s.
# Second option is a monthly income (postpaid) for the acquisition of a speed package with &quot;unlimited data&quot; (is subject to fair use policies with unlimited browsing at 512 kbit/s after you surpass the monthly capacity).
# Third group belongs to the prepaid modality, in this option the client determines the number of days or amount of data he needs to navigate.

===Internet censorship and surveillance===

There are no government restrictions on access to the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.

The constitution provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system ensure freedom of speech and press. The independent media are active and express a wide variety of views without restriction. Individuals and groups are generally able to criticize the government publicly and privately without reprisal, although there have been incidents in which authorities intimidated journalists or other news professionals. Local journalists engage in self-censorship, particularly when coverage could adversely affect the economic or political interests of media owners. The government denies using unauthorized wiretapping or other surreptitious methods to interfere with the private lives of individuals and families, however, human rights groups and opposition politicians allege that such interference does occur.

== See also ==

* Dominican Postal Institute
* North American Regional Broadcasting Agreement

== References ==
* 
==External links==
* nic.do, Network Information Center for the .do domain.
* Claro 
* Compania De Servicios Inalambricos Dominicana
* Indotel, Instituto Dominicano de las Telecomunicaciones.
* Indotel, Dominican Republic Communications Regulation Authority.
* ONEMAX
* Orange 
* SKY
* Tricom 
* VIVA
* Wind Telecom
* Teléfono Dominicana</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7696069" start="0" end="44" title="Telecommunications in the Dominican Republic" label="Telecommunications in the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7841281" start="164" end="175" title="Tricom, S.A" label="Tricom, S.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950772" start="177" end="195" title="WIND Telecom, S.A." label="WIND Telecom, S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q7842089" start="197" end="220" title="Viva (network operator)" label="Viva (network operator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127729" start="226" end="239" title="Claro República Dominicana" label="Claro Codetel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294471" start="429" end="443" title="Cable Internet access" label="Cable Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q161618" start="445" end="449" title="Asymmetric digital subscriber line" label="ADSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="451" end="456" title="WiMAX" label="WiMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q204833" start="458" end="462" title="Enhanced Data Rates for GSM Evolution" label="EDGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q155028" start="464" end="469" title="Evolution-Data Optimized" label="EV-DO"/>
<link wikidata="Q79686" start="474" end="478" title="Universal Mobile Telecommunications System" label="UMTS"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="479" end="484" title="High-Speed Downlink Packet Access" label="HSDPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29643" start="534" end="539" title="Wi-Fi" label="Wi-Fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="594" end="607" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="1403" end="1418" title="Television sets" label="Television sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="1632" end="1647" title="High-definition television" label="high definition"/>
<link wikidata="Q851440" start="1658" end="1670" title="pay-per-view" label="pay-per-view"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629048" start="1758" end="1761" title="HBO Latin America Group" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479456" start="1763" end="1773" title="Playboy TV" label="Playboy TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120659" start="1775" end="1784" title="Cinecanal" label="Cinecanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251419" start="1786" end="1803" title="MLB Extra Innings" label="MLB Extra Innings"/>
<link wikidata="Q152466" start="1947" end="1950" title="Very high frequency" label="VHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q628096" start="1955" end="1958" title="Ultra high frequency" label="UHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q848981" start="1968" end="1979" title="free-to-air" label="free-to-air"/>
<link wikidata="Q177518" start="2451" end="2455" title="IPTV" label="IPTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="2460" end="2472" title="Satellite television" label="Satellite TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q602205" start="2489" end="2493" title="Multichannel Multipoint Distribution Service" label="MMDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323885" start="2499" end="2502" title="SKY México" label="SKY"/>
<link wikidata="Q209588" start="2504" end="2516" title="Satellite television" label="Satellite TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="2929" end="2938" title="Area code" label="Area code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="2962" end="2987" title="List of international call prefixes" label="International call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="3114" end="3129" title="Mobile phone" label="Mobile cellular"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="3216" end="3220" title="Voice over IP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q747066" start="3311" end="3332" title="microwave radio relay" label="microwave radio relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3248959" start="3409" end="3430" title="List of international submarine communications cables" label="Communications cables"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653615" start="3454" end="3491" title="ARCOS-1" label="Americas Region Caribbean Ring System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653062" start="3503" end="3513" title="ANTILLAS I" label="ANTILLAS I"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="3572" end="3577" title="South America" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3612" end="3621" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="3645" end="3668" title="Communications satellite" label="Satellite earth station"/>
<link wikidata="Q778126" start="3673" end="3681" title="Intelsat" label="Intelsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14296" start="3726" end="3742" title="Top-level domain" label="Top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q41002" start="3744" end="3747" title=".do" label=".do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622451" start="3750" end="3764" title="List of countries by number of Internet users" label="Internet users"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="3839" end="3854" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Fixed broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992993" start="3951" end="3969" title="List of countries by number of broadband Internet subscriptions" label="Wireless broadband"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215105" start="4070" end="4084" title="List of countries by number of Internet hosts" label="Internet hosts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="4129" end="4133" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11371" start="4239" end="4264" title="Internet service provider" label="Internet service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127729" start="4809" end="4816" title="Claro República Dominicana" label="Codetel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431486" start="4821" end="4827" title="Orange S.A." label="Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="5511" end="5516" title="WiMAX" label="WiMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q731991" start="5521" end="5525" title="High Speed Packet Access" label="HSPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42763" start="6059" end="6075" title="Santiago de los Caballeros" label="City of Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q242922" start="6279" end="6293" title="Dominican peso" label="Dominican peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q574577" start="7532" end="7542" title="chat rooms" label="chat rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="7602" end="7619" title="freedom of speech" label="freedom of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="7624" end="7629" title="freedom of the press" label="press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290752" start="8547" end="8573" title="Dominican Postal Institute" label="Dominican Postal Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053851" start="8576" end="8622" title="North American Regional Broadcasting Agreement" label="North American Regional Broadcasting Agreement"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8069" wikidata="Q5254885" url="?curid=8069" title="Transport in the Dominican Republic">
<text>Transport in the Dominican Republic utilizes a system of roads, airports, ports, harbours, and an urban railway.

== Roadways ==

Five main highways (DR-1, DR-2, DR-3, DR-4, DR-5) connect the Dominican Republic&#x27;s biggest cities and tourist centers; they are in good condition. There are nearly of highways and roads, 9,872 being paved and (2002 est.) unpaved. Like any underdeveloped nation, the Dominican Republic suffers from a lack of good paved roads to connect smaller towns and less populated areas, though work on paving them proceeds. Major town roads are kept in good condition.

== Public transportation ==

=== Mass transit ===
The Santo Domingo Metro is the first mass transit system in the country, and the second among Caribbean &amp; Central American nations. It is the most extensive metro system in the region by length and total number of stations. On February 27, 2008, the incumbent president Leonel Fernández test-rode the system for the first time, and thereafter free service was offered several times. Commercial service began on January 30, 2009. Several additional lines are currently planned.

Santiago Light Rail is a planned light rail system, still at the development stage, in the Dominican Republic&#x27;s second-largest city Santiago de los Caballeros. Construction was slated to begin in mid-2008 but is currently on hold, due to lack of approval and of central government funds.

===Buses===

The Dominican Republic has a bus system that is rather reliable, and most of these public transportation vehicles are fairly comfortable. The fare is generally inexpensive, and there are bus terminals and stops in most of the island&#x27;s major cities.

===Public Cars (&quot;Carros Públicos&quot;)===
The Public Cars (&quot;Carros Públicos–Conchos&quot;) are privately owned passenger cars that transit a specific route daily Passengers may request a stop anywhere along the route. Carros Públicos carry a significant portion of commuters in Santo Domingo and other major cities. The system is not very reliable and lacks oversight and regulation which leads to congestion and other issues. They may also be somewhat uncomfortable, since drivers try to fit as many people as possible inside the vehicles. Carros Públicos are often standard sedans, but can be packed with as many as six passengers.

== Railways ==
Rail operations are provided by one state-owned operator and several private operators (mainly for sugar mills). There are no rail connections with neighboring Haiti.
* Central Romana Railroad was established in 1911 in the sugarcane fields. The total length of the line is , being the standard gauge.
* The Dominican Republic Government Railway (United Dominican Railways or &quot;Ferrocarriles Unidos Dominicanos&quot;) was a narrow gauge railway.
* There are operated by other sugarcane companies in various gauges: , , gauges (1995).

== Ports and harbors ==
Major ports and harbours in the Dominican Republic:

===Ports===

*The Port of Santo Domingo, with its location in the Caribbean, is well suited for flexible itinerary planning and has excellent support, road, and airport infrastructure within the Santo Domingo region, which facilitate access and transfers. The port is suitable for both turnaround and transit calls.
*Haina Occidental Port, located just 20 km west of Santo Domingo, is one of the most important ports in the Dominican Republic. About 70% of all cargo, excluding Caucedo and free zone exports/imports, is moved through this port.
*DP World&#x27;s terminal Multimodal Caucedo Port maritime terminal and logistic center operates under the Free Zone Regime. Actually 85% of Free Zone exports to the United States is shipped from Caucedo terminal. Multimodal Caucedo port is also able to act as a trans-shipment hub to the Caribbean and Latin America for Asia specifically Japan as a door to the American market.
*Port of Puerto Plata is the main commercial port on the north coast of the Dominican Republic.
*Port of Boca Chica is located about 20 miles east of the capital city and five miles from the International airport Las Americas. Currently the port is almost exclusively used for containers and some lumber, newsprint and homogeneous cargoes.
*Port of San Pedro de Macoris is located on the Higuamo river. This port is mainly used to discharge bulk fertilizer. Cement clinker, coal, wheat, diesel and LPG. It is also used to export sugar and molasses produced by several sugar cane mills in the region.
*Central Romana Port, located in La Romana, belong to Central Romana Corporation which is a private company established in 1912 and has the largest sugar mill in the country.

The following six local ports are a single pier with berth facility:

*Cayo Levantado Port or (Arroyo Barruk/Puerto Duarte) is located in the Samaná Bay.
*Manzanillo Port is located very close to the Haitian border.
*Port of Cabo Rojo is located in Cabo Rojo, southeast to the border.
*Port of Barahona is located in Barahona, in the bay of Neyba.
*Port of Azua in Azua, also called Puerto Viejo is located at Ocoa Bay.
*Palenque Port is located southwest of Santo Domingo.

A local ferry service runs daily between the Samaná and Sabana del Mar ports.

===Merchant marine===
*Total:
**1 ship (1,000 GT or over) totaling 1,587 GT/
*Ships by type:
**cargo 1 (1999 est.)

===Entering the ports===
Boaters and sailors who wish to dock in any of the Dominican Republic&#x27;s ports must follow certain entry requirements: 
* Upon approaching the port, ships must display a quarantine flag, which has the letter &#x27;Q&#x27; on it, and wait for admittance into the port.
* The passengers of the vessel must pay a fee, get a tourist card, and show proper identification including a valid passport.
* Military officials must sometimes grant the passengers clearance to come ashore.
* For entering or leaving the Dominican Republic, the Dominican e-Ticket is required. It is an electronic system designed to streamline immigration procedures and enhance border security.
== Airports ==

In 2009, there were seven major and 31 minor airports in the Dominican Republic. The major ones were:
* Las Américas International Airport, Santo Domingo City, Santo Domingo
* Punta Cana International Airport, Punta Cana / Higüey
* Cibao International Airport, Santiago City, Santiago
* Gregorio Luperón International Airport, Puerto Plata
* La Romana International Airport, La Romana City, La Romana
* Samana El Catey International Airport, Sanchez, Samana
* María Montez International Airport, Barahona City, Barahona

===Airports - with paved runways===
*Total: 10 (1999 est.)
**&quot;Over 3,047 m&quot;: 3
**&quot;2,438 to 3,047 m&quot;: 1
**&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m&quot;: 4
**&quot;914 to 1,523 m&quot;: 3
**&quot;under 913 m&quot;: 2

===Airports - with unpaved runways===
*Total: 15 (1999 est.)
**&quot;1,524 to 2,437 m:&quot; 2
**&quot;914 to 1,523 m:&quot; 4
**&quot;under 914 m:&quot; 9

===National airlines===
* Dominicana de Aviación was the national airline of the Dominican Republic for more than 50 years. This title was passed on to various other companies after Dominicana stopped flying.
* After operations at Dominicana de Aviación ceased, PAWA Dominicana became the flag carrier of the country in 2015. However, the airline ceased operation in January 2018.

==== Flights ====
There are direct flights to and from the Dominican Republic from the United States, Cuba, Canada, Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Argentina, Brazil, Europe and the Caribbean.

== See also ==
* Dominican Republic
* Puerto Plata Airport

== References ==
== External links ==

* Dominican Republic - Ministry of Tourism, Official Site
* Santo Domingo Public Transportation
* Dominican Republic Information Pictures of transportation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5254885" start="0" end="35" title="Transport in the Dominican Republic" label="Transport in the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q788350" start="150" end="154" title="DR-1" label="DR-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205992" start="156" end="160" title="DR-2" label="DR-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205991" start="162" end="166" title="DR-3" label="DR-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205993" start="168" end="172" title="DR-4" label="DR-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205994" start="174" end="178" title="DR-5" label="DR-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345375" start="648" end="667" title="Santo Domingo Metro" label="Santo Domingo Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q151944" start="918" end="934" title="Leonel Fernández" label="Leonel Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420304" start="1126" end="1145" title="Santiago Light Rail" label="Santiago Light Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q42763" start="1263" end="1289" title="Santiago de los Caballeros" label="Santiago de los Caballeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q842389" start="1759" end="1774" title="Share taxi" label="Carros Públicos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2509" end="2514" title="Rail transport in Haiti#Haitian railroads today" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231259" start="2983" end="3004" title="Port of Santo Domingo" label="Port of Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639350" start="3282" end="3303" title="Haina Occidental Port" label="Haina Occidental Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="3332" end="3345" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934803" start="3536" end="3559" title="Multimodal Caucedo Port" label="Multimodal Caucedo Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231241" start="3890" end="3910" title="Port of Puerto Plata" label="Port of Puerto Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231088" start="3986" end="4004" title="Port of Boca Chica" label="Port of Boca Chica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231257" start="4230" end="4258" title="Port of San Pedro de Macoris" label="Port of San Pedro de Macoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15208488" start="4490" end="4509" title="Central Romana Port" label="Central Romana Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q40508" start="4522" end="4531" title="La Romana, Dominican Republic" label="La Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q61996690" start="4543" end="4569" title="Central Romana Corporation" label="Central Romana Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055418" start="4736" end="4755" title="Cayo Levantado Port" label="Cayo Levantado Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037402" start="4807" end="4817" title="Samaná Bay" label="Samaná Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753434" start="4820" end="4835" title="Manzanillo Port" label="Manzanillo Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231101" start="4882" end="4899" title="Port of Cabo Rojo" label="Port of Cabo Rojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015731" start="4914" end="4923" title="Cabo Rojo, Dominican Republic" label="Cabo Rojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231082" start="4951" end="4967" title="Port of Barahona" label="Port of Barahona"/>
<link wikidata="Q958586" start="4982" end="4990" title="Barahona (city)" label="Barahona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231079" start="5014" end="5026" title="Port of Azua" label="Port of Azua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836680" start="5030" end="5034" title="Azua de Compostela" label="Azua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5086" end="5094" title="Palenque, Dominican Republic" label="Palenque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5463" end="5481" title="entry requirements" label="entry requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q182899" start="5534" end="5544" title="quarantine" label="quarantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43812" start="5748" end="5756" title="passport" label="passport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062676" start="6149" end="6183" title="Las Américas International Airport" label="Las Américas International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="6185" end="6203" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352042" start="6221" end="6253" title="Punta Cana International Airport" label="Punta Cana International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568095" start="6255" end="6265" title="Punta Cana" label="Punta Cana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020261" start="6268" end="6274" title="Salvaleón de Higüey" label="Higüey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431111" start="6277" end="6304" title="Cibao International Airport" label="Cibao International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q42763" start="6306" end="6319" title="Santiago de los Caballeros" label="Santiago City"/>
<link wikidata="Q766356" start="6332" end="6370" title="Gregorio Luperón International Airport" label="Gregorio Luperón International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q988413" start="6372" end="6384" title="San Felipe de Puerto Plata" label="Puerto Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q737856" start="6387" end="6418" title="La Romana International Airport" label="La Romana International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262548" start="6448" end="6485" title="Samana El Catey International Airport" label="Samana El Catey International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030428" start="6505" end="6539" title="María Montez International Airport" label="María Montez International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290891" start="6968" end="6990" title="Dominicana de Aviación" label="Dominicana de Aviación"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118299" start="7204" end="7219" title="PAWA Dominicana" label="PAWA Dominicana"/>
<link wikidata="Q721639" start="7231" end="7243" title="flag carrier" label="flag carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="7532" end="7550" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q766356" start="7553" end="7573" title="Puerto Plata Airport" label="Puerto Plata Airport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8070" wikidata="Q436714" url="?curid=8070" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic">
<text>The Dominican Armed Forces, also referred as Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic (), are the military forces of the Dominican Republic. These are made up of three branches: the Army, the Navy and the Air Force. The president of the Republic is the commander in chief of the Dominican Armed Forces and the Ministry of Defense (Spanish: &quot;Ministerio de Defensa de la República Dominicana&quot;) is the chief managing body of the armed forces.

As a Ministry, its origin comes from the Dominican Constitution of 1844, as the Secretary of State for War and Navy. Its ministerial headquarters is located in Santo Domingo, in the Plaza de la Bandera. The primary missions of the Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic are to defend the nation and protect the territorial integrity of the country.

The Armed Forces of Dominican Republic are the strongest army in the Caribbean after Cuba. The Army, consists of six infantry brigades, an air cavalry squadron and a combat service support brigade. The Air Force operates two main bases, one in southern region near Santo Domingo and one in the northern region of the country, the air force operates approximately 75 aircraft including helicopters. The Navy maintains three ageing vessels which were donated from the United States, around 25 patrol crafts and interceptor boats and two helicopters.

There is a counter-terrorist group formed by members of the three branches. This group is highly trained in counter-terrorism missions. The armed forces participate fully in counter-illegal drug trade efforts, for this task, there is a taskforce known as DEPROSER 24/7 (DEfender, PROteger y SERvir). They also are active in efforts to control contraband and illegal immigration from Haiti to the Dominican Republic and from the Dominican Republic to the United States (via illegal transportation of immigrants to Puerto Rico).

==History==

=== War of Independence ===

Haiti under their president Jean-Pierre Boyer had invaded and occupied Dominican Republic from 1822 to 1844. The military forces of the First Republic&#x27;s army comprised about 4,000 soldiers organized into seven line infantry regiments, several loose battalions, 6 escudrones cavalry and 3 artillery brigades with 2/2 brigades; This army was supplemented with national civic guard militia composed of the provinces, the National Naval Armada, original name of the Navy today; It composed of 10 ships, seven owned and 3 taken in requición and armed by the government: the Cibao frigate with 20 cannons; the brigantine schooner San Jose, five guns; the schooner La Libertad, five guns; General schooner Santana 7 guns; the schooner La Merced, five guns; Separation schooner, 3 guns; the schooner February 27, five guns. The requisition taken: the schooner Maria Luisa, 3 guns; the schooner March 30, 3 guns; and the schooner Hope, 3 guns. 674 operated by a man. In addition to the aforementioned military corps expeditionary southern army recruited by Pedro and Ramon Santana in Hato Mayor and El Seibo, with a permit issued by the Central Governing Board with the rank of commander in chief of the army existed. These men were skilled in handling machete and spear. His deputy commander was Brigadier General Antonio Duvergé. The other expeditionary army was the Northern Borders created to defend these borders: its commander was Major General Francisco A. Salcedo.

The Dominican forces would reach levels of organization and efficiency of considerable notoriety. As an example of this, it would suffice to highlight the fact of the achievement and preservation of National Independence, with the Dominican victory over repeated Haitian military invasions in the 12-year period that followed the proclamation of Independence; In addition, 55 percent of the National Budget was allocated to it.

===20th century===
The events that led to the United States military intervention of 1916, brought about the disappearance of any vestige of military structure in the Dominican Republic, setting the intervening forces a military government headed by Captain William Knapp, who make an interim police force called &quot;Constabulary &quot;equivalent to an&quot; armed police force as a military unit &quot;and he had the task of maintaining internal order and enforce the implementing provisions of the US government. This body, purely police function disappears in 1917, leading to the creation of a National Guard. As a result of this historic event of our recent past, the country inherited a hierarchical and organizational akin to the US Marine Corps structure, which served as a platform to the transformations that later gave rise to the armed forces we know today, made up of three components, terrestrial one, one naval and one air.

This land component, now called the National Army, inherited by both its organizational structure of the National Guard organized by the US occupation forces, which operated from April 7, 1917, until June 1921, when it becomes Dominican National Police by Executive Order No. 631 of Rear Admiral Thomas Snowden, who was at that time the military governor of Santo Domingo. After the US military occupation in 1924, Horacio Vásquez wins the presidential elections of that same year. Among his first decisions, decrees the change of the Dominican National Police in National Brigade, a situation that continues until 17 May 1928, when new turn changes the name of the Army by Law No. 928, but basically inheriting a structure Police, who obeyed schemes imposition of public order demanded by the country at that time and not those of an army in their typical roles.

Due to its characteristics and missions, organizational structure that demanded presence throughout the country, which was realized with the creation of posts and detachments in different parts of the country and the establishment in some provinces of company size units, many of which still Army retains today. Over the years and already existing National Police created by decree No. 1523 of March 2, 1936, of President Trujillo, many of these units, posts and detachments became part of it, perfectly adapted to its structure, since These were essentially created to play a policing role. So great was the influence that had the National Guard in Dominican society and very particularly in the rural population, which even today are many Dominicans who often referred to the Armed Forces and unique way to the Army as &quot; The Guard &quot;.

Meanwhile, the Navy has remained since its inception attached to the principles that gave rise, assuming only two name changes since its inception, but gradually evolving the transformation of what was a body created for military purposes, capable of landing and ships with weapons to face possible naval invasions, to be a component mainly responsible for enforcing the provisions on navigation, trade and fishing, as well as international treaties

The Air Force, meanwhile, emerges as an independent component in 1948, under the chairmanship of Generalissimo Rafael L. Trujillo Molina, with characteristics of innovation and modernism, which gave mobility, versatility and depth to the Armed Forces and the complement in the following years would become: a military capacity to project military power in the Caribbean environment. The situation of this air component has changed significantly after reaching its climax in the 50s, when it was one of the best air force equipped in the region, which was due to the strategic guidelines of a long-lived military dictatorship It made efforts to stay in power and he saw in this component one of its mainstays against any invasion or subversion against the dictatorship.

== Components ==
===Army of the Dominican Republic===

The Dominican Army was founded in 1844. Its basic strength is concentrated in light infantry, which in general can be said to be well equipped with basic combat rifles and combat equipment for soldiers. The vehicles, both transport and armored, and the artillery and anti-tank pieces that it has in service, are partly in poor condition, obsolete or simply civilian vehicles adapted for military use. Nowadays, tanks and modern armor systems have been included.

===Navy of the Dominican Republic===

The Dominican Navy was founded in 1844 also with the National Independence with 15,000 troops after Haiti had occupied the eastern part of the island for twenty five years. It keeps around 34 ships in operation, mostly coast guards, patrol boats and small speedboats. It also operates dredges, tugboats and patrol boats of height. The Navy has a small air body composed helicopter utilities Bell OH-58 Kiowa.

The Dominican Navy operates two main bases, one in the port of Santo Domingo in the Dominican capital called &quot;&quot;Naval Base 27 de Febrero&quot; and another in Bahía de las Calderas, in the province of Peravia, called &quot;Las Calderas Naval Base&quot;&quot; in the southern part from the country. It also has presence in the commercial ports of the country, comandancias of ports and is divided into three naval areas that in turn have posts and naval detachments.
===Air Force of the Dominican Republic===

The Dominican Air Force was founded in 1948 with 20,000 people. It has two main bases: the base area of San Isidro in the South-Central zone of the country near the capital city Santo Domingo; and the other operates jointly in the civil facilities belonging to the Gregorio Luperón International Airport, near the city of Puerto Plata in the North of the Republic. Until August 2009, the possibility of starting military operations from the María Montez airport, in the city of Barahona in the Southwest of the country and from the Punta Cana airport in the extreme east is under study.

It keeps the following fixed-wing aircraft in operation: 8 Embraer EMB 314 Super Tucano, 3 CASA C-212 Aviocar transport; 6 T35B Pilot training; as well as around 25 helicopters such as Bell 206, Bell UH-1 Iroquois, Bell OH-58 Kiowa, Eurocopter Dauphin, OH-6 Cayuse and Sikorsky S-300.

==Specialized Security Corps==

The Specialized Security Corps are military security agencies dependent on the Ministry of Defense and they are made up of military and civilian personnel specialized in their different areas of function. Overall their duty is to support state institutions, defend national interests in peace and war, and as force multipliers of the Armed Forces as well as the National Police.

*Antiterrorism Command of the Dominican Armed Forces
*National Department of Investigations (DNI)
*Airport Security and Civil Aviation Special Forces (CESAC)
*Specialized Corps of Metro and Cable Car Railway Security (CESMET)
*Specialized Corps of Tourist Security (CESTUR)
*Specialized Corps of Fuel Control (CECCOM)
*Task Force Ciudad Tranquila (FT-CIUTRAN)
*Specialized Port Security Corps (CESEP)
*Presidential Security Corps (CUSEP)
*Specialized Border Security Corps (CESFRONT)
*National Special Corps of Environmental and Parks Protection (SENPA)
*Military and Police Commission of the Ministry of Public Works and Communications (COMIPOL-MOPC)

== Military training and formation ==
The Higher Institute for Defense &quot;General General Juan Pablo Duarte y Diez&quot; (&quot;INSUDE&quot;) is the agency dependent on the Ministry of Defense of the Dominican Republic and rector of the graduate schools, academies, technical schools, specialized schools for military training and training that constitute the Education System of the Armed Forces, as stipulated in article 205 of Law 139-13 of the Armed Forces. &quot;INSUDE&quot; was created as the Specialized Institute for Higher Studies of the Armed Forces (IEESFA) by Decree 1110-03 of December 2, 2003 and designated with its current name by decree 38-09 of January 17, 2009.

Military training for officers of the Armed Forces is carried out by institutions specialized in each component. The Batalla de las Carreras Military Academy aims to train future officers of the National Army. The academy grants a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Military Sciences lasting 4 years and 3 months.

The Naval Academy, whose purpose is to train officers of the Navy, grants a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Naval Sciences with a duration of 4 years.

The Aerial, whose function is to train Air Force officers, offers a bachelor&#x27;s degree in Aeronautical Sciences in three independent modalities: Aviator Mention, Infantry Mention and Aeronautical Maintenance Mention, all three with a duration of 4 years.

=== Table of ranks ===
== See also ==
*List of wars involving the Dominican Republic
*History of the Dominican Republic
*Dominican National Police

== References ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q436714" start="4" end="26" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q436714" start="45" end="83" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic" label="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="96" end="111" title="Military" label="military forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="119" end="137" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q781132" start="166" end="174" title="Military branch" label="branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290731" start="180" end="184" title="Dominican Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124137" start="190" end="194" title="Dominican Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669881" start="203" end="212" title="Dominican Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="218" end="243" title="president (government title)" label="president of the Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="251" end="269" title="commander in chief" label="commander in chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q436714" start="308" end="327" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic" label="Ministry of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="329" end="336" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788820" start="454" end="462" title="Ministry of defence" label="Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164250" start="490" end="520" title="Constitution of the Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Constitution of 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124137" start="560" end="564" title="Dominican Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540126" start="582" end="594" title="headquarters" label="headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="609" end="622" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6080161" start="631" end="650" title="Flag Square of Santo Domingo" label="Plaza de la Bandera"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="700" end="718" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="819" end="837" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="868" end="877" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q663472" start="884" end="888" title="Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290731" start="894" end="898" title="Dominican Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="916" end="924" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669881" start="1001" end="1010" title="Dominican Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="1064" end="1077" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124137" start="1201" end="1205" title="Dominican Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1265" end="1278" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q331795" start="1290" end="1303" title="Patrol Craft" label="patrol crafts"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="1359" end="1376" title="Counterterrorism" label="counter-terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="1456" end="1473" title="Counterterrorism" label="counter-terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="1530" end="1548" title="illegal drug trade" label="illegal drug trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q436714" start="1603" end="1611" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic" label="DEPROSER"/>
<link wikidata="Q436714" start="1618" end="1620" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic" label="DE"/>
<link wikidata="Q436714" start="1628" end="1631" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic" label="PRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q436714" start="1639" end="1642" title="Armed Forces of the Dominican Republic" label="SER"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758553" start="1691" end="1701" title="contraband" label="contraband"/>
<link wikidata="Q856681" start="1706" end="1725" title="illegal immigration" label="illegal immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1731" end="1736" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="1744" end="1762" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="1776" end="1794" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1802" end="1815" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="1861" end="1872" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1918" end="1923" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q449421" start="1946" end="1963" title="Jean-Pierre Boyer" label="Jean-Pierre Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="1989" end="2007" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="2138" end="2146" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6382533" start="2172" end="2181" title="battalion" label="battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="2197" end="2204" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="2211" end="2220" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257629" start="2492" end="2497" title="Cibao" label="Cibao"/>
<link wikidata="Q204577" start="2538" end="2546" title="schooner" label="schooner"/>
<link wikidata="Q887185" start="2971" end="2976" title="Pedro Santana" label="Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q937217" start="2998" end="3008" title="Hato Mayor Province" label="Hato Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774831" start="3013" end="3021" title="El Seibo" label="El Seibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="3211" end="3228" title="Brigadier general" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5698176" start="3229" end="3244" title="Antonio Duvergé" label="Antonio Duvergé"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="3351" end="3364" title="Major general" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439047" start="3587" end="3608" title="Dominican War of Independence" label="National Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3863" end="3876" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="3877" end="3885" title="United States Armed Forces" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="3984" end="4002" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25114211" start="4067" end="4074" title="Captain" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4556" end="4571" title="United States Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="5117" end="5130" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q436482" start="5174" end="5189" title="Horacio Vásquez" label="Horacio Vásquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="6036" end="6054" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="President Trujillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124137" start="6486" end="6490" title="Dominican Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669881" start="6926" end="6935" title="Dominican Air Force" label="Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q191079" start="7019" end="7032" title="Generalissimo" label="Generalissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q152474" start="7033" end="7058" title="Rafael Trujillo" label="Rafael L. Trujillo Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="7160" end="7172" title="Armed Forces" label="Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="7282" end="7291" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290731" start="7751" end="7765" title="Dominican Army" label="Dominican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598759" start="7825" end="7839" title="light infantry" label="light infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194268" start="7901" end="7914" title="Battle rifle" label="combat rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="8014" end="8023" title="Anti-tank warfare" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124137" start="8252" end="8266" title="Dominican Navy" label="Dominican Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439047" start="8301" end="8322" title="Dominican War of Independence" label="National Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="8348" end="8353" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="8391" end="8397" title="Hispaniola" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124137" start="8583" end="8587" title="Dominican Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q694356" start="8639" end="8655" title="Bell OH-58 Kiowa" label="Bell OH-58 Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124137" start="8662" end="8676" title="Dominican Navy" label="Dominican Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="8721" end="8734" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331932" start="8867" end="8874" title="Peravia Province" label="Peravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669881" start="9179" end="9198" title="Dominican Air Force" label="Dominican Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118894" start="9279" end="9289" title="San Isidro, Dominican Republic" label="San Isidro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="9353" end="9366" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q766356" start="9440" end="9478" title="Gregorio Luperón International Airport" label="Gregorio Luperón International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q988413" start="9497" end="9509" title="Puerto Plata, Dominican Republic" label="Puerto Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030428" start="9616" end="9636" title="María Montez International Airport" label="María Montez airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q958586" start="9653" end="9661" title="Barahona, Dominican Republic" label="Barahona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352042" start="9707" end="9725" title="Punta Cana International Airport" label="Punta Cana airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q949427" start="9822" end="9850" title="Embraer EMB 314 Super Tucano" label="Embraer EMB 314 Super Tucano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497" start="9854" end="9872" title="CASA C-212 Aviocar" label="CASA C-212 Aviocar"/>
<link wikidata="Q660969" start="9948" end="9956" title="Bell 206" label="Bell 206"/>
<link wikidata="Q154106" start="9958" end="9976" title="Bell UH-1 Iroquois" label="Bell UH-1 Iroquois"/>
<link wikidata="Q694356" start="9978" end="9994" title="Bell OH-58 Kiowa" label="Bell OH-58 Kiowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q39663" start="9996" end="10014" title="Eurocopter AS365 Dauphin" label="Eurocopter Dauphin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050858" start="10016" end="10027" title="Hughes OH-6 Cayuse" label="OH-6 Cayuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129727" start="10032" end="10046" title="Schweizer S300" label="Sikorsky S-300"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394185" start="10443" end="10458" title="Dominican Republic National Police" label="National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q116275450" start="10863" end="10898" title="Presidential Security Corps (Dominican Republic)" label="Presidential Security Corps (CUSEP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="11317" end="11335" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8421" start="12346" end="12367" title="Aeronautics" label="Aeronautical Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q18204885" start="12551" end="12596" title="List of wars involving the Dominican Republic" label="List of wars involving the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125775" start="12598" end="12631" title="History of the Dominican Republic" label="History of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394185" start="12633" end="12658" title="Dominican National Police" label="Dominican National Police"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8071" wikidata="Q12593002" url="?curid=8071" title="Foreign relations of the Dominican Republic">
<text>The foreign relations of the Dominican Republic are the Dominican Republic&#x27;s relations with other governments.

The Dominican Republic has a close relationship with the United States and with the other states of the Inter-American system. It has accredited diplomatic missions in most Western Hemisphere countries and in principal European capitals.

==History==

The island nation of the Dominican Republic maintains very limited relations with most of the countries of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, and Eastern Europe. It concentrated its diplomatic activities in four critical arenas: the circum-Caribbean, countries in the Americas, the United States, and Western Europe (mainly West Germany, Spain, and France).

== Diplomatic relations ==
List of countries which the Dominican Republic maintains diplomatic relations with:
==Bilateral relations==

===Africa===
===Americas===
===Asia===
===Europe===
===Multilateral relations===
The Dominican Republic is a founding member of the United Nations and many of its specialized and related agencies, including the World Bank, International Labour Organization, International Atomic Energy Agency, and International Civil Aviation Organization. It also is a member of the OAS, World Trade Organization, World Health Organization, World Customs Organization the Inter-American Development Bank, Central American Integration System, and ACP Group.

==See also==
*List of diplomatic missions in the Dominican Republic
*List of diplomatic missions of the Dominican Republic

==References==
==External links==
* Dominican Ministry of Foreign Affairs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12593002" start="4" end="47" title="Foreign relations of the Dominican Republic" label="foreign relations of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="56" end="74" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q181982" start="290" end="308" title="Western Hemisphere" label="Western Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="689" end="701" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="992" end="1006" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="1071" end="1081" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q54129" start="1083" end="1116" title="International Labour Organization" label="International Labour Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q41984" start="1118" end="1152" title="International Atomic Energy Agency" label="International Atomic Energy Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q125761" start="1158" end="1199" title="International Civil Aviation Organization" label="International Civil Aviation Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q123759" start="1228" end="1231" title="Organization of American States" label="OAS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="1233" end="1257" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="1259" end="1284" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153087" start="1317" end="1348" title="Inter-American Development Bank" label="Inter-American Development Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q190028" start="1350" end="1385" title="Central American Integration System" label="Central American Integration System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6616620" start="1417" end="1470" title="List of diplomatic missions in the Dominican Republic" label="List of diplomatic missions in the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4433593" start="1472" end="1525" title="List of diplomatic missions of the Dominican Republic" label="List of diplomatic missions of the Dominican Republic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8072" wikidata="Q12136" url="?curid=8072" title="Disease">
<text>A disease is a particular abnormal condition that adversely affects the structure or function of all or part of an organism and is not immediately due to any external injury. Diseases are often known to be medical conditions that are associated with specific signs and symptoms. A disease may be caused by external factors such as pathogens or by internal dysfunctions. For example, internal dysfunctions of the immune system can produce a variety of different diseases, including various forms of immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity, allergies, and autoimmune disorders.

In humans, &quot;disease&quot; is often used more broadly to refer to any condition that causes pain, dysfunction, distress, social problems, or death to the person affected, or similar problems for those in contact with the person. In this broader sense, it sometimes includes injuries, disabilities, disorders, syndromes, infections, isolated symptoms, deviant behaviors, and atypical variations of structure and function, while in other contexts and for other purposes these may be considered distinguishable categories. Diseases can affect people not only physically but also mentally, as contracting and living with a disease can alter the affected person&#x27;s perspective on life.

Death due to disease is called death by natural causes. There are four main types of disease: infectious diseases, deficiency diseases, hereditary diseases (including both genetic and non-genetic hereditary diseases), and physiological diseases. Diseases can also be classified in other ways, such as communicable versus non-communicable diseases. The deadliest diseases in humans are coronary artery disease (blood flow obstruction), followed by cerebrovascular disease and lower respiratory infections. In developed countries, the diseases that cause the most sickness overall are neuropsychiatric conditions, such as depression and anxiety.

The study of disease is called &quot;pathology&quot;, which includes the study of &quot;etiology&quot;, or cause.

== Terminology ==

=== Concepts ===
In many cases, terms such as &quot;disease&quot;, &quot;disorder&quot;, &quot;morbidity&quot;, &quot;sickness&quot; and &quot;illness&quot; are used interchangeably; however, there are situations when specific terms are considered preferable.
;Disease
:The term &quot;disease&quot; broadly refers to any condition that impairs the normal functioning of the body. For this reason, diseases are associated with the dysfunction of the body&#x27;s normal homeostatic processes. Commonly, the term is used to refer specifically to infectious diseases, which are clinically evident diseases that result from the presence of pathogenic microbial agents, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa, multicellular organisms, and aberrant proteins known as prions. An infection or colonization that does not and will not produce clinically evident impairment of normal functioning, such as the presence of the normal bacteria and yeasts in the gut, or of a passenger virus, is not considered a disease. By contrast, an infection that is asymptomatic during its incubation period, but expected to produce symptoms later, is usually considered a disease. Non-infectious diseases are all other diseases, including most forms of cancer, heart disease, and genetic disease.
;Acquired disease
:An acquired disease is one that began at some point during one&#x27;s lifetime, as opposed to disease that was already present at birth, which is congenital disease. &quot;Acquired&quot; sounds like it could mean &quot;caught via contagion&quot;, but it simply means acquired sometime after birth. It also sounds like it could imply secondary disease, but acquired disease can be primary disease.
;Acute disease
:An acute disease is one of a short-term nature (acute); the term sometimes also connotes a fulminant nature
;Chronic condition or chronic disease
:A chronic disease is one that persists over time, often for at least six months, but may also include illnesses that are expected to last for the entirety of one&#x27;s natural life.
;Congenital disorder or congenital disease
: A congenital disorder is one that is present at birth. It is often a genetic disease or disorder and can be inherited. It can also be the result of a vertically transmitted infection from the mother, such as HIV/AIDS.
;Genetic disease
:A genetic disorder or disease is caused by one or more genetic mutations. It is often inherited, but some mutations are random and .
;Hereditary or inherited disease
:A hereditary disease is a type of genetic disease caused by genetic mutations that are hereditary (and can run in families)
;Iatrogenic disease
:An iatrogenic disease or condition is one that is caused by medical intervention, whether as a side effect of a treatment or as an inadvertent outcome.
;Idiopathic disease
:An idiopathic disease has an unknown cause or source. As medical science has advanced, many diseases with entirely unknown causes have had some aspects of their sources explained and therefore shed their idiopathic status. For example, when germs were discovered, it became known that they were a cause of infection, but particular germs and diseases had not been linked. In another example, it is known that autoimmunity is the cause of some forms of diabetes mellitus type 1, even though the particular molecular pathways by which it works are not yet understood. It is also common to know certain factors are associated with certain diseases; however, association does not necessarily imply causality. For example, a third factor might be causing both the disease, and the associated phenomenon. 
;Incurable disease
:A disease that cannot be cured. Incurable diseases are not necessarily terminal diseases, and sometimes a disease&#x27;s symptoms can be treated sufficiently for the disease to have little or no impact on quality of life.
;Primary disease
:A primary disease is a disease that is due to a root cause of illness, as opposed to secondary disease, which is a sequela, or complication that is caused by the primary disease. For example, a common cold is a primary disease, where rhinitis is a possible secondary disease, or sequela. A doctor must determine what primary disease, a cold or bacterial infection, is causing a patient&#x27;s secondary rhinitis when deciding whether or not to prescribe antibiotics.
;Secondary disease
:A secondary disease is a disease that is a sequela or complication of a prior, causal disease, which is referred to as the primary disease or simply the underlying cause (root cause). For example, a bacterial infection can be primary, wherein a healthy person is exposed to bacteria and becomes infected, or it can be secondary to a primary cause, that predisposes the body to infection. For example, a primary viral infection that weakens the immune system could lead to a secondary bacterial infection. Similarly, a primary burn that creates an open wound could provide an entry point for bacteria, and lead to a secondary bacterial infection.
;Terminal disease
:A terminal disease is one that is expected to have the inevitable result of death. Previously, AIDS was a terminal disease; it is now incurable, but can be managed indefinitely using medications.
;Illness
:The terms &quot;illness&quot; and &quot;sickness&quot; are both generally used as synonyms for &quot;disease&quot;; however, the term &quot;illness&quot; is occasionally used to refer specifically to the patient&#x27;s personal experience of their disease. In this model, it is possible for a person to have a disease without being ill (to have an objectively definable, but asymptomatic, medical condition, such as a subclinical infection, or to have a clinically apparent physical impairment but not feel sick or distressed by it), and to be &quot;ill&quot; without being &quot;diseased&quot; (such as when a person perceives a normal experience as a medical condition, or medicalizes a non-disease situation in their life – for example, a person who feels unwell as a result of embarrassment, and who interprets those feelings as sickness rather than normal emotions). Symptoms of illness are often not directly the result of infection, but a collection of evolved responses – sickness behavior by the body – that helps clear infection and promote recovery. Such aspects of illness can include lethargy, depression, loss of appetite, sleepiness, hyperalgesia, and inability to concentrate.
:A disorder is a functional abnormality or disturbance that may or may not show specific signs and symptoms. Medical disorders can be categorized into mental disorders, physical disorders, genetic disorders, emotional and behavioral disorders, and functional disorders. The term &quot;disorder&quot; is often considered more value-neutral and less stigmatizing than the terms &quot;disease&quot; or &quot;illness&quot;, and therefore is preferred terminology in some circumstances. In mental health, the term &quot;mental disorder&quot; is used as a way of acknowledging the complex interaction of biological, social, and psychological factors in psychiatric conditions; however, the term &quot;disorder&quot; is also used in many other areas of medicine, primarily to identify physical disorders that are not caused by infectious organisms, such as metabolic disorders.
;Medical condition or health condition
:A &quot;medical condition&quot; or &quot;health condition&quot; is a broad concept that includes all diseases, lesions, disorders, or nonpathologic condition that normally receives medical treatment, such as pregnancy or childbirth. While the term &quot;medical condition&quot; generally includes mental illnesses, in some contexts the term is used specifically to denote any illness, injury, or disease &quot;except&quot; for mental illnesses. The &quot;Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders&quot; (&quot;DSM&quot;), the widely used psychiatric manual that defines all mental disorders, uses the term &quot;general medical condition&quot; to refer to all diseases, illnesses, and injuries except for mental disorders. This usage is also commonly seen in the psychiatric literature. Some health insurance policies also define a &quot;medical condition&quot; as any illness, injury, or disease except for psychiatric illnesses.
:As it is more value-neutral than terms like &quot;disease&quot;, the term &quot;medical condition&quot; is sometimes preferred by people with health issues that they do not consider deleterious. However, by emphasizing the medical nature of the condition, this term is sometimes rejected, such as by proponents of the autism rights movement.
:The term &quot;medical condition&quot; is also a synonym for &quot;medical state&quot;, in which case it describes an individual patient&#x27;s current state from a medical standpoint. This usage appears in statements that describe a patient as being &quot;in critical condition&quot;, for example.
:Morbidity () is a diseased state, disability, or poor health due to any cause. The term may refer to the existence of any form of disease, or to the degree that the health condition affects the patient. Among severely ill patients, the level of morbidity is often measured by ICU scoring systems. Comorbidity, or co-existing disease, is the simultaneous presence of two or more medical conditions, such as schizophrenia and substance abuse.
:In epidemiology and actuarial science, the term &quot;morbidity&quot; (also &quot;morbidity rate&quot; or &quot;morbidity frequency&quot;) can refer to either the incidence rate, the prevalence of a disease or medical condition, or the percentage of people who experience a given condition within a given timeframe (e.g., 20% of people will get influenza in a year). This measure of sickness is contrasted with the mortality rate of a condition, which is the proportion of people dying during a given time interval. Morbidity rates are used in actuarial professions, such as health insurance, life insurance, and long-term care insurance, to determine the premiums charged to customers. Morbidity rates help insurers predict the likelihood that an insured will contract or develop any number of specified diseases.
; Pathosis or pathology
:&quot;Pathosis&quot; (plural &quot;pathoses&quot;) is synonymous with &quot;disease&quot;. The word &quot;pathology&quot; also has this sense, in which it is commonly used by physicians in the medical literature, although . Sometimes a slight connotative shade causes preference for &quot;pathology&quot; or &quot;pathosis&quot; implying &quot;some [as yet poorly analyzed] pathophysiologic process&quot; rather than &quot;disease&quot; implying &quot;a specific disease entity as defined by diagnostic criteria being already met&quot;. This is hard to quantify denotatively, but it explains why cognitive synonymy is not invariable.
;Syndrome
:A &quot;syndrome&quot; is the association of several signs and symptoms, or other characteristics that often occur together, regardless of whether the cause is known. Some syndromes such as Down syndrome are known to have only one cause (an extra chromosome at birth). Others such as Parkinsonian syndrome are known to have multiple possible causes. Acute coronary syndrome, for example, is not a single disease itself but is rather the manifestation of any of several diseases including myocardial infarction secondary to coronary artery disease. In yet other syndromes, however, the cause is unknown. A familiar syndrome name often remains in use even after an underlying cause has been found or when there are a number of different possible primary causes. Examples of the first-mentioned type are that Turner syndrome and DiGeorge syndrome are still often called by the &quot;syndrome&quot; name despite that they can also be viewed as disease entities and not solely as sets of signs and symptoms.
;Predisease
:Predisease is a subclinical or prodromal vanguard of a disease. Prediabetes and prehypertension are common examples. The nosology or epistemology of predisease is contentious, though, because there is seldom a bright line differentiating a legitimate concern for subclinical or premonitory status and the conflict of interest–driven over-medicalization (e.g., by pharmaceutical manufacturers) or de-medicalization (e.g., by medical and disability insurers). Identifying legitimate predisease can result in useful preventive measures, such as motivating the person to get a healthy amount of physical exercise, but labeling a healthy person with an unfounded notion of predisease can result in overtreatment, such as taking drugs that only help people with severe disease or paying for treatments with a poor benefit–cost ratio. 
:One review proposed three criteria for predisease:
:* a high risk for progression to disease making one &quot;far more likely to develop&quot; it than others are- for example, a pre-cancer will almost certainly turn into cancer over time
:* actionability for risk reduction – for example, removal of the precancerous tissue prevents it from turning into a potentially deadly cancer
:* benefit that outweighs the harm of any interventions taken – removing the precancerous tissue prevents cancer, and thus prevents a potential death from cancer.

=== Types by body system ===
;Mental
:Mental illness is a broad, generic label for a category of illnesses that may include affective or emotional instability, behavioral dysregulation, cognitive dysfunction or impairment. Specific illnesses known as mental illnesses include major depression, generalized anxiety disorders, schizophrenia, and attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, to name a few. Mental illness can be of biological (e.g., anatomical, chemical, or genetic) or psychological (e.g., trauma or conflict) origin. It can impair the affected person&#x27;s ability to work or study and can harm interpersonal relationship.
;Organic
:An organic disease is one caused by a physical or physiological change to some tissue or organ of the body. The term sometimes excludes infections. It is commonly used in contrast with mental disorders. It includes emotional and behavioral disorders if they are due to changes to the physical structures or functioning of the body, such as after a stroke or a traumatic brain injury, but not if they are due to psychosocial issues.

=== Stages ===
In an infectious disease, the incubation period is the time between infection and the appearance of symptoms. The latency period is the time between infection and the ability of the disease to spread to another person, which may precede, follow, or be simultaneous with the appearance of symptoms. Some viruses also exhibit a dormant phase, called viral latency, in which the virus hides in the body in an inactive state. For example, varicella zoster virus causes chickenpox in the acute phase; after recovery from chickenpox, the virus may remain dormant in nerve cells for many years, and later cause herpes zoster (shingles).
;Acute disease
:An acute disease is a short-lived disease, like the common cold.
;Chronic disease
:A chronic disease is one that lasts for a long time, usually at least six months. During that time, it may be constantly present, or it may go into remission and periodically relapse. A chronic disease may be stable (does not get any worse) or it may be progressive (gets worse over time). Some chronic diseases can be permanently cured. Most chronic diseases can be beneficially treated, even if they cannot be permanently cured.
;Clinical disease
:One that has clinical consequences; in other words, the stage of the disease that produces the characteristic signs and symptoms of that disease. AIDS is the clinical disease stage of HIV infection.
;Cure
:A cure is the end of a medical condition or a treatment that is very likely to end it, while remission refers to the disappearance, possibly temporarily, of symptoms. Complete remission is the best possible outcome for incurable diseases.
;Flare-up

:A flare-up can refer to either the recurrence of symptoms or an onset of more severe symptoms.
;Progressive disease
:Progressive disease is a disease whose typical natural course is the worsening of the disease until death, serious debility, or organ failure occurs. Slowly progressive diseases are also chronic diseases; many are also degenerative diseases. The opposite of progressive disease is &quot;stable disease&quot; or &quot;static disease&quot;: a medical condition that exists, but does not get better or worse.
:A refractory disease is a disease that resists treatment, especially an individual case that resists treatment more than is normal for the specific disease in question.
;Subclinical disease
:Also called &quot;silent disease&quot;, &quot;silent stage&quot;, or &quot;asymptomatic disease&quot;. This is a stage in some diseases before the symptoms are first noted.
;Terminal phase
:If a person will die soon from a disease, regardless of whether that disease typically causes death, then the stage between the earlier disease process and active dying is the terminal phase.
;Recovery
:Recovery can refer to the repairing of physical processes (tissues, organs etc.) and the resumption of healthy functioning after damage causing processes have been cured.

=== Extent ===

;Localized disease
:A localized disease is one that affects only one part of the body, such as athlete&#x27;s foot or an eye infection.
;Disseminated disease
:A disseminated disease has spread to other parts; with cancer, this is usually called metastatic disease.
;Systemic disease
:A systemic disease is a disease that affects the entire body, such as influenza or high blood pressure.

== Classification ==

Diseases may be classified by cause, pathogenesis (mechanism by which the disease is caused), or by symptoms. Alternatively, diseases may be classified according to the organ system involved, though this is often complicated since many diseases affect more than one organ.

A chief difficulty in nosology is that diseases often cannot be defined and classified clearly, especially when cause or pathogenesis are unknown. Thus diagnostic terms often only reflect a symptom or set of symptoms (syndrome).

Classical classification of human disease derives from the observational correlation between pathological analysis and clinical syndromes. Today it is preferred to classify them by their cause if it is known.

The most known and used classification of diseases is the World Health Organization&#x27;s ICD. This is periodically updated. Currently, the last publication is the ICD-11.

== Causes ==

Diseases can be caused by any number of factors and may be acquired or congenital. Microorganisms, genetics, the environment or a combination of these can contribute to a diseased state. 

Only some diseases such as influenza are contagious and commonly believed infectious. The microorganisms that cause these diseases are known as pathogens and include varieties of bacteria, viruses, protozoa, and fungi. Infectious diseases can be transmitted, e.g. by hand-to-mouth contact with infectious material on surfaces, by bites of insects or other carriers of the disease, and from contaminated water or food (often via fecal contamination), etc. Also, there are sexually transmitted diseases. In some cases, microorganisms that are not readily spread from person to person play a role, while other diseases can be prevented or ameliorated with appropriate nutrition or other lifestyle changes.

Some diseases, such as most (but not all) forms of cancer, heart disease, and mental disorders, are non-infectious diseases. Many non-infectious diseases have a partly or completely genetic basis (see genetic disorder) and may thus be transmitted from one generation to another.

Social determinants of health are the social conditions in which people live that determine their health. Illnesses are generally related to social, economic, political, and environmental circumstances. Social determinants of health have been recognized by several health organizations such as the Public Health Agency of Canada and the World Health Organization to greatly influence collective and personal well-being. The World Health Organization&#x27;s Social Determinants Council also recognizes Social determinants of health in poverty.

When the cause of a disease is poorly understood, societies tend to mythologize the disease or use it as a metaphor or symbol of whatever that culture considers evil. For example, until the bacterial cause of tuberculosis was discovered in 1882, experts variously ascribed the disease to heredity, a sedentary lifestyle, depressed mood, and overindulgence in sex, rich food, or alcohol, all of which were social ills at the time.

When a disease is caused by a pathogenic organism (e.g., when malaria is caused by &quot;Plasmodium&quot;), one should not confuse the pathogen (the cause of the disease) with disease itself. For example, West Nile virus (the pathogen) causes West Nile fever (the disease). The misuse of basic definitions in epidemiology is frequent in scientific publications.

=== Types of causes ===

;Airborne: An airborne disease is any disease that is caused by pathogens and transmitted through the air.
;Foodborne: Foodborne illness or food poisoning is any illness resulting from the consumption of food contaminated with pathogenic bacteria, toxins, viruses, prions or parasites.
;Infectious: Infectious diseases, also known as transmissible diseases or communicable diseases, comprise clinically evident illness (i.e., characteristic medical signs or symptoms of disease) resulting from the infection, presence and growth of pathogenic biological agents in an individual host organism. Included in this category are &quot;contagious diseases&quot; – an infection, such as influenza or the common cold, that commonly spreads from one person to another – and &quot;communicable diseases&quot; – a disease that can spread from one person to another, but does not necessarily spread through everyday contact.
;Lifestyle: A lifestyle disease is any disease that appears to increase in frequency as countries become more industrialized and people live longer, especially if the risk factors include behavioral choices like a sedentary lifestyle or a diet high in unhealthful foods such as refined carbohydrates, trans fats, or alcoholic beverages.
;Non-communicable: A non-communicable disease is a medical condition or disease that is non-transmissible. Non-communicable diseases cannot be spread directly from one person to another. Heart disease and cancer are examples of non-communicable diseases in humans.

== Prevention ==

Many diseases and disorders can be prevented through a variety of means. These include sanitation, proper nutrition, adequate exercise, vaccinations and other self-care and public health measures, .

== Treatments ==

Medical therapies or treatments are efforts to cure or improve a disease or other health problems. In the medical field, therapy is synonymous with the word &quot;treatment&quot;. Among psychologists, the term may refer specifically to psychotherapy or &quot;talk therapy&quot;. Common treatments include medications, surgery, medical devices, and self-care. Treatments may be provided by an organized health care system, or informally, by the patient or family members.

Preventive healthcare is a way to avoid an injury, sickness, or disease in the first place. A treatment or cure is applied after a medical problem has already started. A treatment attempts to improve or remove a problem, but treatments may not produce permanent cures, especially in chronic diseases. Cures are a subset of treatments that reverse diseases completely or end medical problems permanently. Many diseases that cannot be completely cured are still treatable. Pain management (also called pain medicine) is that branch of medicine employing an interdisciplinary approach to the relief of pain and improvement in the quality of life of those living with pain.

Treatment for medical emergencies must be provided promptly, often through an emergency department or, in less critical situations, through an urgent care facility.

== Epidemiology ==

Epidemiology is the study of the factors that cause or encourage diseases. Some diseases are more common in certain geographic areas, among people with certain genetic or socioeconomic characteristics, or at different times of the year.

Epidemiology is considered a cornerstone methodology of public health research and is highly regarded in evidence-based medicine for identifying risk factors for diseases. In the study of communicable and non-communicable diseases, the work of epidemiologists ranges from outbreak investigation to study design, data collection, and analysis including the development of statistical models to test hypotheses and the documentation of results for submission to peer-reviewed journals. Epidemiologists also study the interaction of diseases in a population, a condition known as a syndemic. Epidemiologists rely on a number of other scientific disciplines such as biology (to better understand disease processes), biostatistics (the current raw information available), Geographic Information Science (to store data and map disease patterns) and social science disciplines (to better understand proximate and distal risk factors). Epidemiology can help identify causes as well as guide prevention efforts.

In studying diseases, epidemiology faces the challenge of defining them. Especially for poorly understood diseases, different groups might use significantly different definitions. Without an agreed-on definition, different researchers may report different numbers of cases and characteristics of the disease.

Some morbidity databases are compiled with data supplied by states and territories health authorities, at national levels or larger scale (such as European Hospital Morbidity Database (HMDB)) which may contain hospital discharge data by detailed diagnosis, age and sex. The European HMDB data was submitted by European countries to the World Health Organization Regional Office for Europe.

=== Burdens of disease ===
Disease burden is the impact of a health problem in an area measured by financial cost, mortality, morbidity, or other indicators.

There are several measures used to quantify the burden imposed by diseases on people. The years of potential life lost (YPLL) is a simple estimate of the number of years that a person&#x27;s life was shortened due to a disease. For example, if a person dies at the age of 65 from a disease, and would probably have lived until age 80 without that disease, then that disease has caused a loss of 15 years of potential life. YPLL measurements do not account for how disabled a person is before dying, so the measurement treats a person who dies suddenly and a person who died at the same age after decades of illness as equivalent. In 2004, the World Health Organization calculated that 932 million years of potential life were lost to premature death.

The quality-adjusted life year (QALY) and disability-adjusted life year (DALY) metrics are similar but take into account whether the person was healthy after diagnosis. In addition to the number of years lost due to premature death, these measurements add part of the years lost to being sick. Unlike YPLL, these measurements show the burden imposed on people who are very sick, but who live a normal lifespan. A disease that has high morbidity, but low mortality, has a high DALY and a low YPLL. In 2004, the World Health Organization calculated that 1.5 billion disability-adjusted life years were lost to disease and injury. In the developed world, heart disease and stroke cause the most loss of life, but neuropsychiatric conditions like major depressive disorder cause the most years lost to being sick.

== Society and culture ==
How a society responds to diseases is the subject of medical sociology.

A condition may be considered a disease in some cultures or eras but not in others. For example, obesity was associated with prosperity and abundance, and this perception persists in many African regions, especially since the beginning of the HIV/AIDS. Epilepsy is considered a sign of spiritual gifts among the Hmong people.

Sickness confers the social legitimization of certain benefits, such as illness benefits, work avoidance, and being looked after by others. The person who is sick takes on a social role called the sick role. A person who responds to a dreaded disease, such as cancer, in a culturally acceptable fashion may be publicly and privately honored with higher social status. In return for these benefits, the sick person is obligated to seek treatment and work to become well once more. As a comparison, consider pregnancy, which is not interpreted as a disease or sickness, even if the mother and baby may both benefit from medical care.

Most religions grant exceptions from religious duties to people who are sick. For example, one whose life would be endangered by fasting on Yom Kippur or during the month of Ramadan is exempted from the requirement, or even forbidden from participating. People who are sick are also exempted from social duties. For example, ill health is the only socially acceptable reason for an American to refuse an invitation to the White House.

The identification of a condition as a disease, rather than as simply a variation of human structure or function, can have significant social or economic implications. The controversial recognition of diseases such as repetitive stress injury (RSI) and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has had a number of positive and negative effects on the financial and other responsibilities of governments, corporations, and institutions towards individuals, as well as on the individuals themselves. The social implication of viewing aging as a disease could be profound, though this classification is not yet widespread.

Lepers were people who were historically shunned because they had an infectious disease, and the term &quot;leper&quot; still evokes social stigma. Fear of disease can still be a widespread social phenomenon, though not all diseases evoke extreme social stigma.

Social standing and economic status affect health. Diseases of poverty are diseases that are associated with poverty and low social status; diseases of affluence are diseases that are associated with high social and economic status. Which diseases are associated with which states vary according to time, place, and technology. Some diseases, such as diabetes mellitus, may be associated with both poverty (poor food choices) and affluence (long lifespans and sedentary lifestyles), through different mechanisms. The term &quot;lifestyle diseases&quot; describes diseases associated with longevity and that are more common among older people. For example, cancer is far more common in societies in which most members live until they reach the age of 80 than in societies in which most members die before they reach the age of 50.

=== Language of disease ===
An illness narrative is a way of organizing a medical experience into a coherent story that illustrates the sick individual&#x27;s personal experience.

People use metaphors to make sense of their experiences with disease. The metaphors move disease from an objective thing that exists to an affective experience. The most popular metaphors draw on military concepts: Disease is an enemy that must be feared, fought, battled, and routed. The patient or the healthcare provider is a warrior, rather than a passive victim or bystander. The agents of communicable diseases are invaders; non-communicable diseases constitute internal insurrection or civil war. Because the threat is urgent, perhaps a matter of life and death, unthinkably radical, even oppressive, measures are society&#x27;s and the patient&#x27;s moral duty as they courageously mobilize to struggle against destruction. The War on Cancer is an example of this metaphorical use of language. This language is empowering to some patients, but leaves others feeling like they are failures.

Another class of metaphors describes the experience of illness as a journey: The person travels to or from a place of disease, and changes himself, discovers new information, or increases his experience along the way. He may travel &quot;on the road to recovery&quot; or make changes to &quot;get on the right track&quot; or choose &quot;pathways&quot;. Some are explicitly immigration-themed: the patient has been exiled from the home territory of health to the land of the ill, changing identity and relationships in the process. This language is more common among British healthcare professionals than the language of physical aggression.

Some metaphors are disease-specific. Slavery is a common metaphor for addictions: The alcoholic is enslaved by drink, and the smoker is captive to nicotine. Some cancer patients treat the loss of their hair from chemotherapy as a metonymy or metaphor for all the losses caused by the disease.

Some diseases are used as metaphors for social ills: &quot;Cancer&quot; is a common description for anything that is endemic and destructive in society, such as poverty, injustice, or racism. AIDS was seen as a divine judgment for moral decadence, and only by purging itself from the &quot;pollution&quot; of the &quot;invader&quot; could society become healthy again. More recently, when AIDS seemed less threatening, this type of emotive language was applied to avian flu and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Authors in the 19th century commonly used tuberculosis as a symbol and a metaphor for transcendence. People with the disease were portrayed in literature as having risen above daily life to become ephemeral objects of spiritual or artistic achievement. In the 20th century, after its cause was better understood, the same disease became the emblem of poverty, squalor, and other social problems.

== See also ==

* Cryptogenic disease, a disease whose cause is currently unknown
* Developmental disability, severe, lifelong disabilities attributable to mental or physical impairments
* Environmental disease
* Host–pathogen interaction
* Lists of diseases
* Mitochondrial disease
* Philosophy of medicine
* Plant pathology
* Rare disease, a disease that affects very few people
* Sociology of health and illness
* Syndrome
== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;Man and Disease&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Anne Hardy, David Bradley &amp; Chris Dye (&quot;In Our Time&quot;, 15 December 2002)
* CTD The Comparative Toxicogenomics Database is a scientific resource connecting chemicals, genes, and human diseases.
* Free online health-risk assessment by Your Disease Risk at Washington University in St. Louis
* Health Topics A–Z, fact sheets about many common diseases at the Centers for Disease Control
* Health Topics, MedlinePlus descriptions of most diseases, with access to current research articles.
* NLM Comprehensive database from the US National Library of Medicine
* OMIM Comprehensive information on genes that cause disease at Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man
* Report: &quot;The global burden of disease&quot; from the World Health Organization (WHO), 2004
* &quot;The Merck Manual&quot; containing detailed description of most diseases</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="2" end="9" title="Disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736076" start="85" end="93" title="function (biology)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="167" end="173" title="injury" label="injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="206" end="224" title="Disease" label="medical conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="259" end="277" title="signs and symptoms" label="signs and symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="331" end="339" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="412" end="425" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q641307" start="498" end="514" title="immunodeficiency" label="immunodeficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="516" end="532" title="hypersensitivity" label="hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42982" start="534" end="543" title="allergy" label="allergies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8084905" start="549" end="569" title="autoimmune disorders" label="autoimmune disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q81938" start="668" end="672" title="pain" label="pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724302" start="674" end="685" title="Abnormality (behavior)" label="dysfunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283089" start="687" end="695" title="distress (medicine)" label="distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920219" start="697" end="712" title="social problems" label="social problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q4" start="717" end="722" title="death" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q193078" start="850" end="858" title="injury in humans" label="injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="860" end="872" title="disability" label="disabilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="874" end="883" title="Disorder (medicine)" label="disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="885" end="893" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="896" end="905" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="935" end="943" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406385" start="959" end="969" title="human variability" label="variations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438541" start="1293" end="1316" title="death by natural causes" label="death by natural causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12167" start="1377" end="1395" title="deficiency disease" label="deficiency disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="1398" end="1417" title="hereditary diseases" label="hereditary diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q579704" start="1446" end="1477" title="Non-Mendelian inheritance" label="non-genetic hereditary diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q525512" start="1563" end="1575" title="transmission (medicine)" label="communicable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="1583" end="1599" title="non-communicable disease" label="non-communicable"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="1647" end="1670" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010352" start="1709" end="1732" title="cerebrovascular disease" label="cerebrovascular disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631290" start="1737" end="1765" title="lower respiratory infections" label="lower respiratory infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="1845" end="1872" title="neuropsychiatric conditions" label="neuropsychiatric conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="1882" end="1892" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="1897" end="1904" title="Anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="1944" end="1953" title="pathology" label="pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5850078" start="1989" end="2009" title="Etiology (medicine)" label="&amp;quot;etiology&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q103191" start="2509" end="2530" title="homeostasis" label="homeostatic processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="2584" end="2602" title="infectious disease" label="infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="2676" end="2686" title="pathogenic" label="pathogenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="2724" end="2732" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="2734" end="2739" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47051" start="2807" end="2812" title="prion" label="prion"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="2818" end="2827" title="infection" label="infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q354341" start="2831" end="2843" title="colony (biology)" label="colonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q739734" start="2967" end="2997" title="gut flora" label="bacteria and yeasts in the gut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142604" start="3007" end="3022" title="passenger virus" label="passenger virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="3111" end="3128" title="incubation period" label="incubation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="3203" end="3225" title="Non-infectious disease" label="Non-infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="3275" end="3281" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="3283" end="3296" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="3302" end="3317" title="genetic disease" label="genetic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="3484" end="3502" title="congenital disorder" label="congenital disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="3799" end="3804" title="acute (medicine)" label="acute"/>
<link wikidata="Q661062" start="3831" end="3839" title="connotation" label="connotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508364" start="3842" end="3851" title="fulminant" label="fulminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="3900" end="3915" title="chronic condition" label="chronic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="4128" end="4147" title="congenital disorder" label="congenital disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q14819852" start="4174" end="4179" title="birth" label="birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="4195" end="4222" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disease or disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="4234" end="4243" title="heredity" label="inherited"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113827" start="4276" end="4308" title="vertically transmitted infection" label="vertically transmitted infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="4334" end="4342" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="4364" end="4380" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="4425" end="4433" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178694" start="4616" end="4626" title="heredity" label="hereditary"/>
<link wikidata="Q284220" start="4677" end="4695" title="Iatrogenesis" label="iatrogenic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q594841" start="4850" end="4868" title="idiopathic disease" label="idiopathic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q192360" start="5256" end="5268" title="autoimmunity" label="autoimmunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="5299" end="5323" title="diabetes mellitus type 1" label="diabetes mellitus type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="5459" end="5469" title="association (statistics)" label="associated"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="5541" end="5550" title="causality" label="causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595418" start="5692" end="5696" title="cure" label="cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364787" start="5738" end="5754" title="terminal disease" label="terminal disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="5872" end="5887" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401207" start="5955" end="5965" title="root cause analysis" label="root cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089469" start="6022" end="6029" title="sequela" label="sequela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346149" start="6034" end="6046" title="complication (medicine)" label="complication"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="6101" end="6112" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q114085" start="6141" end="6149" title="rhinitis" label="rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089469" start="6186" end="6193" title="sequela" label="sequela"/>
<link wikidata="Q114085" start="6310" end="6318" title="rhinitis" label="rhinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3089469" start="6437" end="6444" title="sequela" label="sequela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346149" start="6448" end="6460" title="complication (medicine)" label="complication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401207" start="6565" end="6575" title="root cause analysis" label="root cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928978" start="6805" end="6820" title="viral infection" label="viral infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059" start="6838" end="6851" title="immune system" label="immune system"/>
<link wikidata="Q170518" start="6920" end="6924" title="burn" label="burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="7640" end="7652" title="asymptomatic" label="asymptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2326546" start="7683" end="7704" title="subclinical infection" label="subclinical infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134368" start="7940" end="7951" title="medicalizes" label="medicalizes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187990" start="8225" end="8242" title="evolutionary medicine" label="evolved responses"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507668" start="8245" end="8262" title="sickness behavior" label="sickness behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637420" start="8362" end="8370" title="lethargy" label="lethargy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="8372" end="8382" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q254327" start="8384" end="8400" title="anorexia (symptom)" label="loss of appetite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077823" start="8402" end="8412" title="sleepiness" label="sleepiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633866" start="8414" end="8426" title="hyperalgesia" label="hyperalgesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="8445" end="8456" title="Attention" label="concentrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="8609" end="8624" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q30314000" start="8627" end="8644" title="physical disorder" label="physical disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="8647" end="8663" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063847" start="8666" end="8700" title="emotional and behavioral disorders" label="emotional and behavioral disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474598" start="8706" end="8725" title="functional disorder" label="functional disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725568" start="9056" end="9101" title="Biopsychosocial model" label="biological, social, and psychological factors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="9105" end="9116" title="Psychiatry" label="psychiatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351083" start="9308" end="9326" title="metabolic disorder" label="metabolic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q827023" start="9480" end="9486" title="lesion" label="lesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="9577" end="9586" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q34581" start="9590" end="9600" title="childbirth" label="childbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201561" start="9824" end="9877" title="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" label="Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="9955" end="9970" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q334911" start="10173" end="10189" title="health insurance" label="health insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969661" start="10327" end="10340" title="value-neutral" label="value-neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920250" start="10631" end="10653" title="autism rights movement" label="autism rights movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806605" start="10723" end="10736" title="medical state" label="medical state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12131" start="10990" end="11000" title="disability" label="disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5969804" start="11232" end="11251" title="ICU scoring systems" label="ICU scoring systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414874" start="11253" end="11264" title="Comorbidity" label="Comorbidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="11362" end="11375" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="11380" end="11395" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="11401" end="11413" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128453" start="11418" end="11435" title="actuarial science" label="actuarial science"/>
<link wikidata="Q217690" start="11561" end="11570" title="incidence (epidemiology)" label="incidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q719602" start="11581" end="11591" title="prevalence" label="prevalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="11743" end="11752" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q58702" start="11813" end="11827" title="mortality rate" label="mortality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208" start="12344" end="12353" title="pathology" label="pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570700" start="12374" end="12379" title="word sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q5977147" start="12431" end="12449" title="medical literature" label="medical literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q661062" start="12481" end="12492" title="connotation" label="connotative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135939" start="12612" end="12636" title="pathophysiology" label="pathophysiologic process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189753" start="12800" end="12812" title="denotation" label="denotatively"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141247" start="12834" end="12852" title="cognitive synonymy" label="cognitive synonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="12891" end="12899" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="12936" end="12954" title="signs and symptoms" label="signs and symptoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q47715" start="13073" end="13086" title="Down syndrome" label="Down syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="13130" end="13140" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531991" start="13167" end="13188" title="Parkinsonian syndrome" label="Parkinsonian syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q266018" start="13233" end="13256" title="Acute coronary syndrome" label="Acute coronary syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="13371" end="13392" title="myocardial infarction" label="myocardial infarction"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="13406" end="13429" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q594841" start="13468" end="13484" title="idiopathy" label="cause is unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="13689" end="13704" title="Turner syndrome" label="Turner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q525642" start="13709" end="13726" title="DiGeorge syndrome" label="DiGeorge syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="13915" end="13926" title="subclinical" label="subclinical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140331" start="13930" end="13939" title="prodrome" label="prodromal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087205" start="13963" end="13974" title="Prediabetes" label="Prediabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239981" start="13979" end="13994" title="prehypertension" label="prehypertension"/>
<link wikidata="Q845300" start="14020" end="14028" title="nosology" label="nosology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967356" start="14109" end="14120" title="bright line" label="bright line"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="14204" end="14224" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134368" start="14232" end="14251" title="medicalization" label="over-medicalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114070" start="14592" end="14605" title="overtreatment" label="overtreatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887470" start="14707" end="14725" title="benefit–cost ratio" label="benefit–cost ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088163" start="14907" end="14917" title="Precancerous condition" label="pre-cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="15313" end="15327" title="Mental disorder" label="Mental illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="15412" end="15419" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="15551" end="15567" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="15581" end="15597" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="15600" end="15613" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="15619" end="15659" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="16270" end="16276" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410145" start="16333" end="16345" title="psychosocial" label="psychosocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193566" start="16400" end="16417" title="incubation period" label="incubation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q96387011" start="16484" end="16498" title="latency period" label="latency period"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115619" start="16718" end="16731" title="viral latency" label="viral latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6868" start="16805" end="16827" title="varicella zoster virus" label="varicella zoster virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44727" start="16835" end="16845" title="chickenpox" label="chickenpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="16853" end="16864" title="acute (medicine)" label="acute phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q182155" start="16974" end="16987" title="herpes zoster" label="herpes zoster"/>
<link wikidata="Q557429" start="17019" end="17032" title="acute disease" label="acute disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="17068" end="17079" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="17101" end="17116" title="chronic disease" label="chronic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="17247" end="17256" title="remission (medicine)" label="remission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292472" start="17274" end="17281" title="relapse" label="relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="17695" end="17699" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="17733" end="17746" title="HIV infection" label="HIV infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595418" start="17757" end="17761" title="cure" label="cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571900" start="17848" end="17857" title="Remission (medicine)" label="remission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951525" start="18123" end="18142" title="Progressive disease" label="Progressive disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="18310" end="18325" title="chronic disease" label="chronic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q954257" start="18342" end="18362" title="degenerative disease" label="degenerative disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664621" start="19324" end="19341" title="localized disease" label="localized disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609817" start="19397" end="19416" title="athlete&amp;#x27;s foot" label="athlete&amp;#x27;s foot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19423" end="19436" title="Human eye#Disease" label="eye infection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282748" start="19463" end="19483" title="disseminated disease" label="disseminated disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q181876" start="19547" end="19565" title="metastatic disease" label="metastatic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414805" start="19588" end="19604" title="systemic disease" label="systemic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="19656" end="19665" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="19669" end="19688" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q372016" start="19750" end="19762" title="pathogenesis" label="pathogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804646" start="19764" end="19773" title="mechanism (biology)" label="mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q112965645" start="19813" end="19820" title="symptom" label="symptom"/>
<link wikidata="Q188193" start="19882" end="19894" title="organ system" label="organ system"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="20205" end="20213" title="syndrome" label="syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="20485" end="20510" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q50018" start="20518" end="20521" title="International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems" label="ICD"/>
<link wikidata="Q55695727" start="20592" end="20598" title="ICD-11" label="ICD-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="20686" end="20696" title="Birth defect" label="congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="20698" end="20711" title="Microorganism" label="Microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="20831" end="20840" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="20894" end="20907" title="microorganism" label="microorganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="21023" end="21041" title="Infectious disease" label="Infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q107994" start="21143" end="21168" title="vector (epidemiology)" label="insects or other carriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="21232" end="21237" title="feces" label="fecal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="21275" end="21303" title="sexually transmitted disease" label="sexually transmitted disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="21469" end="21478" title="nutrition" label="nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q247491" start="21541" end="21548" title="Infectious cancer" label="not all"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="21559" end="21565" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="21567" end="21580" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="21608" end="21630" title="non-infectious disease" label="non-infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="21709" end="21725" title="genetic disorder" label="genetic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045352" start="21788" end="21817" title="Social determinants of health" label="Social determinants of health"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751709" start="21962" end="21989" title="Environmental disease" label="environmental circumstances"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="22110" end="22116" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551047" start="22289" end="22329" title="Social determinants of health in poverty" label="Social determinants of health in poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="22439" end="22447" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="22541" end="22553" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200779" start="22620" end="22628" title="hereditary disease" label="heredity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349358" start="22632" end="22651" title="sedentary lifestyle" label="sedentary lifestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="22653" end="22667" title="depression (mood)" label="depressed mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920219" start="22737" end="22748" title="social ills" label="social ills"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="22793" end="22801" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12156" start="22825" end="22832" title="malaria" label="malaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q130948" start="22852" end="22862" title="Plasmodium" label="Plasmodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q170065" start="22898" end="22906" title="pathogen" label="pathogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q158856" start="22968" end="22983" title="West Nile virus" label="West Nile virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11627066" start="23006" end="23021" title="West Nile fever" label="West Nile fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q133805" start="23072" end="23084" title="epidemiology" label="epidemiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q381481" start="23165" end="23181" title="airborne disease" label="airborne disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q272002" start="23270" end="23287" title="Foodborne illness" label="Foodborne illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="23450" end="23468" title="Infectious disease" label="Infectious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="23780" end="23798" title="contagious disease" label="contagious disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="23830" end="23839" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q12125" start="23847" end="23858" title="common cold" label="common cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q166231" start="23921" end="23941" title="communicable disease" label="communicable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12600757" start="24077" end="24094" title="lifestyle disease" label="lifestyle disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137154" start="24421" end="24445" title="non-communicable disease" label="non-communicable disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="24587" end="24600" title="Heart disease" label="Heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="24605" end="24611" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q949149" start="24771" end="24781" title="sanitation" label="sanitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138622" start="24790" end="24799" title="nutrition" label="nutrition"/>
<link wikidata="Q219067" start="24810" end="24818" title="exercise" label="exercise"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="24820" end="24831" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q4519653" start="24843" end="24852" title="self-care" label="self-care"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="24857" end="24870" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="25138" end="25151" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="25207" end="25217" title="medication" label="medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="25220" end="25227" title="surgery" label="surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554101" start="25229" end="25244" title="medical devices" label="medical devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q4519653" start="25250" end="25259" title="self-care" label="self-care"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000047" start="25304" end="25322" title="health care system" label="health care system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="25374" end="25395" title="Preventive healthcare" label="Preventive healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q383126" start="25657" end="25673" title="chronic diseases" label="chronic diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595418" start="25675" end="25679" title="Cure" label="Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q621261" start="25845" end="25860" title="Pain management" label="Pain management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751242" start="26059" end="26078" title="medical emergencies" label="medical emergencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295316" start="26123" end="26143" title="emergency department" label="emergency department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900484" start="26188" end="26199" title="urgent care" label="urgent care"/>
<link wikidata="Q691640" start="26574" end="26597" title="evidence-based medicine" label="evidence-based medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475848" start="26614" end="26625" title="Risk factor (epidemiology)" label="risk factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241045" start="26741" end="26749" title="outbreak" label="outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7662290" start="27048" end="27056" title="syndemic" label="syndemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="27131" end="27138" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q214746" start="27181" end="27194" title="biostatistics" label="biostatistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537694" start="27236" end="27266" title="Geographic Information Science" label="Geographic Information Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="27312" end="27326" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282120" start="28201" end="28215" title="Disease burden" label="Disease burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852035" start="28423" end="28451" title="years of potential life lost" label="years of potential life lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="28976" end="29001" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q614165" start="29089" end="29115" title="quality-adjusted life year" label="quality-adjusted life year"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627" start="29127" end="29156" title="disability-adjusted life year" label="disability-adjusted life year"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="29737" end="29750" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="29755" end="29761" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="29795" end="29822" title="neuropsychiatric conditions" label="neuropsychiatric conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="29828" end="29853" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916660" start="29975" end="29992" title="medical sociology" label="medical sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="30092" end="30099" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003455" start="30238" end="30246" title="AIDS wasting" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="30248" end="30256" title="Epilepsy" label="Epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="30307" end="30319" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671751" start="30519" end="30528" title="sick role" label="sick role"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031456" start="30582" end="30588" title="cancer survivor" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q189970" start="30675" end="30688" title="social status" label="social status"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="30828" end="30837" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44602" start="31084" end="31091" title="fasting" label="fasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q132994" start="31095" end="31105" title="Yom Kippur" label="Yom Kippur"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="31129" end="31136" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="31377" end="31388" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q877796" start="31609" end="31633" title="repetitive stress injury" label="repetitive stress injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="31644" end="31674" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070979" start="31920" end="31925" title="senescence" label="aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="32009" end="32015" title="Leprosy" label="Lepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137326" start="32142" end="32155" title="social stigma" label="social stigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936838" start="32323" end="32342" title="Diseases of poverty" label="Diseases of poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="32381" end="32388" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q206866" start="32412" end="32433" title="diseases of affluence" label="diseases of affluence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="32623" end="32640" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12600757" start="32794" end="32824" title="lifestyle disease" label="&amp;quot;lifestyle diseases&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="32928" end="32934" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="33134" end="33151" title="illness narrative" label="illness narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534" start="33295" end="33303" title="metaphor" label="metaphor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="33423" end="33432" title="affective" label="affective"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="33480" end="33488" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250916" start="33613" end="33620" title="warrior" label="warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q467011" start="33705" end="33713" title="Invasion" label="invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="33761" end="33773" title="insurrection" label="insurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="33777" end="33786" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q475706" start="34021" end="34034" title="War on Cancer" label="War on Cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="34864" end="34871" title="Slavery" label="Slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q12029" start="34897" end="34906" title="addiction" label="addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q974135" start="35039" end="35051" title="chemotherapy" label="chemotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41966" start="35057" end="35065" title="metonymy" label="metonymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q319446" start="35585" end="35594" title="Avian flu outbreak of 2009" label="avian flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="35599" end="35623" title="type 2 diabetes mellitus" label="type 2 diabetes mellitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850847" start="35653" end="35679" title="Tuberculosis in popular culture" label="commonly used tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493282" start="35711" end="35724" title="Transcendence (religion)" label="transcendence"/>
<link wikidata="Q594841" start="36040" end="36059" title="Cryptogenic disease" label="Cryptogenic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142806" start="36106" end="36130" title="Developmental disability" label="Developmental disability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751709" start="36211" end="36232" title="Environmental disease" label="Environmental disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909198" start="36235" end="36260" title="Host–pathogen interaction" label="Host–pathogen interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q120670133" start="36263" end="36280" title="Lists of diseases" label="Lists of diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q935710" start="36283" end="36304" title="Mitochondrial disease" label="Mitochondrial disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427574" start="36307" end="36329" title="Philosophy of medicine" label="Philosophy of medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188956" start="36332" end="36347" title="Plant pathology" label="Plant pathology"/>
<link wikidata="Q929833" start="36350" end="36362" title="Rare disease" label="Rare disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552854" start="36405" end="36436" title="Sociology of health and illness" label="Sociology of health and illness"/>
<link wikidata="Q179630" start="36439" end="36447" title="Syndrome" label="Syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="36518" end="36529" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="36595" end="36606" title="In Our Time (radio series)" label="In Our Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155628" start="36642" end="36677" title="Comparative Toxicogenomics Database" label="Comparative Toxicogenomics Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058778" start="36792" end="36809" title="Your Disease Risk" label="Your Disease Risk"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="36915" end="36942" title="Centers for Disease Control" label="Centers for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q557919" start="36960" end="36971" title="MedlinePlus" label="MedlinePlus"/>
<link wikidata="Q611833" start="37083" end="37114" title="US National Library of Medicine" label="US National Library of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q241953" start="37179" end="37214" title="Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man" label="Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="37275" end="37300" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8073" wikidata="Q6514" url="?curid=8073" title="Dardanelles">
<text>The Dardanelles ( ; ; ), also known as the Strait of Gallipoli (after the Gallipoli peninsula) and in classical antiquity as the Hellespont ( ; ), is a narrow, natural strait and internationally significant waterway in northwestern Turkey that forms part of the continental boundary between Asia and Europe and separates Asian Turkey from European Turkey. Together with the Bosporus, the Dardanelles forms the Turkish Straits.

One of the world&#x27;s narrowest straits used for international navigation, the Dardanelles connects the Sea of Marmara with the Aegean and Mediterranean seas while also allowing passage to the Black Sea by extension via the Bosporus. The Dardanelles is long and wide. It has an average depth of with a maximum depth of at its narrowest point abreast the city of Çanakkale. The first fixed crossing across the Dardanelles opened in 2022 with the completion of the 1915 Çanakkale Bridge.

Most of the northern shores of the strait along the Gallipoli peninsula () are sparsely settled, while the southern shores along the Troad peninsula () are inhabited by the city of Çanakkale&#x27;s urban population of 110,000.

==Names==
The contemporary Turkish name , meaning &#x27; Strait&#x27;, is derived from the eponymous midsize city that adjoins the strait, itself meaning &#x27;pottery fort&#x27;—from (, &#x27;pottery&#x27;) + (, &#x27;fortress&#x27;)—in reference to the area&#x27;s famous pottery and ceramic wares, and the landmark Ottoman fortress of Sultaniye.

The English name &quot;Dardanelles&quot; is an abbreviation of &quot;Strait of the Dardanelles&quot;. During Ottoman times there was a castle on each side of the strait. These castles together were called the &quot;Dardanelles&quot;, probably named after Dardanus, an ancient city on the Asian shore of the strait which in turn was said to take its name from Dardanus, the mythical son of Zeus and Electra. The name comes from the Dardani in the Balkans, according to Papazoglu.

The ancient Greek name () means &quot;Sea of Helle&quot;, and was the ancient name of the narrow strait. It was variously named in classical literature , , and . It was so called from Helle, the daughter of Athamas, who was drowned here in the mythology of the Golden Fleece.

==Geography==
As a waterway, the Dardanelles connects various seas along the Eastern Mediterranean, the Balkans, the Near East, and Western Eurasia, and specifically connects the Aegean Sea to the Sea of Marmara. The Marmara further connects to the Black Sea via the Bosporus, while the Aegean further links to the Mediterranean. Thus, the Dardanelles allows maritime connections from the Black Sea all the way to the Mediterranean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean via Gibraltar, and the Indian Ocean through the Suez Canal, making it a crucial international waterway, in particular for the passage of goods coming in from Russia.

The strait is located at approximately .

===Present morphology===
The strait is long, and wide, averaging deep with a maximum depth of at its narrowest point at Nara Burnu, abreast Çanakkale. There are two major currents through the strait: a surface current flows from the Black Sea towards the Aegean Sea, and a more saline undercurrent flows in the opposite direction.

The Dardanelles is unique in many respects. The very narrow and winding shape of the strait is more akin to that of a river. It is considered one of the most hazardous, crowded, difficult and potentially dangerous waterways in the world. The currents produced by the tidal action in the Black Sea and the Sea of Marmara are such that ships under sail must wait at anchorage for the right conditions before entering the Dardanelles.

==History==
As part of the only passage between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean, the Dardanelles has always been of great importance from a commercial and military point of view, and remains strategically important today. It is a major sea access route for numerous countries, including Russia and Ukraine. Control over it has been an objective of a number of hostilities in modern history, notably the attack of the Allied Powers on the Dardanelles during the 1915 Battle of Gallipoli in the course of World War I.

===Ancient Dardanian, Persian, Roman, and Byzantine eras (pre-1454)===
====Dardanian and Persian history====

The ancient city of Troy was located near the western entrance of the strait, and the strait&#x27;s Asiatic shore was the focus of the Trojan War. Troy was able to control the marine traffic entering this vital waterway. The Persian army of Xerxes I of Persia and later the Macedonian army of Alexander the Great crossed the Dardanelles in opposite directions to invade each other&#x27;s lands, in 480 BC and 334 BC respectively.

Herodotus says that, circa 482 BC, Xerxes I (the son of Darius) had two pontoon bridges built across the width of the Hellespont at Abydos, in order that his huge army could cross from Persia into Greece. This crossing was named by Aeschylus in his tragedy &quot;The Persians&quot; as the cause of divine intervention against Xerxes.

According to Herodotus (vv.34), both bridges were destroyed by a storm and Xerxes had those responsible for building the bridges beheaded and the strait itself whipped. The Histories of Herodotus vii.33–37 and vii.54–58 give details of building and crossing of Xerxes&#x27; Pontoon Bridges. Xerxes is then said to have thrown fetters into the strait, given it three hundred lashes with multiple whips and branded it with red-hot irons as the soldiers shouted at the water.

Herodotus commented that this was a &quot;highly presumptuous way to address the Hellespont&quot; but in no way atypical of Xerxes. (vii.35)

Harpalus the engineer is said to have eventually helped the invading armies to cross by lashing the ships together with their bows facing the current and adding two additional anchors to each ship. 

From the perspective of ancient Greek mythology Helle, the daughter of Athamas, supposedly was drowned at the Dardanelles in the legend of the Golden Fleece. Likewise, the strait was the scene of the legend of Hero and Leander, wherein the lovesick Leander swam the strait nightly in order to tryst with his beloved, the priestess Hero, but was ultimately drowned in a storm.

====Byzantine history====
The Dardanelles were vital to the defence of Constantinople during the Byzantine period.

Also, the Dardanelles was an important source of income for the ruler of the region. At the Istanbul Archaeological Museum a marble plate contains a law by the Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I (491–518 AD), that regulated fees for passage through the customs office of the Dardanelles. Translation:

... Whoever dares to violate these regulations shall no longer be regarded as a friend, and he shall be punished. Besides, the administrator of the Dardanelles must have the right to receive 50 golden Litrons, so that these rules, which we make out of piety, shall never ever be violated... ... The distinguished governor and major of the capital, who already has both hands full of things to do, has turned to our lofty piety in order to reorganize the entry and exit of all ships through the Dardanelles... ... Starting from our day and also in the future, anybody who wants to pass through the Dardanelles must pay the following: 
– All wine merchants who bring wine to the capital (Constantinopolis), except Cilicians, have to pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis and 2 sextarius of wine. 
– In the same manner, all merchants of olive-oil, vegetables and lard must pay the Dardanelles officials 6 follis. Cilician sea-merchants have to pay 3 follis and in addition to that, 1 keration (12 follis) to enter, and 2 keration to exit.
– All wheat merchants have to pay the officials 3 follis per modius, and a further sum of 3 follis when leaving.

Since the 14th century the Dardanelles have almost continuously been controlled by the Turks.

===Ottoman era (1354–1922)===

The Dardanelles continued to constitute an important waterway during the period of the Ottoman Empire, which conquered Gallipoli in 1354.

Ottoman control of the strait continued largely without interruption or challenges until the 19th century, when the Empire started its decline.

====Nineteenth century====
Gaining control of, or guaranteed access to, the strait became a key foreign-policy goal of the Russian Empire during the 19th century. During the Napoleonic Wars, Russia—supported by Great Britain in the Dardanelles Operation—blockaded the straits in 1807. 

In 1833, following the Ottoman Empire&#x27;s defeat in the Russo-Turkish War of 1828–1829, Russia pressured the Ottomans to sign the Treaty of Hunkiar Iskelesi—which required the closing of the straits to warships of non-Black Sea powers at Russia&#x27;s request. That would have effectively given Russia a free hand in the Black Sea.

This treaty alarmed the Ottoman Empire, who were concerned that the consequences of potential Russian expansionism in the Black Sea and Mediterranean regions could conflict with their own possessions and economic interest in the region. At the London Straits Convention in July 1841, the United Kingdom, France, Austria, and Prussia pressured Russia to agree that only Turkish warships could traverse the Dardanelles in peacetime. The United Kingdom and France subsequently sent their fleets through the straits to defend the Danube front and to attack the Crimean Peninsula during the Crimean War of 1853–1856 – but they did so as allies of the Ottoman Empire. Following the defeat of Russia in the Crimean War, the Congress of Paris in 1856 formally reaffirmed the London Straits Convention.

====World War I====



In 1915 the Allies sent a substantial invasion force of British, Indian, Australian, New Zealand, French and Newfoundland troops to attempt to open up the straits. In the Gallipoli campaign, Turkish troops trapped the Allies on the coasts of the Gallipoli peninsula. The campaign damaged the career of Winston Churchill, then First Lord of the Admiralty (in office 1911–1915), who had eagerly promoted the (unsuccessful) use of Royal Navy sea power to force open the straits. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, subsequent founder of the Republic of Turkey, served as an Ottoman commander during the land campaign.

The Turks mined the straits to prevent Allied ships from penetrating them but, in minor actions two submarines, one British and one Australian, did succeed in penetrating the minefields. The British submarine sank an obsolete Turkish pre-dreadnought battleship off the Golden Horn of Istanbul. Sir Ian Hamilton&#x27;s Mediterranean Expeditionary Force failed in its attempt to capture the Gallipoli peninsula, and the British cabinet ordered its withdrawal in December 1915, after eight months&#x27; fighting. Total Allied deaths included 41,000 British and Irish, 15,000 French, 8,700 Australians, 2,700 New Zealanders, 1,370 Indians and 49 Newfoundlanders. Total Turkish deaths were around 60,000.

Following the war, the 1920 Treaty of Sèvres demilitarized the strait and made it an international territory under the control of the League of Nations. The Ottoman Empire&#x27;s non-ethnically Turkish territories were broken up and partitioned among the Allied Powers, and Turkish jurisdiction over the straits curbed.

===Turkish republican and modern eras (1923–present)===
After the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire following a lengthy campaign by Turks as part of the Turkish War of Independence against both the Allied Powers and the Ottoman court, the Republic of Turkey was created in 1923 by the Treaty of Lausanne, which established most of the modern sovereign territory of Turkey and restored the straits to Turkish territory, with the condition that Turkey keep them demilitarized and allow all foreign warships and commercial shipping to traverse the straits freely.

As part of its national security strategy, Turkey eventually rejected the terms of the treaty, and subsequently remilitarized the straits area over the following decade. Following extensive diplomatic negotiations, the reversion was formalized under the Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits on 20 July 1936. That convention, which is still in force today, treats the straits as an international shipping lane while allowing Turkey to retain the right to restrict the naval traffic of non-Black Sea states.

During World War II, through February 1945, when Turkey was neutral for most of the length of the conflict, the Dardanelles were closed to the ships of the belligerent nations. Turkey declared war on Germany in February 1945, but it did not employ any offensive forces during the war.

In July 1946, the Soviet Union sent a note to Turkey proposing a new régime for the Dardanelles that would have excluded all nations except the Black Sea powers. The second proposal was that the straits should be put under joint Turkish-Soviet defence. This meant that Turkey, the Soviet Union, Bulgaria and Romania would be the only states having access to the Black Sea through the Dardanelles. The Turkish government however, under pressure from the United States, rejected these proposals.

Turkey joined NATO in 1952, thus affording its straits even more strategic importance as a commercial and military waterway.

In more recent years, the Turkish Straits have become particularly important for the oil industry. Russian oil, from ports such as Novorossyisk, is exported by tankers primarily to western Europe and the U.S. via the Bosporus and the Dardanelles straits.

The Dardanelles were closed in late February 2022 to all foreign warships at the beginning of the Russian invasion of Ukraine in accordance with the Montreux Convention.

== Crossings ==
=== Maritime ===
The waters of the Dardanelles are traversed by numerous passenger and vehicular ferries daily, as well as recreational and fishing boats ranging from dinghies to yachts owned by both public and private entities.

The strait also experiences significant amounts of commercial shipping traffic.

=== Land ===

The Çanakkale 1915 Bridge joins Lapseki, a district of Çanakkale, on the Asian side and Sütlüce, a village of the Gelibolu district, on the European side. It is part of planned expansions to the Turkish National Highway Network. Work on the bridge began in March 2017, and it was opened on March 18, 2022.

=== Subsea ===
2 submarine cable systems transmitting electric power at 400 kV bridge the Dardanelles to feed west and east of Istanbul. They have their own landing stations in Lapseki and Sütlüce. The first, situated in the northeast quarter portion of the strait, was energised in April 2015 and provides 2 GW via 6 phases 400 kV AC 3.9 km far through the sea. The second, somewhat in the middle of the strait, was still under construction in June 2016 and will provide similar capabilities to the first line.

Both subsea power lines cross 4 optical fibre data lines laid earlier along the strait. A published map shows communication lines leading from Istanbul into the Mediterranean, named MedNautilus and landing at Athens, Sicily and elsewhere.

== Image gallery ==
==See also==
* Action of 26 June 1656
* Battle of the Dardanelles (disambiguation)
* Dardanelles Commission
* List of maritime incidents in the Turkish Straits

==References==
==External links==

* Pictures of the city of Çanakkale
* Map of Hellespont
* Livius.org: Hellespont 
* Monuments and memorials of the Gallipoli campaign along the Dardanelles
* Old Maps of the Dardanelles, Eran Laor Cartographic collection, The National Library of Israel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="4" end="15" title="Dardanelles" label="Dardanelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="43" end="62" title="Dardanelles" label="Strait of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q192860" start="74" end="83" title="Gallipoli" label="Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514" start="129" end="139" title="Dardanelles" label="Hellespont"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="232" end="238" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="291" end="295" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="300" end="306" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="374" end="382" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="410" end="425" title="Turkish Straits" label="Turkish Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q25855" start="479" end="503" title="International waterway" label="international navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="534" end="548" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="558" end="564" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="569" end="582" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="623" end="632" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q199712" start="792" end="801" title="Çanakkale" label="Çanakkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833672" start="813" end="827" title="fixed crossing" label="fixed crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077503" start="893" end="914" title="1915 Çanakkale Bridge" label="1915 Çanakkale Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="1050" end="1055" title="Troad" label="Troad"/>
<link wikidata="Q199712" start="1236" end="1258" title="Çanakkale" label="eponymous midsize city"/>
<link wikidata="Q950952" start="1750" end="1758" title="Dardanus (city)" label="Dardanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461212" start="1854" end="1862" title="Dardanus (son of Zeus)" label="Dardanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="1884" end="1888" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q858663" start="1893" end="1900" title="Electra (Pleiad)" label="Electra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043335" start="1926" end="1933" title="Dardani" label="Dardani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="1987" end="1992" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q638578" start="2159" end="2164" title="Helle (mythology)" label="Helle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212262" start="2236" end="2249" title="Golden Fleece" label="Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267889" start="2271" end="2279" title="waterway" label="waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301962" start="2329" end="2350" title="Eastern Mediterranean" label="Eastern Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="2356" end="2363" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q48214" start="2369" end="2378" title="Near East" label="Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="2384" end="2399" title="Western Eurasia" label="Western Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="2431" end="2441" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="2449" end="2463" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="2501" end="2510" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="2519" end="2527" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2567" end="2580" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="2759" end="2769" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2869" end="2875" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010478" start="3040" end="3050" title="Nara Burnu" label="Nara Burnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q199712" start="3060" end="3069" title="Çanakkale" label="Çanakkale"/>
<link wikidata="Q129558" start="3122" end="3137" title="surface current" label="surface current"/>
<link wikidata="Q981348" start="3205" end="3217" title="subsurface current" label="undercurrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3976" end="3982" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="3987" end="3994" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="4106" end="4119" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="4155" end="4174" title="Battle of Gallipoli" label="Battle of Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="4192" end="4203" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="4336" end="4340" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="4451" end="4461" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4541" end="4548" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q129165" start="4557" end="4575" title="Xerxes I of Persia" label="Xerxes I of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="4609" end="4628" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="4747" end="4756" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="4803" end="4809" title="Darius the Great" label="Darius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104072" start="4819" end="4833" title="pontoon bridge" label="pontoon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q336446" start="4879" end="4885" title="Abydos, Hellespont" label="Abydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4944" end="4950" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q40939" start="4979" end="4988" title="Aeschylus" label="Aeschylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q788458" start="5010" end="5022" title="The Persians" label="The Persians"/>
<link wikidata="Q129165" start="5157" end="5163" title="Xerxes I of Persia" label="Xerxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="5251" end="5277" title="The Histories of Herodotus" label="The Histories of Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315391" start="5343" end="5371" title="Xerxes&amp;#x27; Pontoon Bridges" label="Xerxes&amp;#x27; Pontoon Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478548" start="5408" end="5415" title="fetters" label="fetters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5663133" start="5698" end="5719" title="Harpalus (engineer)" label="Harpalus the engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="5922" end="5945" title="ancient Greek mythology" label="ancient Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q638578" start="5946" end="5951" title="Helle (mythology)" label="Helle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212262" start="6041" end="6054" title="Golden Fleece" label="Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q747392" start="6108" end="6124" title="Hero and Leander" label="Hero and Leander"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="6346" end="6360" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="6372" end="6381" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="6483" end="6491" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q173470" start="6551" end="6581" title="Anastasius I (emperor)" label="Byzantine Emperor Anastasius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q620864" start="7401" end="7408" title="Cilicia" label="Cilicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135840" start="7452" end="7458" title="follis" label="follis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161819" start="7465" end="7474" title="sextarius" label="sextarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8053" end="8067" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q916266" start="8075" end="8094" title="Fall of Gallipoli" label="conquered Gallipoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393556" start="8236" end="8247" title="Decline of the Ottoman Empire" label="its decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="8373" end="8387" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="8424" end="8439" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8461" end="8474" title="United Kingdom" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984642" start="8482" end="8503" title="Dardanelles Operation" label="Dardanelles Operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25544" start="8504" end="8525" title="Battle of the Dardanelles (1807)" label="blockaded the straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8560" end="8574" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q287942" start="8596" end="8626" title="Russo-Turkish War (1828–1829)" label="Russo-Turkish War of 1828–1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051748" start="8670" end="8696" title="Treaty of Hunkiar Iskelesi" label="Treaty of Hunkiar Iskelesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8897" end="8911" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q700363" start="9117" end="9142" title="London Straits Convention" label="London Straits Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9161" end="9175" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="9177" end="9183" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="9185" end="9192" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="9198" end="9205" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="9430" end="9447" title="Crimean Peninsula" label="Crimean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="9459" end="9470" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110818" start="9590" end="9607" title="Congress of Paris" label="Congress of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="9703" end="9709" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="9862" end="9880" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9993" end="10010" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="10017" end="10044" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="10119" end="10129" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761621" start="10130" end="10139" title="sea power" label="sea power"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="10167" end="10188" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10216" end="10234" title="Republic of Turkey#Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051067" start="10528" end="10554" title="pre-dreadnought battleship" label="pre-dreadnought battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="10563" end="10574" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q699617" start="10588" end="10604" title="Ian Hamilton (British Army officer)" label="Sir Ian Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081722" start="10612" end="10645" title="Mediterranean Expeditionary Force" label="Mediterranean Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q182515" start="11023" end="11039" title="Treaty of Sèvres" label="Treaty of Sèvres"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="11129" end="11146" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="11299" end="11306" title="Turkish Straits" label="straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="11401" end="11415" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="11469" end="11496" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11555" end="11573" title="Republic of Turkey" label="Republic of Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q193258" start="11601" end="11619" title="Treaty of Lausanne (1923)" label="Treaty of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="11705" end="11712" title="Turkish Straits" label="straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="12004" end="12015" title="Turkish Straits" label="the straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q869500" start="12132" end="12195" title="Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits" label="Montreux Convention Regarding the Regime of the Turkish Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="12419" end="12431" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12716" end="12728" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="13207" end="13211" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="13345" end="13360" title="Turkish Straits" label="Turkish Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q15760" start="13450" end="13462" title="Novorossyisk" label="Novorossyisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="13673" end="13700" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q869500" start="13724" end="13743" title="Montreux Convention" label="Montreux Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026657" start="14119" end="14126" title="Lapseki" label="Lapseki"/>
<link wikidata="Q6570510" start="14175" end="14182" title="Sütlüce, Gelibolu" label="Sütlüce"/>
<link wikidata="Q216907" start="14201" end="14209" title="Gelibolu" label="Gelibolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117949" start="14411" end="14426" title="Submarine power cable" label="submarine cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="14703" end="14705" title="Gigawatt" label="GW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="15116" end="15122" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="15124" end="15130" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q256563" start="15182" end="15204" title="Action of 26 June 1656" label="Action of 26 June 1656"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872902" start="15207" end="15249" title="Battle of the Dardanelles (disambiguation)" label="Battle of the Dardanelles (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222422" start="15252" end="15274" title="Dardanelles Commission" label="Dardanelles Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627198" start="15277" end="15326" title="List of maritime incidents in the Turkish Straits" label="List of maritime incidents in the Turkish Straits"/>
<link wikidata="Q188915" start="15589" end="15615" title="National Library of Israel" label="National Library of Israel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8074" wikidata="Q8197" url="?curid=8074" title="Daugava">
<text>The Daugava ( ), also known as the Western Dvina or the Väina River, is a large river rising in the Valdai Hills of Russia that flows through Belarus and Latvia into the Gulf of Riga of the Baltic Sea. The Daugava rises close to the source of the Volga. It is in length, of which are in Latvia and in Russia. It is a westward-flowing river, tracing out a great south-bending curve as it passes through northern Belarus.

Latvia&#x27;s capital, Riga, bridges the river&#x27;s estuary four times. Built on both riverbanks, the city centre is from the river&#x27;s mouth and is a significant port.

== Etymology ==

According to Max Vasmer&#x27;s &quot;Etymological Dictionary&quot;, the toponym Dvina cannot stem from a Uralic language; instead, it possibly comes from an Indo-European word which used to mean &#x27;river&#x27; or &#x27;stream&#x27;. The name &quot;Dvina&quot; strongly resembles &quot;Danuvius&quot; which is itself derived from the Proto-Indo-European &quot;*dānu&quot;, meaning &#x27;large river&#x27;.

The Finno-Ugric names (Livonian), (Estonian), and (Finnish) all stem from Proto-Finnic &quot;*väin&quot;, which roughly translates to &#x27;a large, peacefully rolling river&#x27;.

==Geography==
The total catchment area of the river is , of which are in Belarus.

===Tributaries ===
The following rivers are tributaries to the river Daugava (from source to mouth):

*Left: Mezha, Kasplya, Dysna, Laucesa, Berezauka, Eglona, Pikstere, Ņega
*Right: Usvyacha, Palata, Drysa, Dubna, Aiviekste, Pērse, Dīvaja, Ogre

== History ==

Humans have settled at the mouth of the Daugava and along the shores of the Gulf of Riga for millennia, initially participating in a hunter-gatherer economy and utilizing the waters of the Daugava estuary for fishing and gathering. Beginning around the sixth century CE, Viking explorers crossed the Baltic Sea and entered the Daugava River, navigating upriver into the Baltic interior.

In medieval times, the Daugava was part of the trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks, an important route for the transport of furs from the north and of Byzantine silver from the south. The Riga area, inhabited by the Finnic-speaking Livs, became a key location of settlement and defence of the mouth of the Daugava at least as early as the Middle Ages, as evidenced by the now destroyed fort at Torņakalns on the west bank of the Daugava in present-day Riga.

From the end of the Livonian War great part of the Daugava formed the northeastern border of Duchy of Courland and Semigallia saparating it initially from the Kingdom of Livonia, later Swedish Livonia and Riga Governorate.
After the incorporation later in the Russian Empire the river formed a border between governorates of Courland on the western bank and Livonia and Vitebsk on the eastern bank.

From 1936 to 1939 Ķegums Hydroelectric Power Station was built on the Daugava river in Latvia. Pļaviņas Hydroelectric Power Station was put into operation in 1968 and Riga Hydroelectric Power Plant in 1974.

== Settlements ==

The following are some of the cities and towns built along the Daugava:

=== Russia ===
=== Belarus ===
=== Latvia ===
== Environment ==

The river began experiencing environmental deterioration in the Soviet era due to collective agriculture (producing considerable adverse water pollution runoff) and hydroelectric power projects. This is the river that the Vula river flows into.

=== Water quality ===
Upstream of the Latvian town of Jekabpils, the river&#x27;s pH has a characteristic value of about 7.8 (slight alkaline). In this area, the concentration of ionic calcium is around 43 milligrams per liter, nitrate is about 0.82 milligrams per liter, ionic phosphate is 0.038 milligrams per liter, and oxygen saturation is 80%. The high nitrate and phosphate load of the Daugava has contributed to the extensive buildup of phytoplankton biomass in the Baltic Sea; the Oder and Vistula rivers also contribute to the high nutrient loading of the Baltic.

In Belarus, water pollution of the Daugava is considered moderately severe, with the chief sources being treated wastewater, fish-farming, and agricultural chemical runoff (such as herbicides, pesticides, nitrates, and phosphates).

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Francis W. Carter and David Turnock. 2002. Environmental problems of East Central Europe. 442 pages Google eBook

==External links==
* Daugava River photos at flickr</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="4" end="11" title="Daugava" label="Daugava"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="35" end="48" title="Daugava" label="Western Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="56" end="67" title="Daugava" label="Väina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q194196" start="100" end="112" title="Valdai Hills" label="Valdai Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="116" end="122" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="142" end="149" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="154" end="160" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174731" start="170" end="182" title="Gulf of Riga" label="Gulf of Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="190" end="200" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="247" end="252" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773" start="444" end="448" title="Riga" label="Riga"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="475" end="482" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q77420" start="626" end="636" title="Max Vasmer" label="Max Vasmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="685" end="692" title="toponym" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="718" end="733" title="Uralic language" label="Uralic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="770" end="783" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="901" end="909" title="Danube" label="Danuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q79890" start="1026" end="1037" title="Finno-Ugric languages" label="Finno-Ugric"/>
<link wikidata="Q33698" start="1045" end="1053" title="Livonian language" label="Livonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="1057" end="1065" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="1073" end="1080" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883720" start="1096" end="1108" title="Proto-Finnic" label="Proto-Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="1228" end="1242" title="Catchment area (hydrology)" label="catchment area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197635" start="1396" end="1401" title="Mezha (Daugava)" label="Mezha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798377" start="1403" end="1410" title="Kasplya" label="Kasplya"/>
<link wikidata="Q432399" start="1412" end="1417" title="Dysna" label="Dysna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4255256" start="1419" end="1426" title="Laucesa" label="Laucesa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1428" end="1437" title="Berezauka" label="Berezauka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1439" end="1445" title="Eglona" label="Eglona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1447" end="1455" title="Pikstere" label="Pikstere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1457" end="1461" title="Ņega" label="Ņega"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093880" start="1470" end="1478" title="Usvyacha" label="Usvyacha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596996" start="1480" end="1486" title="Palata (river)" label="Palata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263131" start="1495" end="1500" title="Dubna (Daugava)" label="Dubna"/>
<link wikidata="Q176087" start="1502" end="1511" title="Aiviekste" label="Aiviekste"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738689" start="1513" end="1518" title="Pērse" label="Pērse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1520" end="1526" title="Dīvaja" label="Dīvaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q629663" start="1528" end="1532" title="Ogre (river)" label="Ogre"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="1820" end="1826" title="Viking" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q378346" start="1984" end="2029" title="trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks" label="trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2098" end="2107" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="2163" end="2169" title="Finnic languages" label="Finnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q690126" start="2179" end="2183" title="Livs" label="Livs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394313" start="2341" end="2351" title="Torņakalns" label="Torņakalns"/>
<link wikidata="Q246863" start="2426" end="2438" title="Livonian War" label="Livonian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q156038" start="2499" end="2531" title="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia" label="Duchy of Courland and Semigallia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346056" start="2565" end="2583" title="Kingdom of Livonia" label="Kingdom of Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="2591" end="2606" title="Swedish Livonia" label="Swedish Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552845" start="2611" end="2627" title="Riga Governorate" label="Riga Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2666" end="2680" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q386371" start="2731" end="2739" title="Courland Governorate" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419584" start="2764" end="2771" title="Governorate of Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435411" start="2776" end="2783" title="Vitebsk Governorate" label="Vitebsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662755" start="2824" end="2858" title="Ķegums Hydroelectric Power Station" label="Ķegums Hydroelectric Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984983" start="2901" end="2937" title="Pļaviņas Hydroelectric Power Station" label="Pļaviņas Hydroelectric Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377548" start="2973" end="3003" title="Riga Hydroelectric Power Plant" label="Riga Hydroelectric Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3393" end="3403" title="Vuła (river)" label="Vula river"/>
<link wikidata="Q191120" start="3471" end="3480" title="Jekabpils" label="Jekabpils"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="3499" end="3501" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q485742" start="3550" end="3558" title="alkaline" label="alkaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q182168" start="3645" end="3652" title="nitrate" label="nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="3695" end="3704" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="3906" end="3910" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="3915" end="3922" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q103204" start="4435" end="4441" title="flickr" label="flickr"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8075" wikidata="Q27543" url="?curid=8075" title="Datsun">
<text>Datsun (, ) was a Japanese automobile manufacturer brand owned by Nissan. Datsun&#x27;s original production run began in 1931. From 1958 to 1986, only vehicles exported by Nissan were identified as Datsun. Nissan phased out the Datsun brand in March 1986, but relaunched it in June 2013 as the brand for low-cost vehicles manufactured for emerging markets. Nissan considered phasing out the Datsun brand for a second time in 2019 and 2020, eventually discontinuing the struggling brand in April 2022.

In 1931, DAT Motorcar Co. chose to name its new small car &quot;Datson&quot;, a name which indicated the new car&#x27;s smaller size when compared to the DAT&#x27;s larger vehicle already in production. When Nissan took control of DAT in 1934, the name &quot;Datson&quot; was changed to &quot;Datsun&quot;, because &quot;son&quot; also means &quot;loss&quot; (損 &quot;son&quot;) in Japanese, and to honour the sun depicted in the national flag – thus the name &quot;Datsun&quot;: . The Datsun name is internationally well known for the 510, Fairlady roadsters, and the Z and ZX coupés.

==History==

===Origin of Datsun===
Before the Datsun brand name came into being, an automobile named the DAT car was built in 1914, by the , in the Azabu-Hiroo District in Tokyo. The new car&#x27;s name was an acronym of the initials of the company partners:
* 
* Meitaro Takeuchi 

Incidentally, &quot;datto&quot; (how a native Japanese speaker would pronounce &quot;dat&quot;) means to &quot;dash off like a startled rabbit&quot; (脱兎), which was considered a good name for the little car. The firm was renamed Kaishinsha Motorcar Co. in 1918, seven years after their establishment and again, in 1925, to DAT Motorcar Co. DAT Motors constructed trucks in addition to the DAT passenger cars. In fact, their output focused on trucks since there was almost no consumer market for passenger cars at the time. Beginning in 1918, the first DAT trucks were assembled for the military market. The low demand from the military market during the 1920s forced DAT to consider merging with other automotive industries. In 1926 the Tokyo-based DAT Motors merged with the Osaka-based also known as Jitsuyo Motors (established 1919, as a Kubota subsidiary) to become in Osaka until 1932. (Jitsuyo Jidosha began producing a three-wheeled vehicle with an enclosed cab called the Gorham in 1920, and the following year produced a four-wheeled version. From 1923 to 1925, the company produced light cars and trucks under the name of Lila.)

The DAT corporation had been selling full size cars to Japanese consumers under the DAT name since 1914. In 1930, the Japanese government created a ministerial ordinance that allowed cars with engines up to 500 cc to be driven without a license. DAT Automobile Manufacturing began development of a line of 495 cc cars to sell in this new market segment, calling the new small cars &quot;Datson&quot; – meaning &quot;Son of DAT&quot;. The name was changed to &quot;Datsun&quot; two years later in 1933.

The first prototype Datson was completed in the summer of 1931. The production vehicle was called the Datson Type 10, and &quot;approximately ten&quot; of these cars were sold in 1931. They sold around 150 cars in 1932, now calling the model the Datsun Type 11. In 1933, government rules were revised to permit engines, and Datsun increased the displacement of their microcar engine to the maximum allowed. These larger displacement cars were called Type 12s.

By 1935, the company had established a true production line, following the example of Ford, and were producing a car closely resembling the Austin 7. There is evidence that six of these early Datsuns were exported to New Zealand in 1936, a market they then re-entered in May 1962. In 1937, Datsun&#x27;s biggest pre-war year, 8593 were built, with some exported to Australia in knock-down form.

After Japan went to war with China in 1937, passenger car production was restricted, so by 1938, Datsun&#x27;s Yokohama plant concentrated on building trucks for the Imperial Japanese Army.

When the Pacific War ended, Datsun would turn to provide trucks for the Occupation forces. This lasted until car production resumed in 1947. As before the war, Datsun closely patterned their cars on contemporary Austin products: postwar, the Devon and Somerset were selected. For Datsun&#x27;s smaller cars (and trucks), such as the DB and DS series, they depended on designs based on the pre-war Austin Seven. The heavier trucks, meanwhile, were based on Chevrolet&#x27;s 1937 design with an engine of Graham-Paige design. Nissan also built the 4W60 Patrol, based on the Willys Jeep, and the 4W70 Carrier, based on the Dodge M37. Not until January 1955 did Datsun offer a fully indigenous design.

That year, the Occupation returned production facilities to Japanese control, and Datsun introduced the 110 saloon and the 110-based 120 pickup.

===Datsun in the American market===
The use of the &quot;Datsun&quot; name in the American market derives from the name Nissan used for its production cars. In fact, the cars produced by Nissan already used the Datsun brand name, a successful brand in Japan since 1932, long before World War II. Before the entry into the American market in 1958, Nissan did not produce cars under the Nissan brand name, but only trucks. Their in-house-designed cars were always branded as &quot;Datsuns&quot;. Hence, for Nissan executives it would be only natural to use such a successful name when exporting models to the United States. Only in the 1960s did Datsun begin to brand some automobile models as &quot;Nissans&quot;, like the Patrol and a small test batch of about 100 Cedric luxury sedans, and then not again until the 1980s. The Japanese market Z-car (sold as the Fairlady Z) also had Nissan badging. In the United States, the Nissan branch was named &quot;Nissan Motor Corporation in U.S.A.&quot;, and chartered on September 28, 1960, in California, but the small cars the firm exported to America were still named Datsun.

Corporate choice favored Datsun, so as to distance the parent factory Nissan&#x27;s association by Americans with Japanese military manufacture. In fact Nissan&#x27;s involvement in Japan&#x27;s military industries was substantial. The company&#x27;s car production at the Yokohama plant shifted towards military needs just a few years after the first passenger cars rolled off the assembly line, on April 11, 1935. By 1939 Nissan&#x27;s operations had moved to Manchuria, then under Japanese occupation, where its founder and President, Yoshisuke Ayukawa, established the Manchurian Motor Company to manufacture military trucks.

Ayukawa, a well-connected and aggressive risk taker, also made himself a principal partner of the Japanese Colonial Government of Manchukuo. Ultimately, Nissan Heavy Industries emerged near the end of the war as an important player in Japan&#x27;s war machinery. After the war ended, Soviet Union seized all of Nissan&#x27;s Manchuria assets, while the Occupation Forces made use of over half of the Yokohama plant. General MacArthur had Ayukawa imprisoned for 21 months as a war criminal. After release he was forbidden from returning to any corporate or public office until 1951. He was never allowed back into Nissan, which returned to passenger car manufacture in 1947 and to its original name of Nissan Motor Company Ltd. in 1949.

American service personnel in their teens or early twenties during the Second World War would be in prime car-buying age by 1960, if only to find an economical small second car for their growing family needs. Yutaka Katayama (Mr. &quot;K&quot;), former president of Nissan&#x27;s American operations, would have had his personal wartime experiences in mind supporting the name Datsun. Katayama&#x27;s visit to Nissan&#x27;s Manchuria truck factory in 1939 made him realise the appalling conditions prevalent on the assembly lines, leading him to abandon the firm. In 1945, near the end of the war, Katayama was ordered to return to the Manchurian plant, however he rebuffed these calls and refused to return.

Katayama desired to build and sell passenger cars to people, not to the military; for him, the name &quot;&quot;Datsun&quot; had survived the war with its purity intact, not &quot;Nissan&quot;&quot;. This obviously led Katayama to have problems with the corporate management. The discouragement felt by Katayama as regards his prospects at Nissan, led to his going on the verge of resigning, when Datsun&#x27;s 1958 Australian Mobilgas victories vaulted him, as leader of the winning Datsun teams, to national prominence in a Japan bent on regaining international status.

The company&#x27;s first product to be exported around the world was the 113, with a proprietary four-cylinder engine.

Datsun entered the American market in 1958, with sales in California. By 1959, the company had dealers across the U.S. and began selling the 310 (known as Bluebird domestically). From 1962 to 1969 the Nissan Patrol utility vehicle was sold in the United States (as a competitor to the Toyota Land Cruiser J40 series), making it the only Nissan-badged product sold in the US prior to that name&#x27;s introduction worldwide decades later.

From 1960 on, exports and production continued to grow. A new plant was built at Oppama, south of Yokohama; it opened in 1962. The next year, Bluebird sales first topped 200,000, and exports touched 100,000. By 1964, Bluebird was being built at 10,000 cars a month.

For 1966, Datsun debuted the Sunny/1000, allowing kei car owners to move up to something bigger. That same year, Datsun won the East African Safari Rally and merged with Prince Motors, giving the company the Skyline model range, as well as a test track at Murayama.

The company introduced the Bluebird 510 in 1967. This was followed in 1968 with the iconic 240Z, which proved affordable sports cars could be built and sold profitably: it was soon the world&#x27;s #1-selling sports car. It relied on an engine based on the Bluebird and used Bluebird suspension components. It would go on to two outright wins in the East African Rally.

Katayama was made Vice President of the Nissan North American subsidiary in 1960, and as long as he was involved in decision making, both as North American Vice President from 1960 to 1965, and then President of Nissan Motor Company U.S.A. from 1965 to 1975, the cars were sold as Datsuns. &quot;What we need to do is improve our car&#x27;s efficiency gradually and creep up slowly before others notice. Then, before Detroit realizes it, we will have become an excellent car maker, and the customers will think so too. If we work hard to sell our own cars, we won&#x27;t be bothered by whatever the other manufacturers do. If all we do is worry about the other cars in the race, we will definitely lose.&quot;

===Datsun in Europe===
In 1935, the first Datsun-badged vehicle was shipped to Britain by car magnate Sir Herbert Austin. The vehicle, a Type 14, was never meant for the road or production, but was a part of a patent dispute as Austin saw a number of similarities to the car with the Austin 7 Ruby. Nissan began exporting Datsun-badged cars to the United Kingdom in 1968, at which time foreign cars were a rarity, with only a small percentage of cars being imported – some of the most popular examples at the time including the Renault 16 from France and Volkswagen Beetle from West Germany. The first European market that Nissan had entered was Finland, where sales began in 1962. Within a few years, it was importing cars to most of Western Europe.

Datsun was particularly successful on the British market. It sold just over 6,000 cars there as late as 1971, but its sales surged to more than 30,000 the following year and continued to climb over the next few years, with well-priced products including the Cherry 100A and Sunny 120Y proving particularly popular, at a time when the British motor industry was plagued by strikes and British Leyland in particular was gaining a reputation for building cars which had major issues with build quality and reliability. During the 1970s and early 1980s, Nissan frequently enjoyed the largest market share in Britain of any foreign carmaker.

By the early 1980s, the Nissan badge was gradually appearing on Datsun-badged cars, and eventually the Datsun branding was phased out, the final new car with a Datsun badge being the Micra supermini, launched in Britain from June 1983. By the end of 1984, the Datsun branding had completely disappeared in Britain, although it lingered elsewhere until 1986.

===Rebranding===
In Japan, there appears to have been what probably constituted a long-held &#x27;official&#x27; company bias against use of the name &quot;Datsun&quot;. At the time, Kawamata was a veteran of Nissan, in the last year of his presidency, a powerful figure whose experience in the firm exceeded two decades. His rise to its leadership position occurred in 1957 in part because of his handling of the critical Nissan workers&#x27; strike that began May 25, 1953, and ran for 100 days. During his tenure as president, Kawamata stated that he &quot;regretted that his company did not imprint its corporate name on cars, the way Toyota does. &#x27;Looking back, we wish we had started using Nissan on all of our cars,&#x27; he says. &#x27;But Datsun was a pet name for the cars when we started exporting.&#x27;&quot;

Ultimately, the decision was made to stop using the brand name &quot;Datsun&quot; worldwide, in order to strengthen the company name &quot;Nissan&quot;.

&quot;The decision to change the name Datsun to Nissan in the U.S. was announced in the autumn (September/October) of 1981. The rationale was that the name change would help the pursuit of a global strategy. A single name worldwide would increase the possibility that advertising campaigns, brochures, and promotional materials could be used across countries and simplify product design and manufacturing. Further, potential buyers would be exposed to the name and product when traveling to other countries. Industry observers, however, speculated that the most important motivation was that a name change would help Nissan market stocks and bonds in the U.S. They also presumed substantial ego involvement, since the absence of the Nissan name in the U.S. surely rankled Nissan executives who had seen Toyota and Honda become household words.&quot;

Ultimately, the name change campaign lasted for a three-year period from 1982 to 1984 – Datsun badged vehicles had been progressively fitted with small &quot;Nissan&quot; and &quot;Datsun by Nissan&quot; badges from the late 1970s onward until the Nissan name was given prominence in 1983 – although in some export markets, vehicles continued to wear both the Datsun and Nissan badges until 1986. In the United Kingdom for example, the Nissan name initially was used as a prefix to the model name, with Datsun still being used as the manufacturer&#x27;s name (e.g. Datsun-Nissan Micra) from 1982 until 1984. In the United States, the Nissan name was used for some new vehicles for 1982 such as the Nissan Stanza and the Nissan Sentra while the Datsun name was used on existing vehicles through 1983 including – confusingly enough – the Datsun Maxima, which like the Stanza and Sentra was also a new model for 1982, albeit as a renamed Datsun 810. The Maxima and Z continue in production in North America as of 2021, as Nissan&#x27;s last direct link to its Datsun years.

The name change had cost Nissan a figure in the region of US$500 million. Operational costs included the changing of signs at 1,100 Datsun dealerships, and amounted to US$30 million. Another US$200 million were spent during the 1982 to 1986 advertising campaigns, where the &quot;Datsun, We Are Driven!&quot; campaign (which was adopted in late 1977 in the wake of the 1973 oil crisis and subsequent 1979 energy crisis) yielded to &quot;The Name is Nissan&quot; campaign (the latter campaign was used for some years beyond 1985). Another US$50 million was spent on Datsun advertisements that were paid for but stopped or never used. Five years after the name change program was over, &quot;Datsun&quot; still remained more familiar than &quot;Nissan&quot;.

===Datsun truck===
In 2001, Nissan marketed its D22 pick-up model in Japan with the name &quot;Datsun&quot;. This time however, the use of the brand name was wholly restricted to this one specific model name. Production of this model was between May 2001 and October 2002.

==Relaunch==
On 20 March 2012, it was announced that Nissan would revive the Datsun marque as a low-cost car brand for use in Indonesia, Nepal, South Africa, India, and Russia, and on 15 July 2013, nearly three decades after it was phased out, the name was formally resurrected. Nissan said the brand&#x27;s reputation for value and reliability would help it gain market share in emerging markets.

The Datsun brand was relaunched in New Delhi, India, with the Datsun Go, which went on sale in India in early 2014. Datsun models are sold in Indonesia, Russia, India, Nepal and South Africa since 2014. The brand entered Kazakhstan in 2015, and Belarus and Lebanon in 2016.

The Datsun Go was being built at the Renault-Nissan plant in Chennai, India. It was also produced in Indonesia. The Go is based on the same Nissan V platform as the Nissan Micra. The Go+, a 5+2 seater station wagon, was added to the range in September 2013.

In February 2014, the redi-Go concept car was presented. The redi-Go crossover became available in India mid-2015.

In April 2014, the first model for the Russian market, the Datsun on-Do based on Lada Granta, was launched.

In November 2019, it was announced that Datsun would stop its production in Indonesia and Russia in 2020.

In April 2022, Nissan announced that it is shutting down the production of Datsun cars in India.

===Models===

* Datsun Go (2013–2022)
* Datsun Go+ (2013–2022)
* Datsun on-Do (2014–2020)
* Datsun mi-Do (2015–2020)
* Datsun redi-Go (2016–2022)
* Datsun Cross (2018–2020)

==See also==

* Datsun Sports
* Laurence Hartnett
* Yutaka Katayama
* Nissan
* Nissan Motor Car Carrier
* Sports Car International Top Sports Cars

==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==
*Official site in Russia
*Official site in Indonesia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="0" end="6" title="Datsun" label="Datsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="66" end="72" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="339" end="355" title="emerging markets" label="emerging markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="862" end="863" title="Datsun" label="損"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="884" end="892" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489002" start="1038" end="1041" title="Datsun 510" label="510"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172693" start="1043" end="1051" title="Datsun Sports" label="Fairlady"/>
<link wikidata="Q338545" start="1071" end="1086" title="Nissan Z-car" label="Z and ZX coupés"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1371" end="1371" title=":ja:竹内明太郎" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="2110" end="2115" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35765" start="2246" end="2251" title="Osaka" label="Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q377180" start="3262" end="3276" title="Datsun Type 11" label="Datsun Type 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q466511" start="3361" end="3373" title="Engine displacement" label="displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333140" start="3466" end="3473" title="Datsun Type 12" label="Type 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="3563" end="3567" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q781028" start="3617" end="3625" title="Austin 7" label="Austin 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="4039" end="4061" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="4073" end="4084" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q781156" start="4276" end="4282" title="Austin Motor Company" label="Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631801" start="4306" end="4311" title="Austin A40 Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3802370" start="4316" end="4324" title="Austin A40 Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q20182903" start="4397" end="4399" title="Datsun DB Series" label="DB"/>
<link wikidata="Q17048991" start="4404" end="4413" title="Datsun DS Series" label="DS series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541900" start="4567" end="4579" title="Graham-Paige" label="Graham-Paige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141487" start="4610" end="4621" title="Nissan Patrol" label="4W60 Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712498" start="4684" end="4693" title="Dodge M37" label="Dodge M37"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4867" end="4870" title="Nissan Bluebird#110 series" label="110"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="4871" end="4877" title="Sedan (car)" label="saloon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4896" end="4899" title="Datsun Truck#Datsun 120" label="120"/>
<link wikidata="Q215601" start="4900" end="4906" title="Pickup truck" label="pickup"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5191" end="5203" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5631" end="5637" title="Nissan Patrol#Second generation (60; 1959–1980)" label="Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5674" end="5680" title="Nissan Cedric#First generation 30" label="Cedric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683216" start="5736" end="5751" title="Japanese domestic market" label="Japanese market"/>
<link wikidata="Q338545" start="5752" end="5757" title="Nissan Z-car" label="Z-car"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="6494" end="6503" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q404867" start="6570" end="6587" title="Yoshisuke Ayukawa" label="Yoshisuke Ayukawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="6793" end="6802" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="6947" end="6959" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q696251" start="7016" end="7033" title="Occupation of Japan" label="Occupation Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="7063" end="7071" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q127417" start="7079" end="7096" title="Douglas MacArthur" label="General MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="7139" end="7151" title="war crime" label="war criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="7400" end="7426" title="United States armed forces" label="American service personnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273005" start="7549" end="7559" title="economic system" label="economical"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656272" start="7609" end="7624" title="Yutaka Katayama" label="Yutaka Katayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q6886729" start="8521" end="8555" title="Mobil Economy Run" label="1958 Australian Mobilgas victories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046461" start="8636" end="8680" title="Post-Occupation Japan" label="Japan bent on regaining international status"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8756" end="8759" title="Nissan Bluebird#210/211 series" label="113"/>
<link wikidata="Q7040932" start="8768" end="8779" title="Nissan D engine" label="proprietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576663" start="8780" end="8800" title="four-cylinder engine" label="four-cylinder engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8944" end="8947" title="Nissan Bluebird#310/311/312 series" label="310"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141487" start="9004" end="9017" title="Nissan Patrol" label="Nissan Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q914069" start="9088" end="9107" title="Toyota Land Cruiser" label="Toyota Land Cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="9323" end="9329" title="Yokosuka, Kanagawa" label="Oppama"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="9340" end="9348" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9538" end="9548" title="Nissan Sunny#B10" label="Sunny/1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059437" start="9559" end="9566" title="kei car" label="kei car"/>
<link wikidata="Q281772" start="9637" end="9662" title="Safari Rally" label="East African Safari Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110378" start="9679" end="9692" title="Prince Motors" label="Prince Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q643635" start="9717" end="9724" title="Nissan Skyline" label="Skyline"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489002" start="9803" end="9815" title="Datsun 510" label="Bluebird 510"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575681" start="9867" end="9871" title="Datsun 240Z" label="240Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q274586" start="9897" end="9907" title="sports car" label="sports car"/>
<link wikidata="Q924713" start="10488" end="10498" title="Efficient energy use" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="10564" end="10571" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124536" start="11386" end="11396" title="Renault 16" label="Renault 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q152946" start="11413" end="11430" title="Volkswagen Beetle" label="Volkswagen Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="11436" end="11448" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="11593" end="11607" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476157" start="11868" end="11879" title="Datsun Cherry" label="Cherry 100A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132451" start="11884" end="11894" title="Datsun Sunny" label="Sunny 120Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046187" start="11994" end="12009" title="British Leyland" label="British Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q738470" start="12431" end="12436" title="Nissan Micra" label="Micra"/>
<link wikidata="Q742736" start="12728" end="12732" title="bias" label="bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="13246" end="13252" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="13411" end="13417" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570906" start="13780" end="13795" title="global strategy" label="global strategy"/>
<link wikidata="Q486893" start="14280" end="14283" title="Human ego" label="ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164691" start="14307" end="14314" title="Consumer confusion" label="absence"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="14392" end="14398" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="14403" end="14408" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q738470" start="15019" end="15024" title="Nissan March" label="Micra"/>
<link wikidata="Q375074" start="15138" end="15151" title="Nissan Stanza" label="Nissan Stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q719974" start="15160" end="15173" title="Nissan Sentra" label="Nissan Sentra"/>
<link wikidata="Q377287" start="15276" end="15289" title="Nissan Maxima" label="Datsun Maxima"/>
<link wikidata="Q20726777" start="15375" end="15385" title="Datsun 810" label="Datsun 810"/>
<link wikidata="Q338545" start="15402" end="15403" title="Nissan Z-car" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q316817" start="15881" end="15896" title="1973 oil crisis" label="1973 oil crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925730" start="15912" end="15930" title="1979 energy crisis" label="1979 energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q513100" start="16166" end="16185" title="Brand equity" label="name change program"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="16298" end="16304" title="Nissan Motors" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16318" end="16329" title="Nissan Navara#D22" label="D22 pick-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="16978" end="16987" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13921088" start="17005" end="17014" title="Datsun Go" label="Datsun Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="17279" end="17286" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613556" start="17358" end="17375" title="Nissan B platform" label="Nissan V platform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17383" end="17395" title="Nissan Micra#Fourth generation (2010–present)" label="Nissan Micra"/>
<link wikidata="Q188886" start="17419" end="17432" title="station wagon" label="station wagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16687622" start="17652" end="17664" title="Datsun on-Do" label="Datsun on-Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574740" start="17674" end="17685" title="Lada Granta" label="Lada Granta"/>
<link wikidata="Q13921088" start="17923" end="17932" title="Datsun Go" label="Datsun Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q13921088" start="17947" end="17957" title="Datsun Go+" label="Datsun Go+"/>
<link wikidata="Q16687622" start="17972" end="17984" title="Datsun on-Do" label="Datsun on-Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q18330788" start="17999" end="18011" title="Datsun mi-Do" label="Datsun mi-Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q24540408" start="18026" end="18040" title="Datsun redi-Go" label="Datsun redi-Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q13921088" start="18055" end="18067" title="Datsun Cross" label="Datsun Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172693" start="18097" end="18110" title="Datsun Sports" label="Datsun Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500638" start="18113" end="18130" title="Laurence Hartnett" label="Laurence Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656272" start="18133" end="18148" title="Yutaka Katayama" label="Yutaka Katayama"/>
<link wikidata="Q20165" start="18151" end="18157" title="Nissan" label="Nissan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11509869" start="18160" end="18184" title="Nissan Motor Car Carrier" label="Nissan Motor Car Carrier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18187" end="18227" title="Sports Car International Top Sports Cars#1970s" label="Sports Car International Top Sports Cars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8078" wikidata="Q80728" url="?curid=8078" title="Dynamite">
<text>Dynamite is an explosive made of nitroglycerin, sorbents (such as powdered shells or clay), and stabilizers. It was invented by the Swedish chemist and engineer Alfred Nobel in Geesthacht, Northern Germany, and was patented in 1867. It rapidly gained wide-scale use as a more robust alternative to the traditional black powder explosives. It allows the use of nitroglycerine&#x27;s favorable explosive properties while greatly reducing its risk of accidental detonation.

==History==

Dynamite was invented by Swedish chemist Alfred Nobel in 1866 and was the first safely manageable explosive stronger than black powder.

Alfred Nobel&#x27;s father, Immanuel Nobel, was an industrialist, engineer, and inventor. He built bridges and buildings in Stockholm and founded Sweden&#x27;s first rubber factory. His construction work inspired him to research new methods of blasting rock that were more effective than black powder. After some bad business deals in Sweden, in 1838 Immanuel moved his family to Saint Petersburg, where Alfred and his brothers were educated privately under Swedish and Russian tutors. At the age of 17, Alfred Nobel was sent abroad for two years; in the United States he met Swedish engineer John Ericsson and in France studied under famed chemist Théophile-Jules Pelouze and his pupil Ascanio Sobrero, who had first synthesized nitroglycerin in 1847. Pelouze cautioned Nobel against using nitroglycerine as a commercial explosive because of its great sensitivity to shock.

In 1857, Nobel filed the first of several hundred patents, mostly concerning air pressure, gas and fluid gauges, but remained fascinated with nitroglycerin&#x27;s potential as an explosive. Nobel, along with his father and brother Emil, experimented with various combinations of nitroglycerin and black powder. Nobel came up with a way to safely detonate nitroglycerin by inventing the detonator, or blasting cap, that allowed a controlled explosion set off from a distance using a fuse. In 1863 Nobel performed his first successful detonation of pure nitroglycerin, using a blasting cap made of a copper percussion cap and mercury fulminate. In 1864, Alfred Nobel filed patents for both the blasting cap and his method of synthesizing nitroglycerin, using sulfuric acid, nitric acid and glycerin. On 3 September 1864, while experimenting with nitroglycerin, Emil and several others were killed in an explosion at the factory at Immanuel Nobel&#x27;s estate at Heleneborg. After this, Alfred founded the company Nitroglycerin Aktiebolaget in Vinterviken to continue work in a more isolated area and the following year moved to Germany, where he founded another company, Dynamit Nobel.

Despite the invention of the blasting cap, the instability of nitroglycerin rendered it useless as a commercial explosive. To solve this problem, Nobel sought to combine it with another substance that would make it safe for transport and handling but would not reduce its effectiveness as an explosive. He tried combinations of cement, coal, and sawdust, but was unsuccessful. Finally, he tried diatomaceous earth, which is fossilized algae, that he brought from the Elbe River near his factory in Hamburg, which successfully stabilized the nitroglycerin into a portable explosive.

Nobel obtained patents for his inventions in England on 7 May 1867 and in Sweden on 19 October 1867. After its introduction, dynamite rapidly gained wide-scale use as a safe alternative to black powder and nitroglycerin. Nobel tightly controlled the patents, and unlicensed duplicating companies were quickly shut down. A few American businessmen got around the patent by using absorbents other than diatomaceous earth, such as resin.

Nobel originally sold dynamite as &quot;Nobel&#x27;s Blasting Powder&quot; and later changed the name to dynamite, from the Ancient Greek word &quot;dýnamis&quot; (), meaning &quot;power&quot;.

==Manufacture==

===Form===
Dynamite is usually sold in the form of cardboard cylinders about long and about in diameter, with a mass of about . A stick of dynamite thus produced contains roughly 1 MJ (megajoule) of energy. Other sizes also exist, rated by either portion (Quarter-Stick or Half-Stick) or by weight.

Dynamite is usually rated by &quot;weight strength&quot; (the amount of nitroglycerin it contains), usually from 20% to 60%. For example, &quot;40% dynamite&quot; is composed of 40% nitroglycerin and 60% &quot;dope&quot; (the absorbent storage medium mixed with the stabilizer and any additives).

===Storage considerations===
The maximum shelf life of nitroglycerin-based dynamite is recommended as one year from the date of manufacture under good storage conditions.

Over time, regardless of the sorbent used, sticks of dynamite will &quot;weep&quot; or &quot;sweat&quot; nitroglycerin, which can then pool in the bottom of the box or storage area. For that reason, explosive manuals recommend the regular up-ending of boxes of dynamite in storage. Crystals will form on the outside of the sticks, purportedly causing them to be even more sensitive to shock, friction, and temperature. Therefore, while the risk of an explosion without the use of a blasting cap is minimal for fresh dynamite, old dynamite is dangerous. Modern packaging helps eliminate this by placing the dynamite into sealed plastic bags and using wax-coated cardboard.

Dynamite is moderately sensitive to shock. Shock resistance tests are usually carried out with a drop-hammer: about 100 mg of explosive is placed on an anvil, upon which a weight of between is dropped from different heights until detonation is achieved. With a hammer of 2 kg, mercury fulminate detonates with a drop distance of 1 to 2 cm, nitroglycerin with 4 to 5 cm, dynamite with 15 to 30 cm, and ammoniacal explosives with 40 to 50 cm.

===Major manufacturers===
====South Africa====
For several decades beginning in the 1940s, the largest producer of dynamite in the world was the Union of South Africa. There, the De Beers company established a factory in 1902 at Somerset West. The explosives factory was later operated by AECI (African Explosives and Chemical Industries). The demand for the product came mainly from the country&#x27;s vast gold mines, centered on the Witwatersrand. The factory at Somerset West was in operation in 1903 and by 1907 it was already producing 340,000 cases, each, annually. A rival factory at Modderfontein was producing another 200,000 cases per year.

There were two large explosions at the Somerset West plant during the 1960s. Some workers died, but the loss of life was limited by the modular design of the factory and its earth works, and the planting of trees that directed the blasts upward. There were several other explosions at the Modderfontein factory. After 1985, pressure from trade unions forced AECI to phase out the production of dynamite. The factory then went on to produce ammonium nitrate emulsion-based explosives that are safer to manufacture and handle.

====United States====
Dynamite was first manufactured in the US by the Giant Powder Company of San Francisco, California, whose founder had obtained the exclusive rights from Nobel in 1867. Giant was eventually acquired by DuPont, which produced dynamite under the Giant name until Giant was dissolved by DuPont in 1905.
Thereafter, DuPont produced dynamite under its own name until 1911–12, when its explosives monopoly was broken up by the U.S. Circuit Court in the &quot;Powder Case&quot;. Two new companies were formed upon the breakup, the Hercules Powder Company and the Atlas Powder Company, which took up the manufacture of dynamite (in different formulations).

Currently, only Dyno Nobel manufactures dynamite in the US. The only facility producing it is located in Carthage, Missouri, but the material is purchased from Dyno Nobel by other manufacturers who put their labels on the dynamite and boxes.

==Non-dynamite explosives==
Other explosives are often referred to or confused with dynamite:

===TNT===
Trinitrotoluene (TNT) is often assumed to be the same as (or confused for) dynamite largely because of the ubiquity of both explosives during the 20th century. This incorrect connection between TNT and dynamite was enhanced by cartoons such as Bugs Bunny, where animators labeled any kind of bomb (ranging from sticks of dynamite to kegs of black powder) as TNT, because the initialism was shorter and more memorable and did not require literacy to recognize that TNT meant &quot;bomb&quot;.

Aside from both being high explosives, TNT and dynamite have little in common. TNT is a second-generation castable explosive adopted by the military, while dynamite, in contrast, has never been popular in warfare because it degenerates quickly under severe conditions and can be detonated by either fire or a wayward bullet. The German armed forces adopted TNT as a filling for artillery shells in 1902, some 40 years after the invention of dynamite, which is a first-generation phlegmatized explosive primarily intended for civilian earthmoving. TNT has never been popular or widespread in civilian earthmoving, as it is considerably more expensive and less powerful by weight than dynamite, as well as being slower to mix and pack into boreholes. TNT&#x27;s primary asset is its remarkable insensitivity and stability: it is waterproof and incapable of detonating without the extreme shock and heat provided by a blasting cap (or a sympathetic detonation); this stability also allows it to be melted at , poured into high explosive shells and allowed to re-solidify, with no extra danger or change in the TNT&#x27;s characteristics. Accordingly, more than 90% of the TNT produced in the United States was always for the military market, with most TNT used for filling shells, hand grenades and aerial bombs, and the remainder being packaged in brown &quot;bricks&quot; (not red cylinders) for use as demolition charges by combat engineers.

===&quot;Extra&quot; dynamite===
In the United States, in 1885, the chemist Russell S. Penniman invented &quot;ammonium dynamite&quot;, a form of explosive that used ammonium nitrate as a substitute for the more costly nitroglycerin. Ammonium nitrate has only 85% of the chemical energy of nitroglycerin.

It is rated by either &quot;weight strength&quot; (the amount of ammonium nitrate in the medium) or &quot;cartridge strength&quot; (the potential explosive strength generated by an amount of explosive of a certain density and grain size used in comparison to the explosive strength generated by an equivalent density and grain size of a standard explosive). For example, high-explosive &quot;65% Extra dynamite&quot; has a weight strength of 65% ammonium nitrate and 35% &quot;dope&quot; (the absorbent medium mixed with the stabilizers and additives). Its &quot;cartridge strength&quot; would be its weight in pounds times its strength in relation to an equal amount of ANFO (the civilian baseline standard) or TNT (the military baseline standard). For example, 65% ammonium dynamite with a 20% cartridge strength would mean the stick was equal to an equivalent weight strength of 20% ANFO.

===&quot;Military dynamite&quot;===
&quot;Military dynamite&quot; (or M1 dynamite) is a dynamite substitute made with more stable ingredients than nitroglycerin. It contains 75% RDX, 15% TNT and 10% desensitizers and plasticizers. It has only 60% equivalent strength as commercial dynamite, but is much safer to store and handle.

==Regulation==

Various countries around the world have enacted laws regarding explosives and require licenses to manufacture, distribute, store, use, and possess explosives or ingredients.

==See also==
* Blast fishing
* Blasting machine
* Dynamite gun
* Nobel Prize
* Relative effectiveness factor

==References==
==Further reading==
* Cartwright, A. P. (1964). &quot;The dynamite Company: The Story of African Explosives and Chemical Industries Limited&quot;. Cape Town: Purnell &amp; Sons (S.A.) (Pty) Ltd.
* Schück, H. and Sohlman, R. (1929). &quot;The Life of Alfred Nobel&quot;. London: William Heinemann Ltd.

==External links==
* Alfred Nobel’s dynamite companies
* Oregon State Police – Arson and Explosives Section (Handling instructions and photos)
* (Dynamite US patent)
* Dynamite and TNT at &quot;The Periodic Table of Videos&quot; (University of Nottingham)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80728" start="0" end="8" title="Dynamite" label="Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q12870" start="15" end="24" title="explosive" label="explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="33" end="46" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428995" start="48" end="55" title="sorbent" label="sorbent"/>
<link wikidata="Q910592" start="96" end="107" title="Stabilizer (chemistry)" label="stabilizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="132" end="139" title="Swedish people" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="161" end="173" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q494790" start="177" end="187" title="Geesthacht" label="Geesthacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="215" end="223" title="patented" label="patented"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="314" end="326" title="gun powder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q23810" start="526" end="538" title="Alfred Nobel" label="Alfred Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="607" end="619" title="black powder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q726590" start="650" end="664" title="Immanuel Nobel" label="Immanuel Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366833" start="988" end="998" title="Nobel family" label="his family"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="1002" end="1018" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682302" start="1143" end="1168" title="grand tour" label="sent abroad for two years"/>
<link wikidata="Q435290" start="1215" end="1228" title="John Ericsson" label="John Ericsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q445815" start="1271" end="1294" title="Théophile-Jules Pelouze" label="Théophile-Jules Pelouze"/>
<link wikidata="Q351377" start="1309" end="1324" title="Ascanio Sobrero" label="Ascanio Sobrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q162867" start="1352" end="1365" title="nitroglycerin" label="nitroglycerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="1548" end="1554" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4382287" start="1729" end="1733" title="Emil Oskar Nobel" label="Emil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="1884" end="1893" title="detonator" label="detonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q664571" start="1980" end="1984" title="Fuse (explosives)" label="fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q614853" start="2103" end="2117" title="percussion cap" label="percussion cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q309033" start="2122" end="2139" title="Mercury(II) fulminate" label="mercury fulminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="2255" end="2268" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q10519458" start="2459" end="2469" title="Heleneborg" label="Heleneborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527222" start="2540" end="2551" title="Vinterviken" label="Vinterviken"/>
<link wikidata="Q872866" start="2668" end="2681" title="Dynamit Nobel" label="Dynamit Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q193414" start="3079" end="3097" title="diatomaceous earth" label="diatomaceous earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="3151" end="3155" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="3182" end="3189" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="3827" end="3840" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="4100" end="4109" title="megajoule" label="megajoule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689021" start="4554" end="4564" title="shelf life" label="shelf life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="5167" end="5179" title="blasting cap" label="blasting cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q309033" start="5635" end="5652" title="mercury fulminate" label="mercury fulminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="5945" end="5966" title="Union of South Africa" label="Union of South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="5979" end="5987" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290313" start="6029" end="6042" title="Somerset West" label="Somerset West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4651263" start="6089" end="6093" title="AECI" label="AECI"/>
<link wikidata="Q587808" start="6236" end="6249" title="Witwatersrand" label="Witwatersrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977500" start="7050" end="7070" title="Giant Powder Company" label="Giant Powder Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="7074" end="7087" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="7202" end="7208" title="DuPont (1802–2017)" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q766486" start="7524" end="7547" title="Hercules Powder Company" label="Hercules Powder Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q113499592" start="7556" end="7576" title="Atlas Powder Company" label="Atlas Powder Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319225" start="7666" end="7676" title="Dyno Nobel" label="Dyno Nobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q729304" start="7755" end="7773" title="Carthage, Missouri" label="Carthage, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="7998" end="8013" title="Trinitrotoluene" label="Trinitrotoluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="8242" end="8252" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="8339" end="8351" title="black powder" label="black powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8236" start="8435" end="8443" title="literacy" label="literacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8597" end="8615" title="Use forms of explosives#Castings" label="castable explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q903397" start="8970" end="8992" title="phlegmatized explosive" label="phlegmatized explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="9406" end="9418" title="blasting cap" label="blasting cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661370" start="9425" end="9447" title="sympathetic detonation" label="sympathetic detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q318028" start="9510" end="9531" title="shell (projectile)" label="high explosive shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q173517" start="9769" end="9782" title="hand grenades" label="hand grenades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137468" start="9787" end="9799" title="aerial bombs" label="aerial bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496823" start="9893" end="9911" title="satchel charge" label="demolition charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q151197" start="9915" end="9931" title="combat engineers" label="combat engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182329" start="10100" end="10116" title="ammonium nitrate" label="ammonium nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q582668" start="10205" end="10220" title="chemical energy" label="chemical energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313649" start="10376" end="10404" title="Strength (explosive)" label="potential explosive strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q295697" start="10911" end="10915" title="ANFO" label="ANFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170167" start="10952" end="10955" title="TNT" label="TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="11311" end="11314" title="RDX" label="RDX"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11380" end="11399" title="TNT_equivalent#Relative_effectiveness_factor" label="equivalent strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269057" start="11670" end="11683" title="Blast fishing" label="Blast fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q248256" start="11686" end="11702" title="Blasting machine" label="Blasting machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319094" start="11705" end="11717" title="Dynamite gun" label="Dynamite gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191" start="11720" end="11731" title="Nobel Prize" label="Nobel Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="11734" end="11763" title="Relative effectiveness factor" label="Relative effectiveness factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988689" start="12276" end="12304" title="The Periodic Table of Videos" label="The Periodic Table of Videos"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8079" wikidata="Q184903" url="?curid=8079" title="David Fincher">
<text>David Andrew Leo Fincher (born August 28, 1962) is an American film director. Often described as one of the most preeminent directors of his generation, his films, of which most are psychological thrillers, have collectively grossed over $2.1 billion worldwide and have received numerous accolades, including three nominations for the Academy Awards for Best Director. He has also received four Primetime Emmy Awards, two Grammy Awards, a BAFTA Award, and a Golden Globe Award.

Fincher co-founded the production company Propaganda Films in 1986. He directed numerous music videos for the company, including Madonna&#x27;s &quot;Express Yourself&quot; in 1989 and &quot;Vogue&quot; in 1990, both of which won him the MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction. He received two Grammy Awards for Best Music Video for &quot;Love Is Strong&quot; (1994) by the Rolling Stones and &quot;Suit &amp; Tie&quot; (2013) by Justin Timberlake featuring Jay-Z.

He made his feature film debut with &quot;Alien 3&quot; (1992) and gained his breakthrough with &quot;Seven&quot; (1995). He has since directed &quot;The Game&quot; (1997), &quot;Fight Club&quot; (1999), &quot;Panic Room&quot; (2002), &quot;Zodiac&quot; (2007), &quot;The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo&quot; (2011), &quot;Gone Girl&quot; (2014), and &quot;The Killer&quot; (2023). He received nominations for the Academy Award for Best Director for the dramas &quot;The Curious Case of Benjamin Button&quot; (2008), &quot;The Social Network&quot; (2010), and &quot;Mank&quot; (2020).

In television, Fincher has served as an executive producer and director for the Netflix series &quot;House of Cards&quot; (2013–2018) and &quot;Mindhunter&quot; (2017–2019), winning the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for the pilot episode of the former. He also executive produced and co-created the Netflix animated series &quot;Love, Death &amp; Robots&quot; (2019–present) which received three Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program.

==Early life==
David Andrew Leo Fincher was born in Denver on August 28, 1962. His mother, Claire Mae (née Boettcher), was a mental health nurse from South Dakota who worked in drug addiction programs. His father, Howard Kelly &quot;Jack&quot; Fincher (1930–2003), was an author from Oklahoma who worked as a reporter and bureau chief for &quot;Life&quot; magazine. When Fincher was two years old, the family moved to San Anselmo, California, where he counted filmmaker George Lucas among his neighbors. He became fascinated with filmmaking at the age of eight and began making films on an 8mm camera. In a 2012 interview, he said:

As a teenager, Fincher moved to Ashland, Oregon, where he attended Ashland High School. He directed plays and designed sets and lighting after school, was a non-union projectionist at Varsity Theatre, and worked as a production assistant at the KOBI news station in Medford. He supported himself by working as a busboy, dishwasher, and fry cook.

==Career==
===1983–1991: Early work===
While establishing himself in the film industry, Fincher was employed at John Korty&#x27;s studio as a production head. Gaining further experience, he became a visual effects producer, working on the animated &quot;Twice Upon a Time&quot; (1983) with George Lucas. He was hired by Industrial Light &amp; Magic (ILM) in 1983 as an assistant cameraman and matte photographer and worked on &quot;Return of the Jedi&quot; (1983) and &quot;Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom&quot; (1984). In 1984, he left ILM to direct a television commercial for the American Cancer Society that depicted a fetus smoking a cigarette.

This quickly brought Fincher to the attention of producers in Los Angeles, and he was soon given the opportunity to direct Rick Springfield&#x27;s 1985 documentary, &quot;The Beat of the Live Drum&quot;. Set on a directing career, Fincher co-founded production company Propaganda Films and started directing commercials and music videos. Other directors such as Michael Bay, Antoine Fuqua, Michel Gondry, Spike Jonze, Alex Proyas, Paul Rachman, Mark Romanek, Zack Snyder and Gore Verbinski also honed their skills at Propaganda Films before moving on to feature films.

Fincher directed TV commercials for many companies including Levi&#x27;s, Converse, Nike, Pepsi, Revlon, Sony, Coca-Cola and Chanel, although he loathed doing them. Starting in 1984, Fincher began his foray into music videos. He directed videos for various artists including singer-songwriters Rick Springfield, Don Henley, Martha Davis, Paula Abdul, rock band the Outfield, and R&amp;B singer Jermaine Stewart. Fincher&#x27;s 1990 music video for &quot;Freedom! &#x27;90&quot; was one of the most successful for George Michael.

He directed Michael Jackson&#x27;s &quot;Who Is It&quot;, Aerosmith&#x27;s &quot;Janie&#x27;s Got A Gun&quot; and Billy Idol&#x27;s &quot;Cradle of Love&quot;. For Madonna, he directed the videos for &quot;Express Yourself&quot;, &quot;Oh Father&quot;, &quot;Bad Girl&quot; and &quot;Vogue&quot;. The black-and-white video for &quot;Vogue&quot; took inspiration from the films of the 1920s and 1930s and has been frequently cited as one of the best videos of all time. Between 1984 and 1993, Fincher was credited as a director for 53 music videos. He referred to the production of music videos as his own &quot;film school&quot;, in which he learned how to work efficiently within a small budget and time frame.

===1992–2000: Breakthrough===
In 1990, 20th Century Fox hired Fincher to replace Vincent Ward as the director for the science-fiction horror &quot;Alien 3&quot; (1992), his film directorial debut. It was the third installment in the &quot;Alien&quot; franchise starring Sigourney Weaver. The film was released in May 1992 to a mixed reception from critics and was considered weaker than the preceding films. From the beginning, &quot;Alien 3&quot; was hampered by studio intervention and several abandoned scripts. Peter Travers of the &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; called the film &quot;bold and haunting&quot;, despite the &quot;struggle of nine writers&quot; and &quot;studio interference&quot;.

The film received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects. Years later, Fincher publicly expressed his dismay and subsequently disowned the film. In the book &quot;Director&#x27;s Cut: Picturing Hollywood in the 21st Century&quot;, Fincher blames the producers for their lack of trust in him. In an interview with &quot;The Guardian&quot; in 2009, he stated, &quot;No one hated it more than me; to this day, no one hates it more than me.&quot;

After this critical disappointment, Fincher eschewed reading film scripts or directing another project. He briefly retreated to directing commercials and music videos, including the video for the song &quot;Love Is Strong&quot; by the Rolling Stones in 1994, which won the Grammy Award for Best Music Video. Shortly, Fincher decided to make a foray back into film. He read Andrew Kevin Walker&#x27;s original screenplay for &quot;Seven&quot; (1995), which had been revised by Jeremiah Chechik, the director attached to the project at one point. Fincher expressed no interest in directing the revised version, so New Line Cinema agreed to keep the original ending. Starring Brad Pitt, Morgan Freeman, Gwyneth Paltrow, R. Lee Ermey, and Kevin Spacey, it tells the story of two detectives who attempt to identify a serial killer who bases his murders on the Christian seven deadly sins. &quot;Seven&quot; was positively received by film critics and was one of the highest-earning films of 1995, grossing more than $320 million worldwide. Writing for &quot;Sight and Sound&quot;, John Wrathall said it &quot;stands as the most complex and disturbing entry in the serial killer genre since &quot;Manhunter&quot;&quot; and Roger Ebert opined that &quot;Seven&quot; is &quot;one of the darkest and most merciless films ever made in the Hollywood mainstream.&quot;

Following &quot;Seven&quot;, Fincher directed a music video for &quot;6th Avenue Heartache&quot; by the Wallflowers and went on to direct his third feature film, the mystery thriller &quot;The Game&quot; (1997), written by the duo John Brancato and Michael Ferris. Fincher also hired &quot;Seven&quot; screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker to contribute and polish the script. Filmed on location in San Francisco, the story follows an investment banker, played by Michael Douglas, who receives an unusual gift from his younger brother (Sean Penn), where he becomes involved in a &quot;game&quot; that integrates with his everyday life, making him unable to differentiate between game and reality. Almar Haflidason of the BBC was critical of the ending, but praised the visuals—&quot;Fincher does a marvelous job of turning ordinary city locations into frightening backdrops, where every corner turned is another step into the unknown&quot;. Upon &quot;The Game&quot;&#x27;s release in September 1997, the film received generally favorable reviews but performed moderately at the box office. &quot;The Game&quot; was later included in the Criterion Collection.

In August 1997, Fincher agreed to direct &quot;Fight Club&quot;, based on the 1996 novel of the same name by Chuck Palahniuk. It was his second film with 20th Century Fox after the troubled production of &quot;Alien 3&quot;. Starring Brad Pitt, Edward Norton and Helena Bonham Carter, the film is about a nameless office worker suffering from insomnia, who meets a salesman, and together form an underground fighting club as a form of therapy. Fox struggled with the marketing of the film, and were concerned that it would have a limited audience. &quot;Fight Club&quot; premiered on October 15, 1999, in the United States to a polarized response and modest box office success; the film grossed $100.9 million against a budget of $63 million. Initially, many critics thought the film was &quot;a violent and dangerous express train of masochism and aggression.&quot; However, in following years, &quot;Fight Club&quot; became a cult favorite and gained acknowledgement for its multilayered themes; the film has been the source of critical analysis from academics and film critics.

===2001–2010: Continued success===

In 2001, Fincher served as an executive producer for the first season of &quot;The Hire&quot;, a series of short films to promote BMW automobiles. The films were released on the internet in 2001. Next in 2002, Fincher returned to another feature film, a thriller titled &quot;Panic Room&quot;. The story follows a single mother and her daughter who hide in a safe room of their new home, during a home invasion by a trio. Starring Jodie Foster (who replaced Nicole Kidman), Forest Whitaker, Kristen Stewart, Dwight Yoakam, and Jared Leto, it was theatrically released on March 29, 2002, after a month delay, to critical acclaim and commercial success.

In North America, the film earned $96.4 million. In other countries, it grossed $100 million for a worldwide $196.4 million. Mick LaSalle of the &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot; praised the filmmakers for their &quot;fair degree of ingenuity... for 88 minutes of excitement&quot; and the convincing performance given by Foster. Fincher acknowledged &quot;Panic Room&quot; for being more mainstream, describing the film, &quot;It&#x27;s supposed to be a popcorn movie—there are no great, overriding implications. It&#x27;s just about survival.&quot;

Five years after &quot;Panic Room&quot;, Fincher returned on March 2, 2007, with &quot;Zodiac&quot;, a thriller based on Robert Graysmith&#x27;s books about the search for the Zodiac, a real life serial murderer who terrorized communities between the late 1960s and early 1970s. Fincher first learned of the project after being approached by producer Brad Fischer; he was intrigued by the story due to his childhood personal experience. &quot;The highway patrol had been following our school buses&quot;, he recalled. His father told him, &quot;There&#x27;s a serial killer who has killed four or five people... who&#x27;s threatened to... shoot the children as they come off the bus.&quot;

After extensive research on the case with fellow producers, Fincher formed a principal cast of Jake Gyllenhaal, Mark Ruffalo, Robert Downey Jr., Anthony Edwards and Brian Cox. It was the first of Fincher&#x27;s films to be shot in digital, with a Thomson Viper FilmStream HD camera. However, high-speed film cameras were used for particular murder scenes. &quot;Zodiac&quot; was well received, appearing in more than two hundred top ten lists (only &quot;No Country for Old Men&quot; and &quot;There Will Be Blood&quot; appeared in more). However, the film struggled at the United States box office, earning $33 million, but did better overseas with a gross of $51.7 million. Worldwide, &quot;Zodiac&quot; was a moderate success. Despite a campaign by Paramount Pictures, the film did not receive any Academy Award or Golden Globe nominations.

In 2008, Fincher was attached to a film adaptation of the science-fiction novel, &quot;Rendezvous with Rama&quot; by Arthur C. Clarke, however, Fincher said the film is unlikely to go ahead due to problems with the script. His next project was &quot;The Curious Case of Benjamin Button&quot; (2008), an adaptation of F. Scott Fitzgerald&#x27;s eponymous 1923 short story, about a man who is born as a seventy-year-old baby and ages in reverse. The romantic-drama marked Fincher&#x27;s third collaboration with Brad Pitt, who stars opposite Cate Blanchett. The budget for the film was estimated to be $167 million, with very expensive visual effects utilized for Pitt&#x27;s character.

Filming started in November 2006 in New Orleans, taking advantage of Louisiana&#x27;s film incentive. The film was theatrically released on December 25, 2008, in the United States to a commercial success and warm reception. Writing for the &quot;USA Today&quot;, Claudia Puig praises the &quot;graceful and poignant&quot; tale despite it being &quot;overlong and not as emotionally involving as it could be&quot;. The film received thirteen Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture, Best Director for Fincher, Best Actor for Pitt, and Best Supporting Actress for Taraji P. Henson, and won three, for Best Art Direction, Best Makeup, and Best Visual Effects.

Fincher directed the 2010 film &quot;The Social Network&quot;, a biographical drama about Facebook founder, Mark Zuckerberg and his legal battles. The screenplay was written by Aaron Sorkin, who adapted it from the book &quot;The Accidental Billionaires&quot;. It stars Jesse Eisenberg as Zuckerberg, with a supporting cast of Andrew Garfield, Justin Timberlake, Armie Hammer and Max Minghella. Principal photography started in October 2009 in Cambridge, Massachusetts and the film was released one year later. &quot;The Social Network&quot; was also a commercial success, earning $224.9 million worldwide. At the 83rd Academy Awards, the film received eight nominations and won three awards; soundtrack composers Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross won for Best Original Score, and the other two awards were for Best Adapted Screenplay and Best Film Editing. The film received awards for Best Motion Picture – Drama, Best Director, Best Screenplay, and Best Original Score at the 68th Golden Globe Awards. Critics including Roger Ebert, complimented the writing, describing the film as having &quot;spellbinding dialogue. It makes an untellable story clear and fascinating&quot;.

=== 2011–present: Established filmmaker and work with Netflix ===

In 2011, Fincher followed the success of &quot;The Social Network&quot; with &quot;The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo&quot;, a psychological thriller based on the novel by Swedish writer Stieg Larsson. Screenwriter Steven Zaillian spent three months analyzing the novel, writing notes and deleting elements to achieve a suitable running time. Featuring Daniel Craig as journalist Mikael Blomkvist and Rooney Mara as Lisbeth Salander, it follows Blomkvist&#x27;s investigation to solve what happened to a woman from a wealthy family who disappeared four decades ago. To maintain the novel&#x27;s setting, the film was primarily shot in Sweden.

The soundtrack, composed by collaborators Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross, was described by A. O. Scott of &quot;The New York Times&quot; as, &quot;unnerving and powerful&quot;. Upon the film&#x27;s release in December, reviews were generally favorable, according to review aggregator Metacritic. Scott adds, &quot;Mr. Fincher creates a persuasive ambience of political menace and moral despair&quot;. Philip French of &quot;The Guardian&quot; praises the &quot;authentic, quirky detail&quot; and faithful adaptation. The film received five Academy Award nominations, including Best Actress for Mara, and won the award for Best Film Editing. In 2012, Fincher signed a first look deal with Regency Enterprises.

In 2013, Fincher served as an executive producer for the Netflix television series &quot;House of Cards&quot;, a political thriller about a Congressman&#x27;s quest for revenge, of which he also directed the first two episodes. The series received positive reviews, earning nine Primetime Emmy nominations, including Outstanding Drama Series. Fincher won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for the first episode. He also directed a music video for the first time since 2005, &quot;Suit &amp; Tie&quot; by Justin Timberlake and Jay-Z, which won a Grammy Award for Best Music Video.

In 2014, Fincher signed a deal with HBO for three television series - &quot;Utopia&quot; (an adaptation of the British series, to be written by Gillian Flynn), &quot;Shakedown&quot;, and &quot;Videosyncrazy&quot;. In August 2015, budget disputes between him and the network halted production. Three years later, in 2018, &quot;Utopia&quot; was picked up by Amazon Studios, with Gillian Flynn as creator.

Fincher directed &quot;Gone Girl&quot; (2014), an adaptation of Gillian Flynn&#x27;s novel of the same name, starring Ben Affleck and Rosamund Pike. He even met with Flynn to discuss his interest in the project before a director was selected. Set in Missouri, the story begins as a mystery that follows the events surrounding Nick Dunne (Affleck), who becomes the prime suspect in the sudden disappearance of his wife Amy (Pike). A critical and commercial success, the film earned $369 million worldwide against a $61 million budget, making it Fincher&#x27;s highest-grossing work to date. Writing for &quot;Salon&quot; magazine, Andrew O&#x27;Hehir praises the &quot;tremendous ensemble cast who mesh marvelously&quot;, adding, &quot;All the technical command of image, sound and production design for which Fincher is justly famous is here as well.&quot; &quot;Gone Girl&quot; garnered awards and nominations in a various categories; Pike earned an Academy Award nomination for Best Actress and Fincher received his third Golden Globe nomination for Best Director.Between 2016 and 2019, Fincher directed, produced and served as showrunner for another series, &quot;Mindhunter&quot;, starring Holt McCallany and Jonathan Groff. The series, based on the book &quot;Mind Hunter: Inside the FBI&#x27;s Elite Serial Crime Unit&quot;, debuted on Netflix worldwide on October 13, 2017. He has expressed interest in eventually making a third season of &quot;Mindhunter&quot;, which was put on indefinite hold in 2020. In 2023, Fincher confirmed that Netflix will not be making a third season of &quot;Mindhunter&quot;, saying &quot;I&#x27;m very proud of the first two seasons. But it&#x27;s a very expensive show and, in the eyes of Netflix, we didn&#x27;t attract enough of an audience to justify such an investment [for Season 3].&quot;

In June 2017, Jim Gianopulos of Paramount Pictures announced that a sequel to &quot;World War Z&quot; was &quot;in advanced development&quot; with Fincher and Brad Pitt. Producers Dede Gardner and Jeremy Kleiner said that Fincher would begin directing it in June 2019. However, in February 2019, Paramount cancelled the project. As of 2019, Fincher serves as an executive producer for &quot;Love, Death &amp; Robots&quot;, an animated science-fiction web series for Netflix.

In July 2019, Fincher signed on to direct &quot;Mank&quot;, a biopic about &quot;Citizen Kane&quot; screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz. &quot;Mank&quot; received a limited theatrical release on November 13, 2020, and was made available on Netflix on December 4. Gary Oldman portrayed Mankiewicz, and the film received ten Academy Award nominations, winning two for Best Cinematography and Best Production Design.

Fincher served as an executive producer on a series titled &quot;Voir&quot; (2021) for Netflix. In 2022, Fincher made his first foray in animation directing an episode for the third season of &quot;Love, Death &amp; Robots&quot;. The episode is titled &quot;Bad Travelling&quot; and was written by &quot;Seven&quot; screenwriter Andrew Kevin Walker. In February 2021, it was reported that Fincher would direct an adaptation of the graphic novel &quot;The Killer&quot; for Netflix, with Andrew Kevin Walker writing the screenplay and Michael Fassbender attached to star. It premiered at the 80th Venice International Film Festival. It began a limited theatrical release in October 2023 and was subsequently released on Netflix on 10 November.

In 2024, it was reported that Fincher was interested in working on an American adaptation of the popular Korean series &quot;Squid Game&quot; and was developing it alongside a &quot;Chinatown&quot; prequel miniseries that he co-wrote with the late Robert Towne. It was confirmed in October 2024 that he would develop and work on the &quot;Squid Game&quot; adaptation for 2025.

==Filmmaking style and techniques==
=== Influences ===
Fincher did not attend film school. He has listed filmmakers George Roy Hill, Alfred Hitchcock, Stanley Kubrick, Alan J. Pakula, Ridley Scott, and Martin Scorsese as his major influences. His personal favorite films include &quot;Rear Window&quot; (1954), &quot;Lawrence of Arabia&quot; (1962), &quot;The Graduate&quot; (1967), &quot;Paper Moon&quot; (1973), &quot;American Graffiti&quot; (1973), &quot;Jaws&quot; (1975), &quot;All the President&#x27;s Men&quot; (1976), &quot;Taxi Driver&quot; (1976), &quot;Close Encounters of the Third Kind&quot; (1977), and &quot;Zelig&quot; (1983). He suggested that his film &quot;Panic Room&quot; is a combination of &quot;Rear Window&quot; and &quot;Straw Dogs&quot; (1971).

For &quot;Seven&quot;, Fincher and cinematographer Darius Khondji were inspired by films &quot;The French Connection&quot; (1971) and &quot;Klute&quot; (1971), as well as the work of photographer Robert Frank. He has cited graphic designer Saul Bass as an inspiration for his films&#x27; title sequences; Bass designed many such sequences for prominent directors, including Hitchcock and Kubrick.

=== Method ===

Fincher&#x27;s filmmaking process always begins with extensive research and preparation, although he has said the process is different every time: &quot;I enjoy reading a script that you can see in your head, and then I enjoy the casting and I enjoy the rehearsal, and I enjoy all the meetings about what it should be, what it could be, what it might be.&quot; He has admitted to having autocratic tendencies and prefers to micromanage every aspect of a film&#x27;s production. Icelandic film producer Sigurjón Sighvatsson, with whom Fincher has collaborated for decades, has said that &quot;[Fincher] was always a rebel... always challenging the status quo&quot;.

Known for his perfectionism and meticulous eye for detail, Fincher performs thorough research when casting actors to ensure their suitability for the part. His colleague Max Daly said, &quot;He&#x27;s really good at finding the one detail that was missed. He knows more than anybody.&quot; Producer Laura Ziskin said of him, &quot;He&#x27;s just scary smart, sort of smarter than everyone else in the room.&quot; He approaches editing like &quot;intricate mathematical problems&quot;. Long-time collaborator Angus Wall said that editing &quot;Zodiac&quot; was like &quot;putting together a Swiss watch... all the pieces are so beautifully machined&quot;. He elaborated, &quot;[Fincher] is incredibly specific. He never settles. And there&#x27;s a purity that shows in his work.&quot;

When working with actors, Fincher is known to demand a grueling series of takes to capture a scene perfectly. For instance, the &quot;Zodiac&quot; cast members were required to do upwards of 70 takes for certain scenes, much to the displeasure of Jake Gyllenhaal. Rooney Mara had to endure 99 takes for a scene in &quot;The Social Network&quot; and said that Fincher enjoys challenging people. &quot;Gone Girl&quot; averaged 50 takes per scene. In one of the episodes for &quot;Mindhunter&quot;, it was reported that a nine-minute scene took 11 hours to shoot. When asked about this method, Fincher said, &quot;I hate earnestness in performance... usually by take 17 the earnestness is gone.&quot; He added that he wants a scene to be as natural and authentic as possible. Some actors appreciate this approach, arguing that the subtle adjustments have a big difference in the way a scene is carried. Others have been critical, with R. Lee Ermey stating, &quot;[Fincher] wants puppets. He doesn&#x27;t want actors that are creative.&quot;

Fincher prefers shooting with Red digital cameras, under natural or pre-existing light conditions rather than using elaborate lighting setups. Fincher is known to use computer-generated imagery, which is mostly unnoticeable to the viewer. He does not normally use hand-held cameras during filming, instead preferring cameras on a tripod. He said, &quot;Handheld has a powerful psychological stranglehold. It means something specific and I don&#x27;t want to cloud what&#x27;s going on with too much meaning.&quot; He has experimented with the disembodied camera movement, notably in &quot;Panic Room&quot;, where the camera glides around the house to give the impression of surveillance by an unseen observer.

=== Style and themes ===
One element of Fincher&#x27;s visual style is the specific way in which he uses tilt, pan, and track in the camera movements. When a character is in motion or expressing emotions, the camera moves at the exact same speed and direction as their body. The movements are choreographed precisely between the actors and camera operators. The resulting effect helps the audience connect with the character to understand their feelings. Similarly, in his music videos, Fincher appreciated that the visuals should enhance the listening experience. He would cut around the vocals, and let the choreography finish before cutting the shot. Camera movements are synchronized to the beat of the music.

Some regard Fincher as an auteur filmmaker, although he dislikes being associated with that term. Much of his work is influenced by classical film noir and neo noir genres. Fincher&#x27;s visual style also includes using monochromatic and desaturated colors of blue, green, and yellow, representing the world that the characters are in. In &quot;The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo&quot;, Fincher uses heavy desaturation for certain scenes, and increases or decreases the effect based on the story or characters&#x27; emotions. Erik Messerschmidt, cinematographer for &quot;Mindhunter&quot;, explained the color palette: &quot;The show has a desaturated green-yellow look... [it] helps give the show its period feel.&quot; He states the effect is achieved through production design, costumes, and filming locations—not necessarily through lighting used on set. Fincher also favors detailed and pronounced shadows, as well as using minimal light. When asked about his use of dim lighting, he said bright lights make the color of skin appear unnatural, and that the lights and colors in his films represent &quot;the way the world looks to [him]&quot;.

Fincher has explored themes of martyrdom, alienation, and dehumanization of modern culture. In addition to the wider themes of good and evil, his characters are usually troubled, discontented, and flawed; they are often unable to socialize and suffer from loneliness. In &quot;Seven&quot;, &quot;Zodiac&quot;, and &quot;The Social Network&quot;, themes of pressure and obsession are explored, leading to the character&#x27;s downfall. Quoting historian Frank Krutnik, the writer Piers McCarthy argues that &quot;the protagonists of these films are not totally in control of their actions but are subject to darker, inner impulses&quot;.

In a 2017 interview, Fincher explained his fascination of sinister themes: &quot;There was always a house in any neighborhood that I ever lived in that all the kids on the street wondered, &#x27;What are those people up to?&#x27; We sort of attach the sinister to the mundane in order to make things interesting... I think it&#x27;s also because in order for something to be evil, it almost has to cloak itself as something else.&quot; Fincher once stated, &quot;I think people are perverts. I&#x27;ve maintained that. That&#x27;s the foundation of my career.&quot;

=== Collaborators ===

Over the course of his career, Fincher has shown loyalty to many members of his cast and crew. As a music video director, he collaborated with Paula Abdul five times, as well as Madonna and Rick Springfield four times each. Once he made the transition to feature films, he cast Brad Pitt in three of them. He said of Pitt, &quot;On-screen and off-screen, Brad&#x27;s the ultimate guy... he has such a great ease with who he is.&quot; Bob Stephenson, Michael Massee, Christopher John Fields, John Getz, Elias Koteas, Zach Grenier, Charles Dance, Rooney Mara, Jared Leto, Arliss Howard, and Richmond Arquette have also appeared in at least two of his films.

&quot;Fight Club&quot; was scored by the Dust Brothers, who at that point had never scored a film. Describing their working relationship with Fincher, they said he &quot;was not hanging over our shoulders telling us what to do&quot; and that the only direction he gave was to make the music sound as great as the score from &quot;The Graduate&quot; (1967). Nine Inch Nails members Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross composed the music for &quot;The Social Network&quot;, &quot;The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo&quot;, &quot;Gone Girl&quot;, &quot;Mank&quot;, and &quot;The Killer&quot;. The musicians describe their working relationship as &quot;collaborative, respectful, and inspiring&quot; although quipped that it &quot;hasn&#x27;t gotten any easier&quot;. Many years before the duo worked with Fincher, he arranged for a remix of the Nine Inch Nails song &quot;Closer&quot; to play over the opening credits of &quot;Seven&quot;. Howard Shore composed the scores for &quot;Seven&quot;, &quot;The Game&quot;, and &quot;Panic Room&quot;.

Darius Khondji and Jeff Cronenweth have served as cinematographers for Fincher&#x27;s films. Khondji said, &quot;Fincher deserves a lot of credit. It was his influence that pushed me to experiment and got me as far as I did.&quot; Fincher has hired sound designer Ren Klyce in all his films since 1995 and trusts him &quot;implicitly&quot;. He has worked with film editor Angus Wall since 1988. Wall has worked on seven of his films, five of which as editor.

Donald Graham Burt has served as a production designer for six films and Bob Wagner has served as an assistant director for six. Casting director Laray Mayfield has worked with Fincher for over 20 years. In a 2010 interview, Fincher said, &quot;You don&#x27;t have to love all of your co-collaborators, but you do have to respect them. And when you do, when you realize that people bring stuff to the table that&#x27;s not necessarily your experience, but if you allow yourself to relate to it, it can enrich the buffet that you&#x27;re going to bring with you into the editing room.&quot;

==Personal life==
Fincher married model Donya Fiorentino (sister of actress Linda Fiorentino). They had one daughter together, before divorcing in 1995. Fincher married producer Ceán Chaffin in 1996.

==Filmography==

==Awards and recognitions==

Tim Walker of &quot;The Independent&quot; praised Fincher&#x27;s work, stating &quot;His portrayals of the modern psyche have a power and precision that few film-makers can match.&quot; In 2003, Fincher was ranked 39th in &quot;The Guardian&quot;&#x27;s 40 best directors. In 2012, &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed him again in their ranking of 23 best film directors in the world, applauding &quot;his ability to sustain tone and tension&quot;. In 2016&quot;, Zodiac&quot; and &quot;The Social Network&quot; appeared in the BBC&#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century list. In addition to films, Fincher has often been admired for producing some of the most creative music videos.

Fincher received three Academy Award for Best Director nominations for &quot;The Curious Case of Benjamin Button&quot; (2008), &quot;The Social Network&quot; (2010), and &quot;Mank&quot; (2020). He won both the BAFTA Award for Best Direction and the Golden Globe Award for Best Director for &quot;The Social Network&quot;. He also received two Grammy Awards for &quot;Love Is Strong&quot; (1995) by &quot;The Rolling Stones&quot; and &quot;Suit &amp; Tie&quot; (2013) by Justin Timberlake and Jay-Z as well as four Primetime Emmy Awards for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for &quot;House of Cards&quot; (2013) and three Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program for &quot;Love, Death &amp; Robots&quot;.

==See also==
* David Fincher&#x27;s unrealized projects

== Notes ==
==References==
==Bibliography==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184903" start="0" end="24" title="David Fincher" label="David Andrew Leo Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089843" start="153" end="162" title="David Fincher filmography" label="his films"/>
<link wikidata="Q590103" start="182" end="204" title="psychological thriller" label="psychological thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q30687332" start="279" end="297" title="List of awards and nominations received by David Fincher" label="numerous accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="335" end="349" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="350" end="367" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="395" end="416" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="422" end="435" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="439" end="450" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="458" end="476" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250053" start="521" end="537" title="Propaganda Films" label="Propaganda Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="608" end="615" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q582091" start="629" end="645" title="Express Yourself (Madonna song)" label="Express Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128775" start="670" end="675" title="Vogue (Madonna song)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q915665" start="717" end="757" title="MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction" label="MTV Video Music Award for Best Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976730" start="775" end="809" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Video" label="Grammy Awards for Best Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428794" start="820" end="834" title="Love Is Strong" label="Love Is Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="851" end="869" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072616" start="880" end="894" title="Suit &amp;amp; Tie" label="Suit &amp;amp; Tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="911" end="928" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="939" end="944" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543" start="989" end="996" title="Alien 3" label="Alien 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q190908" start="1049" end="1054" title="Seven (1995 film)" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q723187" start="1097" end="1105" title="The Game (1997 film)" label="The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="1126" end="1136" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q741042" start="1157" end="1167" title="Panic Room" label="Panic Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q218172" start="1188" end="1194" title="Zodiac (film)" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q474093" start="1215" end="1246" title="The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (2011 film)" label="The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920425" start="1267" end="1276" title="Gone Girl (film)" label="Gone Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q111008873" start="1301" end="1311" title="The Killer (2023 film)" label="The Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="1358" end="1389" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q183239" start="1411" end="1446" title="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)" label="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q185888" start="1467" end="1485" title="The Social Network" label="The Social Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q73093591" start="1510" end="1514" title="Mank" label="Mank"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1610" end="1617" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="1631" end="1645" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340152" start="1674" end="1684" title="Mindhunter (TV series)" label="Mindhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q583972" start="1716" end="1781" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073446" start="1790" end="1803" title="Chapter 1 (House of Cards)" label="pilot episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q61740435" start="1895" end="1919" title="Love, Death &amp;amp; Robots" label="Love, Death &amp;amp; Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987659" start="1962" end="2027" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program" label="Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="2082" end="2088" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="2180" end="2192" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112472" start="2244" end="2281" title="Jack Fincher (screenwriter)" label="Howard Kelly &amp;quot;Jack&amp;quot; Fincher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="2314" end="2322" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="2369" end="2394" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q984597" start="2448" end="2471" title="San Anselmo, California" label="San Anselmo, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="2500" end="2512" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q270183" start="2620" end="2630" title="8mm film" label="8mm camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q450100" start="2695" end="2710" title="Ashland, Oregon" label="Ashland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4805251" start="2730" end="2749" title="Ashland High School (Oregon)" label="Ashland High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334781" start="2908" end="2912" title="KOBI (TV)" label="KOBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q836663" start="2929" end="2936" title="Medford, Oregon" label="Medford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168358" start="3122" end="3132" title="John Korty" label="John Korty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857883" start="3264" end="3281" title="Twice Upon a Time (1983 film)" label="Twice Upon a Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q746676" start="3330" end="3358" title="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic" label="Industrial Light &amp;amp; Magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16662817" start="3403" end="3408" title="Matte (filmmaking)" label="matte"/>
<link wikidata="Q181803" start="3442" end="3460" title="Return of the Jedi" label="Return of the Jedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q179215" start="3484" end="3520" title="Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom" label="Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="3598" end="3621" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q707446" start="3789" end="3805" title="Rick Springfield" label="Rick Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250053" start="3935" end="3951" title="Propaganda Films" label="Propaganda Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q59259" start="4028" end="4039" title="Michael Bay" label="Michael Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q465139" start="4041" end="4054" title="Antoine Fuqua" label="Antoine Fuqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q126098" start="4056" end="4069" title="Michel Gondry" label="Michel Gondry"/>
<link wikidata="Q259913" start="4071" end="4082" title="Spike Jonze" label="Spike Jonze"/>
<link wikidata="Q259687" start="4084" end="4095" title="Alex Proyas" label="Alex Proyas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366516" start="4097" end="4109" title="Paul Rachman" label="Paul Rachman"/>
<link wikidata="Q538145" start="4111" end="4123" title="Mark Romanek" label="Mark Romanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q139890" start="4125" end="4136" title="Zack Snyder" label="Zack Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q295463" start="4141" end="4155" title="Gore Verbinski" label="Gore Verbinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q127962" start="4297" end="4308" title="Levi Strauss &amp;amp; Co." label="Levi&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q319515" start="4310" end="4318" title="Converse (company)" label="Converse"/>
<link wikidata="Q483915" start="4320" end="4324" title="Nike, Inc." label="Nike"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="4326" end="4331" title="Pepsi-Cola" label="Pepsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459595" start="4333" end="4339" title="Revlon" label="Revlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q41187" start="4341" end="4345" title="Sony" label="Sony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="4347" end="4356" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="4361" end="4367" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q316454" start="4548" end="4558" title="Don Henley" label="Don Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q60330734" start="4560" end="4572" title="Martha Davis (musician)" label="Martha Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185465" start="4574" end="4585" title="Paula Abdul" label="Paula Abdul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093178" start="4597" end="4609" title="the Outfield" label="the Outfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q493333" start="4630" end="4646" title="Jermaine Stewart" label="Jermaine Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q942781" start="4690" end="4707" title="Freedom! &amp;#x27;90" label="Freedom! &amp;#x27;90"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="4749" end="4763" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="4778" end="4793" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q733532" start="4807" end="4816" title="Who Is It (Michael Jackson song)" label="Who Is It"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="4824" end="4833" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q625461" start="4847" end="4869" title="Janie&amp;#x27;s Got a Gun" label="Janie&amp;#x27;s Got A Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q73437" start="4880" end="4890" title="Billy Idol" label="Billy Idol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180493" start="4904" end="4918" title="Cradle of Love (Billy Idol song)" label="Cradle of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="4930" end="4937" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q582091" start="4972" end="4988" title="Express Yourself (Madonna song)" label="Express Yourself"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415550" start="5002" end="5011" title="Oh Father" label="Oh Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041243" start="5025" end="5033" title="Bad Girl (Madonna song)" label="Bad Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128775" start="5050" end="5055" title="Vogue (Madonna song)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="5067" end="5082" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="5518" end="5534" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q726024" start="5560" end="5572" title="Vincent Ward (director)" label="Vincent Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="5597" end="5612" title="Science fiction" label="science-fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q108543" start="5626" end="5633" title="Alien 3" label="Alien 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990792" start="5712" end="5739" title="Alien (franchise)" label="&amp;quot;Alien&amp;quot; franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q102124" start="5749" end="5765" title="Sigourney Weaver" label="Sigourney Weaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q890207" start="5994" end="6007" title="Peter Travers" label="Peter Travers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="6021" end="6034" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="6196" end="6209" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="6225" end="6244" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Best Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6507" end="6519" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428794" start="6839" end="6853" title="Love Is Strong" label="Love Is Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="6863" end="6881" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="6905" end="6917" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976730" start="6922" end="6938" title="Grammy Award for Best Music Video" label="Best Music Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q505689" start="7005" end="7024" title="Andrew Kevin Walker" label="Andrew Kevin Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q190908" start="7062" end="7067" title="Seven (1995 film)" label="Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q655416" start="7108" end="7124" title="Jeremiah Chechik" label="Jeremiah Chechik"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="7244" end="7259" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="7305" end="7314" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q48337" start="7316" end="7330" title="Morgan Freeman" label="Morgan Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="7332" end="7347" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q353978" start="7349" end="7361" title="R. Lee Ermey" label="R. Lee Ermey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25144" start="7367" end="7379" title="Kevin Spacey" label="Kevin Spacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q484188" start="7444" end="7457" title="serial killer" label="serial killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="7487" end="7496" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q166502" start="7497" end="7514" title="seven deadly sins" label="seven deadly sins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="7685" end="7700" title="Sight and Sound" label="Sight and Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q886719" start="7823" end="7832" title="Manhunter (film)" label="Manhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="7849" end="7860" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642607" start="8060" end="8080" title="6th Avenue Heartache" label="6th Avenue Heartache"/>
<link wikidata="Q643005" start="8090" end="8105" title="the Wallflowers" label="the Wallflowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q723187" start="8179" end="8187" title="The Game (1997 film)" label="The Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q13441891" start="8221" end="8253" title="John Brancato and Michael Ferris" label="John Brancato and Michael Ferris"/>
<link wikidata="Q119798" start="8449" end="8464" title="Michael Douglas" label="Michael Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44221" start="8521" end="8530" title="Sean Penn" label="Sean Penn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="8706" end="8709" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204187" start="9123" end="9143" title="The Criterion Collection" label="Criterion Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q190050" start="9193" end="9203" title="Fight Club" label="Fight Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q837283" start="9229" end="9251" title="Fight Club (novel)" label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q268181" start="9255" end="9270" title="Chuck Palahniuk" label="Chuck Palahniuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="9391" end="9404" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170428" start="9409" end="9429" title="Helena Bonham Carter" label="Helena Bonham Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056495" start="10176" end="10225" title="Interpretations of Fight Club" label="critical analysis from academics and film critics"/>
<link wikidata="Q512499" start="10343" end="10351" title="The Hire" label="The Hire"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="10394" end="10397" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q741042" start="10540" end="10550" title="Panic Room" label="Panic Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560381" start="10661" end="10674" title="home invasion" label="home invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41351" start="10695" end="10707" title="Jodie Foster" label="Jodie Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="10722" end="10735" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q182763" start="10738" end="10753" title="Forest Whitaker" label="Forest Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q126599" start="10755" end="10770" title="Kristen Stewart" label="Kristen Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q713099" start="10772" end="10785" title="Dwight Yoakam" label="Dwight Yoakam"/>
<link wikidata="Q484523" start="10791" end="10801" title="Jared Leto" label="Jared Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="11068" end="11091" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q218172" start="11557" end="11563" title="Zodiac (film)" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338953" start="11591" end="11607" title="Robert Graysmith" label="Robert Graysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q218148" start="11646" end="11652" title="Zodiac Killer" label="Zodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q58494473" start="11821" end="11833" title="Bradley J. Fischer" label="Brad Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133313" start="12257" end="12272" title="Jake Gyllenhaal" label="Jake Gyllenhaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41422" start="12274" end="12286" title="Mark Ruffalo" label="Mark Ruffalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q165219" start="12288" end="12305" title="Robert Downey Jr." label="Robert Downey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q314924" start="12307" end="12322" title="Anthony Edwards (actor)" label="Anthony Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q34975" start="12327" end="12336" title="Brian Cox (actor)" label="Brian Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224918" start="12393" end="12400" title="digital cinematography" label="digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q104844927" start="12409" end="12422" title="Thomson Viper FilmStream Camera" label="Thomson Viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916762" start="12434" end="12436" title="High-definition video" label="HD"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145694" start="12437" end="12443" title="Digital cinematography cameras" label="camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q183081" start="12617" end="12639" title="No Country for Old Men (film)" label="No Country for Old Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q244315" start="12656" end="12675" title="There Will Be Blood" label="There Will Be Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="12914" end="12932" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q741222" start="13094" end="13114" title="Rendezvous with Rama" label="Rendezvous with Rama"/>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="13124" end="13140" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q183239" start="13257" end="13292" title="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)" label="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q93354" start="13324" end="13343" title="F. Scott Fitzgerald" label="F. Scott Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574830" start="13361" end="13377" title="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (short story)" label="1923 short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q80966" start="13547" end="13561" title="Cate Blanchett" label="Cate Blanchett"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="13729" end="13740" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q39681" start="13939" end="13948" title="USA Today" label="USA Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="14134" end="14147" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="14171" end="14183" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="14185" end="14198" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q103916" start="14212" end="14222" title="Academy Award for Best Actor" label="Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="14237" end="14260" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q235511" start="14265" end="14281" title="Taraji P. Henson" label="Taraji P. Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q277751" start="14302" end="14320" title="Academy Award for Best Production Design" label="Best Art Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q487136" start="14322" end="14333" title="Academy Award for Best Makeup and Hairstyling" label="Best Makeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q393686" start="14339" end="14358" title="Academy Award for Best Visual Effects" label="Best Visual Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q185888" start="14398" end="14416" title="The Social Network" label="The Social Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="14451" end="14459" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q36215" start="14469" end="14484" title="Mark Zuckerberg" label="Mark Zuckerberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q299194" start="14538" end="14550" title="Aaron Sorkin" label="Aaron Sorkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2977762" start="14587" end="14614" title="The Accidental Billionaires" label="The Accidental Billionaires"/>
<link wikidata="Q219512" start="14631" end="14646" title="Jesse Eisenberg" label="Jesse Eisenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891" start="14688" end="14703" title="Andrew Garfield" label="Andrew Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="14705" end="14722" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q374273" start="14724" end="14736" title="Armie Hammer" label="Armie Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q360426" start="14741" end="14754" title="Max Minghella" label="Max Minghella"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="14805" end="14829" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q183355" start="14975" end="14994" title="83rd Academy Awards" label="83rd Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="15075" end="15087" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q520346" start="15092" end="15104" title="Atticus Ross" label="Atticus Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q488651" start="15113" end="15132" title="Academy Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="15168" end="15191" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q281939" start="15196" end="15213" title="Academy Award for Best Film Editing" label="Best Film Editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011509" start="15244" end="15271" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama" label="Best Motion Picture – Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="15273" end="15286" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q849124" start="15288" end="15303" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Screenplay" label="Best Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422140" start="15309" end="15328" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score" label="Best Original Score"/>
<link wikidata="Q180813" start="15336" end="15360" title="68th Golden Globe Awards" label="68th Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q474093" start="15687" end="15718" title="The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo (2011 film)" label="The Girl with the Dragon Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q186317" start="15788" end="15801" title="Stieg Larsson" label="Stieg Larsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q291141" start="15816" end="15831" title="Steven Zaillian" label="Steven Zaillian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547" start="15954" end="15966" title="Daniel Craig" label="Daniel Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628415" start="15981" end="15997" title="Mikael Blomkvist" label="Mikael Blomkvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q228766" start="16002" end="16013" title="Rooney Mara" label="Rooney Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191282" start="16017" end="16033" title="Lisbeth Salander" label="Lisbeth Salander"/>
<link wikidata="Q38351" start="16335" end="16346" title="A. O. Scott" label="A. O. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="16356" end="16374" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="16528" end="16538" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="16668" end="16680" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="16821" end="16833" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="17011" end="17018" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="17043" end="17057" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="17233" end="17247" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q989438" start="17271" end="17295" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series" label="Outstanding Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q583972" start="17313" end="17378" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072616" start="17470" end="17484" title="Suit &amp;amp; Tie" label="Suit &amp;amp; Tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="17516" end="17521" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="17607" end="17610" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636827" start="17647" end="17653" title="Utopia (2020 TV series)" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240237" start="17682" end="17696" title="Utopia (British TV series)" label="British series"/>
<link wikidata="Q311755" start="17715" end="17728" title="Gillian Flynn" label="Gillian Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740868" start="17928" end="17942" title="Amazon Studios" label="Amazon Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q14920425" start="17993" end="18014" title="Gone Girl (film)" label="&amp;quot;Gone Girl&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581570" start="18067" end="18083" title="Gone Girl (novel)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q483118" start="18094" end="18105" title="Ben Affleck" label="Ben Affleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q230004" start="18110" end="18123" title="Rosamund Pike" label="Rosamund Pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="18226" end="18234" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585139" start="18258" end="18265" title="Mystery Story" label="mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q28677832" start="18394" end="18397" title="Amy Dunne" label="Amy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="18578" end="18595" title="Salon (website)" label="&amp;quot;Salon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q19961303" start="18892" end="18910" title="List of accolades received by Gone Girl (film)" label="various categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="18927" end="18940" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="18956" end="18968" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="19000" end="19012" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340152" start="19143" end="19153" title="Mindhunter (TV series)" label="Mindhunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368141" start="19170" end="19184" title="Holt McCallany" label="Holt McCallany"/>
<link wikidata="Q556644" start="19189" end="19203" title="Jonathan Groff" label="Jonathan Groff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28196" start="19895" end="19906" title="World War Z (film)" label="World War Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249738" start="19991" end="20003" title="Dede Gardner" label="Dede Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15884784" start="20008" end="20022" title="Jeremy Kleiner" label="Jeremy Kleiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q61740435" start="20202" end="20226" title="Love, Death &amp;amp; Robots" label="Love, Death &amp;amp; Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q73093591" start="20335" end="20339" title="Mank" label="Mank"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="20349" end="20355" title="Biographical film" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="20368" end="20380" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q956533" start="20400" end="20420" title="Herman J. Mankiewicz" label="Herman J. Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="20548" end="20559" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q57246152" start="20604" end="20633" title="93rd Academy Awards" label="ten Academy Award nominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q131520" start="20651" end="20670" title="Academy Award for Best Cinematography" label="Best Cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q277751" start="20675" end="20697" title="Academy Award for Best Production Design" label="Best Production Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q110070045" start="20765" end="20769" title="Voir (TV series)" label="Voir"/>
<link wikidata="Q111008873" start="21110" end="21123" title="The Killer (2023 film)" label="an adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072249" start="21151" end="21161" title="The Killer (comics)" label="The Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q57147" start="21233" end="21251" title="Michael Fassbender" label="Michael Fassbender"/>
<link wikidata="Q117315857" start="21290" end="21329" title="80th Venice International Film Festival" label="80th Venice International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q106582931" start="21568" end="21578" title="Squid Game" label="Squid Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q644987" start="21625" end="21634" title="Chinatown (1974 film)" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q721922" start="21691" end="21703" title="Robert Towne" label="Robert Towne"/>
<link wikidata="Q51570" start="21937" end="21952" title="George Roy Hill" label="George Roy Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="21954" end="21970" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001" start="21972" end="21987" title="Stanley Kubrick" label="Stanley Kubrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q51519" start="21989" end="22003" title="Alan J. Pakula" label="Alan J. Pakula"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="22005" end="22017" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="22023" end="22038" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34414" start="22106" end="22117" title="Rear Window" label="Rear Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q228186" start="22132" end="22162" title="Lawrence of Arabia (film)" label="&amp;quot;Lawrence of Arabia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q217627" start="22177" end="22189" title="The Graduate" label="The Graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q603162" start="22204" end="22226" title="Paper Moon (film)" label="&amp;quot;Paper Moon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q375855" start="22241" end="22258" title="American Graffiti" label="American Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q189505" start="22279" end="22283" title="Jaws (film)" label="Jaws"/>
<link wikidata="Q466781" start="22304" end="22332" title="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men (film)" label="All the President&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q47221" start="22353" end="22364" title="Taxi Driver" label="Taxi Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q320588" start="22385" end="22419" title="Close Encounters of the Third Kind" label="Close Encounters of the Third Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q187423" start="22444" end="22449" title="Zelig" label="Zelig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163628" start="22568" end="22578" title="Straw Dogs (1971 film)" label="Straw Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q951018" start="22645" end="22659" title="Darius Khondji" label="Darius Khondji"/>
<link wikidata="Q220735" start="22689" end="22710" title="The French Connection (film)" label="The French Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348177" start="22734" end="22739" title="Klute" label="Klute"/>
<link wikidata="Q467574" start="22790" end="22802" title="Robert Frank" label="Robert Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q536884" start="22834" end="22843" title="Saul Bass" label="Saul Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q441606" start="22882" end="22896" title="title sequence" label="title sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="23395" end="23405" title="Autocracy" label="autocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933932" start="23432" end="23443" title="Micromanaging" label="micromanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482118" start="23510" end="23530" title="Sigurjón Sighvatsson" label="Sigurjón Sighvatsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270533" start="23973" end="23985" title="Laura Ziskin" label="Laura Ziskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q544658" start="24182" end="24192" title="Angus Wall" label="Angus Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q670753" start="24264" end="24275" title="Swiss made" label="Swiss watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q353978" start="25391" end="25403" title="R. Lee Ermey" label="R. Lee Ermey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257270" start="25528" end="25531" title="Red Digital Cinema" label="Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497127" start="25624" end="25639" title="Photographic lighting" label="lighting setups"/>
<link wikidata="Q6002306" start="25665" end="25691" title="computer-generated imagery" label="computer-generated imagery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647097" start="25762" end="25778" title="hand-held camera" label="hand-held camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q683906" start="25828" end="25834" title="tripod (photography)" label="tripod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919140" start="26314" end="26318" title="Tilt (camera)" label="tilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116837" start="26320" end="26323" title="Panning (camera)" label="pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813492" start="26329" end="26334" title="Match moving" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q237893" start="26783" end="26786" title="Film editing" label="cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q788514" start="26950" end="26956" title="auteur" label="auteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q185867" start="27066" end="27075" title="film noir" label="film noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421031" start="27080" end="27088" title="Neo-noir" label="neo noir"/>
<link wikidata="Q27673" start="27163" end="27174" title="Colorfulness" label="desaturated"/>
<link wikidata="Q76081666" start="27448" end="27466" title="Erik Messerschmidt" label="Erik Messerschmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="28103" end="28109" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q545825" start="28114" end="28124" title="Social alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495037" start="28130" end="28144" title="dehumanization" label="dehumanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q185465" start="29443" end="29454" title="Paula Abdul" label="Paula Abdul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="29478" end="29485" title="Madonna" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q707446" start="29490" end="29506" title="Rick Springfield" label="Rick Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="29578" end="29587" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q352012" start="29734" end="29748" title="Bob Stephenson (actor)" label="Bob Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q526468" start="29750" end="29764" title="Michael Massee" label="Michael Massee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992967" start="29791" end="29800" title="John Getz" label="John Getz"/>
<link wikidata="Q379808" start="29802" end="29814" title="Elias Koteas" label="Elias Koteas"/>
<link wikidata="Q139341" start="29816" end="29828" title="Zach Grenier" label="Zach Grenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q309690" start="29830" end="29843" title="Charles Dance" label="Charles Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q228766" start="29845" end="29856" title="Rooney Mara" label="Rooney Mara"/>
<link wikidata="Q484523" start="29858" end="29868" title="Jared Leto" label="Jared Leto"/>
<link wikidata="Q675776" start="29870" end="29883" title="Arliss Howard" label="Arliss Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q765119" start="29998" end="30011" title="Dust Brothers" label="Dust Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q217627" start="30287" end="30299" title="The Graduate" label="The Graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11647" start="30314" end="30329" title="Nine Inch Nails" label="Nine Inch Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q282722" start="30338" end="30350" title="Trent Reznor" label="Trent Reznor"/>
<link wikidata="Q520346" start="30355" end="30367" title="Atticus Ross" label="Atticus Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q239076" start="30816" end="30822" title="Closer (Nine Inch Nails song)" label="Closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207773" start="30884" end="30896" title="Howard Shore" label="Howard Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358070" start="31010" end="31025" title="Jeff Cronenweth" label="Jeff Cronenweth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297272" start="31255" end="31264" title="Ren Klyce" label="Ren Klyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239909" start="31451" end="31469" title="Donald Graham Burt" label="Donald Graham Burt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204393" start="32118" end="32134" title="Linda Fiorentino" label="Linda Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q961183" start="32220" end="32232" title="Ceán Chaffin" label="Ceán Chaffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="32309" end="32324" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32813" end="32816" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q26705935" start="32824" end="32862" title="BBC&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century" label="100 Greatest Films of the 21st Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="33000" end="33031" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q183239" start="33054" end="33089" title="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (film)" label="The Curious Case of Benjamin Button"/>
<link wikidata="Q185888" start="33110" end="33128" title="The Social Network (film)" label="The Social Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q73093591" start="33153" end="33157" title="Mank" label="Mank"/>
<link wikidata="Q787131" start="33188" end="33218" title="BAFTA Award for Best Direction" label="BAFTA Award for Best Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q586356" start="33227" end="33263" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Director" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="33321" end="33334" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428794" start="33345" end="33359" title="Love Is Strong" label="Love Is Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="33382" end="33400" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072616" start="33417" end="33431" title="Suit &amp;amp; Tie" label="Suit &amp;amp; Tie"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="33448" end="33465" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="33470" end="33475" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="33492" end="33513" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q583972" start="33518" end="33583" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330940" start="33594" end="33608" title="House of Cards (American TV series)" label="House of Cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987659" start="33632" end="33696" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Short Form Animated Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q61740435" start="33707" end="33731" title="Love, Death &amp;amp; Robots" label="Love, Death &amp;amp; Robots"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609105" start="33755" end="33795" title="David Fincher&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects" label="David Fincher&amp;#x27;s unrealized projects"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8080" wikidata="Q196828" url="?curid=8080" title="List of decades, centuries, and millennia">
<text>The list below includes links to articles with further details for each decade, century, and millennium from 15,000BC to AD3000.

==Notes==
==See also==
* List of years
* Timelines of world history
* List of timelines
* Chronology
* See calendar and list of calendars for other groupings of years.
* See history, history by period, and periodization for different organizations of historical events.
* For earlier time periods, see Timeline of the Big Bang, Geologic time scale, Timeline of evolution, and Logarithmic timeline.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11879744" start="155" end="168" title="List of years" label="List of years"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806483" start="171" end="197" title="Timelines of world history" label="Timelines of world history"/>
<link wikidata="Q131000" start="200" end="217" title="List of timelines" label="List of timelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q130788" start="220" end="230" title="Chronology" label="Chronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="237" end="245" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287739" start="250" end="267" title="list of calendars" label="list of calendars"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="304" end="311" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="313" end="330" title="history by period" label="history by period"/>
<link wikidata="Q816829" start="336" end="349" title="periodization" label="periodization"/>
<link wikidata="Q136407" start="432" end="456" title="Timeline of the Big Bang" label="Timeline of the Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="458" end="477" title="Geologic time scale" label="Geologic time scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138223" start="479" end="500" title="Timeline of evolution" label="Timeline of evolution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8081" wikidata="Q92614" url="?curid=8081" title="Douglas Engelbart">
<text>Douglas Carl Engelbart (January 30, 1925 – July 2, 2013) was an American engineer, inventor, and a pioneer in many aspects of computer science. He is best known for his work on founding the field of human–computer interaction, particularly while at his Augmentation Research Center Lab in SRI International, which resulted in creation of the computer mouse, and the development of hypertext, networked computers, and precursors to graphical user interfaces. These were demonstrated at The Mother of All Demos in 1968. Engelbart&#x27;s law, the observation that the intrinsic rate of human performance is exponential, is named after him.

NLS, the &quot;oN-Line System&quot;, developed by the Augmentation Research Center under Engelbart&#x27;s guidance with funding primarily from ARPA (as DARPA was then known), demonstrated numerous technologies, most of which are now in widespread use; it included the computer mouse, bitmapped screens, word processing, and hypertext; all of which were displayed at &quot;The Mother of All Demos&quot; in 1968. The lab was transferred from SRI to Tymshare in the late 1970s, which was acquired by McDonnell Douglas in 1984, and NLS was renamed Augment (now the Doug Engelbart Institute). At both Tymshare and McDonnell Douglas, Engelbart was limited by a lack of interest in his ideas and funding to pursue them and retired in 1986.

In 1988, Engelbart and his daughter Christina launched the Bootstrap Institute – later known as The Doug Engelbart Institute – to promote his vision, especially at Stanford University; this effort did result in some DARPA funding to modernize the user interface of Augment. In December 2000, United States President Bill Clinton awarded Engelbart the National Medal of Technology, the U.S.&#x27;s highest technology award. In December 2008, Engelbart was honored by SRI at the 40th anniversary of the &quot;Mother of All Demos&quot;.

== Early life and education ==
Engelbart was born in Portland, Oregon, on January 30, 1925, to Carl Louis Engelbart and Gladys Charlotte Amelia Munson Engelbart. His ancestors were of German, Swedish and Norwegian descent.

He was the middle of three children, with a sister Dorianne (three years older), and a brother David (14 months younger). The family lived in Portland, Oregon, in his early years, and moved to the surrounding countryside along Johnson Creek when he was 8. His father died one year later. He graduated from Portland&#x27;s Franklin High School in 1942.

Midway through his undergraduate years at Oregon State University, he served two years in the United States Navy as a radio and radar technician in the Philippines. It was there, on the remote island of Leyte in a small traditional hut on stilts, that he read Vannevar Bush&#x27;s article &quot;As We May Think&quot;, which would have a large influence on his thinking and work. He returned to Oregon State and completed his bachelor&#x27;s degree in electrical engineering in 1948. While at Oregon State, he was a member of Sigma Phi Epsilon social fraternity. He was hired by the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics at the Ames Research Center, where he worked in wind tunnel maintenance. In his off hours he enjoyed hiking, camping, and folk dancing. It was there he met Ballard Fish (August 18, 1928 – June 18, 1997), who was just completing her training to become an occupational therapist. They were married in Portola State Park on May 5, 1951. Soon after, Engelbart left Ames to pursue graduate studies at the University of California, Berkeley. At Berkeley, he studied electrical engineering with a specialty in computers, earning his MS in 1953 and his PhD in 1955.

== Career and accomplishments ==
=== Guiding philosophy ===
Engelbart&#x27;s career was inspired in December 1950 when he was engaged to be married and realized he had no career goals other than &quot;a steady job, getting married and living happily ever after&quot;. Over several months he reasoned that:
# he would focus his career on making the world a better place
# any serious effort to make the world better would require some kind of organized effort that harnessed the collective human intellect of all people to contribute to effective solutions.
# if you could dramatically improve how we do that, you&#x27;d be boosting every effort on the planet to solve important problems – the sooner the better
# computers could be the vehicle for dramatically improving this capability.

In 1945, Engelbart had read with interest Vannevar Bush&#x27;s article &quot;As We May Think&quot;, a call to action for making knowledge widely available as a national peacetime grand challenge. He had also read something about the recent phenomenon of computers, and from his experience as a radar technician, he knew that information could be analyzed and displayed on a screen. He envisioned intellectual workers sitting at display &quot;working stations&quot;, flying through information space, harnessing their collective intellectual capacity to solve important problems together in much more powerful ways. Harnessing collective intellect, facilitated by interactive computers, became his life&#x27;s mission at a time when computers were viewed as number crunching tools.

As a graduate student at Berkeley, he assisted in the construction of CALDIC. His graduate work led to eight patents. After completing his doctorate, Engelbart stayed on at Berkeley as an assistant professor for a year before departing when it became clear that he could not pursue his vision there. Engelbart then formed a startup company, Digital Techniques, to commercialize some of his doctoral research on storage devices, but after a year decided instead to pursue the research he had been dreaming of since 1951.

=== SRI and the Augmentation Research Center ===
Engelbart took a position at SRI International (known then as Stanford Research Institute) in Menlo Park, California in 1957. He worked for Hewitt Crane on magnetic devices and miniaturization of electronics; Engelbart and Crane became close friends. At SRI, Engelbart soon obtained a dozen patents, and by 1962 produced a report about his vision and proposed research agenda titled &quot;Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework&quot;. The research was funded by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, where Rowena Swanson took an active interest in Engelbart&#x27;s work. Among other highlights, this paper introduced &quot;Building Information Modelling&quot;, which architectural and engineering practice eventually adopted (first as &quot;parametric design&quot;) in the 1990s and after.

This led to funding from ARPA to launch his work. Engelbart recruited a research team in his new Augmentation Research Center (ARC, the lab he founded at SRI). Engelbart embedded a set of organizing principles in his lab, which he termed &quot;bootstrapping strategy&quot;. He designed the strategy to accelerate the rate of innovation of his lab.

The ARC became the driving force behind the design and development of the oN-Line System (NLS). He and his team developed computer interface elements such as bitmapped screens, the mouse, hypertext, collaborative tools, and precursors to the graphical user interface. He conceived and developed many of his user interface ideas in the mid-1960s, long before the personal computer revolution, at a time when most computers were inaccessible to individuals who could only use computers through intermediaries (see batch processing), and when software tended to be written for vertical applications in proprietary systems.
Engelbart applied for a patent in 1967 and received it in 1970, for the wooden shell with two metal wheels (computer mouse – ), which he had developed with Bill English, his lead engineer, sometime before 1965. In the patent application it is described as an &quot;X-Y position indicator for a display system&quot;. Engelbart later revealed that it was nicknamed the &quot;mouse&quot; because the tail came out the end. His group also called the on-screen cursor a &quot;bug&quot;, but this term was not widely adopted. Engelbart&#x27;s original cursor was displayed as an arrow pointing upward, but was slanted to the left upon its deployment in the XEROX PARC machine to better distinguish between on-screen text and the cursor in the machine&#x27;s low-resolution interface. The now-familiar cursor arrow is characterized by a vertical left side and a 45-degree angle on the right.

He never received any royalties for the invention of the mouse. During an interview, he said, &quot;SRI patented the mouse, but they really had no idea of its value. Some years later it was learned that they had licensed it to Apple Computer for something like $40,000.&quot; Engelbart showcased the chorded keyboard and many more of his and ARC&#x27;s inventions in 1968 at The Mother of All Demos.

=== Tymshare and McDonnell Douglas ===

Engelbart slipped into relative obscurity by the mid-1970s. As early as 1970, several of his researchers became alienated from him and left his organization for Xerox PARC, in part due to frustration, and in part due to differing views of the future of computing. Engelbart saw the future in collaborative, networked, timeshare (client-server) computers, which younger programmers rejected in favor of personal computers. The conflict was both technical and ideological: the younger programmers came from an era where centralized power was highly suspect, and personal computing was just barely on the horizon.

Beginning in 1972, several key ARC personnel were involved in Erhard Seminars Training (EST), with Engelbart ultimately serving on the corporation&#x27;s board of directors for many years. Although EST had been recommended by other researchers, the controversial nature of EST and other social experiments reduced the morale and social cohesion of the ARC community. The 1969 Mansfield Amendment, which ended military funding of non-military research, the end of the Vietnam War, and the end of the Apollo program gradually reduced ARC&#x27;s funding from ARPA and NASA throughout the early 1970s.

SRI&#x27;s management, which disapproved of Engelbart&#x27;s approach to running the center, placed the remains of ARC under the control of artificial intelligence researcher Bertram Raphael, who negotiated the transfer of the laboratory to Tymshare in 1976. Engelbart&#x27;s house in Atherton, California burned down during this period, causing him and his family further problems. Tymshare took over NLS and the lab that Engelbart had founded, hired most of the lab&#x27;s staff (including its creator as a Senior Scientist), renamed the software &quot;Augment&quot;, and offered it as a commercial service via its new Office Automation Division. Tymshare was already somewhat familiar with NLS; when ARC was still operational, it had experimented with its own local copy of the NLS software on a minicomputer called OFFICE-1, as part of a joint project with ARC.

At Tymshare, Engelbart soon found himself further marginalized. Operational concerns at Tymshare overrode Engelbart&#x27;s desire to conduct ongoing research. Various executives, first at Tymshare and later at McDonnell Douglas, which acquired Tymshare in 1984, expressed interest in his ideas, but never committed the funds or the people to further develop them. His interest inside of McDonnell Douglas was focused on the enormous knowledge management and IT requirements involved in the life cycle of an aerospace program, which served to strengthen Engelbart&#x27;s resolve to motivate the information technology arena toward global interoperability and an open hyperdocument system. Engelbart retired from McDonnell Douglas in 1986, determined to pursue his work free from commercial pressure.

=== Bootstrap and the Doug Engelbart Institute ===
Teaming with his daughter, Christina Engelbart, he founded the Bootstrap Institute in 1988 to coalesce his ideas into a series of three-day and half-day management seminars offered at Stanford University from 1989 to 2000. By the early 1990s there was sufficient interest among his seminar graduates to launch a collaborative implementation of his work, and the Bootstrap Alliance was formed as a non-profit home base for this effort. Although the invasion of Iraq and subsequent recession spawned a rash of belt-tightening reorganizations which drastically redirected the efforts of their alliance partners, they continued with the management seminars, consulting, and small-scale collaborations. In the mid-1990s they were awarded some DARPA funding to develop a modern user interface to Augment, called Visual AugTerm (VAT), while participating in a larger program addressing the IT requirements of the Joint Task Force.

Engelbart was Founder Emeritus of the Doug Engelbart Institute, which he founded in 1988 with his daughter Christina Engelbart, who is executive director. The Institute promotes Engelbart&#x27;s philosophy for boosting Collective IQ—the concept of dramatically improving how we can solve important problems together—using a strategic &quot;bootstrapping&quot; approach for accelerating our progress toward that goal. In 2005, Engelbart received a National Science Foundation grant to fund the open source HyperScope project. The Hyperscope team built a browser component using Ajax and Dynamic HTML designed to replicate Augment&#x27;s multiple viewing and jumping capabilities (linking within and across various documents).

=== Later years and death ===
Engelbart attended the Program for the Future 2010 Conference where hundreds of people convened at The Tech Museum in San Jose and online to engage in dialog about how to pursue his vision to augment collective intelligence.

The most complete coverage of Engelbart&#x27;s bootstrapping ideas can be found in &quot;Boosting Our Collective IQ&quot;, by Douglas C. Engelbart, 1995. This includes three of Engelbart&#x27;s key papers, edited into book form by Yuri Rubinsky and Christina Engelbart to commemorate the presentation of the 1995 SoftQuad Web Award to Doug Engelbart at the World Wide Web conference in Boston in December 1995. Only 2,000 softcover copies were printed, and 100 hardcover, numbered and signed by Engelbart and Tim Berners-Lee. Engelbart&#x27;s book is now being republished by the Doug Engelbart Institute.

Two comprehensive histories of Engelbart&#x27;s laboratory and work are in &quot;What the Dormouse Said: How the Sixties Counterculture Shaped the Personal Computer Industry&quot; by John Markoff and &quot;A Heritage of Innovation: SRI&#x27;s First Half Century&quot; by Donald Neilson. Other books on Engelbart and his laboratory include &quot;Bootstrapping: Douglas Engelbart, Coevolution, and the Origins of Personal Computing&quot; by Thierry Bardini and &quot;The Engelbart Hypothesis: Dialogs with Douglas Engelbart&quot;, by Valerie Landau and Eileen Clegg in conversation with Douglas Engelbart. All four of these books are based on interviews with Engelbart as well as other contributors in his laboratory.

Engelbart served on the Advisory Boards of the University of Santa Clara Center for Science, Technology, and Society, Foresight Institute, Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, The Technology Center of Silicon Valley, and The Liquid Information Company.

Engelbart had four children, Gerda, Diana, Christina and Norman with his first wife Ballard, who died in 1997 after 47 years of marriage. He remarried on January 26, 2008, to writer and producer Karen O&#x27;Leary Engelbart. An 85th birthday celebration was held at the Tech Museum of Innovation.

Engelbart died at his home in Atherton, California, on July 2, 2013, due to kidney failure. A close friend and fellow computer scientist, Ted Nelson, gave a speech paying tribute to Engelbart. According to the Doug Engelbart Institute, his death came after a long battle with Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, which he was diagnosed with in 2007. Engelbart was 88 and was survived by his second wife, the four children from his first marriage, and nine grandchildren.

=== Anecdotal notes ===
Historian of science Thierry Bardini argues that Engelbart&#x27;s complex personal philosophy (which drove all his research) foreshadowed the modern application of the concept of coevolution to the philosophy and use of technology. Bardini points out that Engelbart was strongly influenced by the principle of linguistic relativity developed by Benjamin Lee Whorf. Where Whorf reasoned that the sophistication of a language controls the sophistication of the thoughts that can be expressed by a speaker of that language, Engelbart reasoned that the state of our current technology controls our ability to manipulate information, and that fact in turn will control our ability to develop new, improved technologies. He thus set himself to the revolutionary task of developing computer-based technologies for manipulating information directly, and also to improve individual and group processes for knowledge-work.

== Awards and honors ==
Since the late 1980s, prominent individuals and organizations have recognized the seminal importance of Engelbart&#x27;s contributions. In December 1995, at the Fourth WWW Conference in Boston, he was the first recipient of what would later become the Yuri Rubinsky Memorial Award. In 1997, he was awarded the Lemelson-MIT Prize of $500,000, the world&#x27;s largest single prize for invention and innovation, and the ACM Turing Award. To mark the 30th anniversary of Engelbart&#x27;s 1968 demo, in 1998 the Stanford Silicon Valley Archives and the Institute for the Future hosted &quot;Engelbart&#x27;s Unfinished Revolution&quot;, a symposium at Stanford University&#x27;s Memorial Auditorium, to honor Engelbart and his ideas. He was inducted into National Inventors Hall of Fame in 1998.

Engelbart was awarded the Stibitz-Wilson Award from the American Computer &amp; Robotics Museum in 1998.

Also in 1998, Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) SIGCHI awarded Engelbart the CHI Lifetime Achievement Award. ACM SIGCHI later inducted Engelbart into the CHI Academy in 2002. Engelbart was awarded The Franklin Institute&#x27;s Certificate of Merit in 1996 and the Benjamin Franklin Medal in 1999 in Computer and Cognitive Science. In early 2000 Engelbart produced, with volunteers and sponsors, what was called &quot;The Unfinished Revolution – II&quot;, also known as the &quot;Engelbart Colloquium&quot; at Stanford University, to document and publicize his work and ideas to a larger audience (live, and online).

In December 2000, U.S. President Bill Clinton awarded Engelbart the National Medal of Technology, the country&#x27;s highest technology award. In 2001 he was awarded the British Computer Society&#x27;s Lovelace Medal. In 2005, he was made a Fellow of the Computer History Museum &quot;for advancing the study of human–computer interaction, developing the mouse input device, and for the application of computers to improving organizational efficiency.&quot; He was honored with the Norbert Wiener Award, which is given annually by Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility. Robert X. Cringely did an hour-long interview with Engelbart on December 9, 2005, in his NerdTV video podcast series.

On December 9, 2008, Engelbart was honored at the 40th Anniversary celebration of the 1968 &quot;Mother of All Demos&quot;. The event was produced by SRI International and held at Memorial Auditorium at Stanford University. Speakers included several members of Engelbart&#x27;s original Augmentation Research Center (ARC) team including Don Andrews, Bill Paxton, Bill English, and Jeff Rulifson, Engelbart&#x27;s chief government sponsor Bob Taylor, and other pioneers of interactive computing, including Andy van Dam and Alan Kay. In addition, Christina Engelbart spoke about her father&#x27;s early influences and the ongoing work of the Doug Engelbart Institute.

In June 2009, the New Media Consortium recognized Engelbart as an NMC Fellow for his lifetime of achievements. In 2011, Engelbart was inducted into IEEE Intelligent Systems&#x27; AI&#x27;s Hall of Fame. Engelbart received the first honorary Doctor of Engineering and Technology degree from Yale University in May 2011.

== See also ==
* Dynamic knowledge repository
* Global brain
* List of pioneers in computer science

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* The &quot;Doug Engelbart Foundation&quot; claims the book was not authorized by Douglas Engelbart and he was not a co-author.
*
*How Douglas Engelbart Invented the Future | Innovation | Smithsonian

== External links ==

* Doug Engelbart&#x27;s official Web site and home of the Doug Engelbart Institute (formerly Bootstrap)
* Douglas Engelbart Interviewed by John Markoff of &quot;The New York Times&quot; (recorded March 26, 2002)
* Guide to the Douglas C. Engelbart Papers, Special Collections, Stanford University Libraries (with new accessions added in 2016)
* &quot;The Augmentation of Douglas Engelbart&quot;, a documentary film directed by Daniel Silveira, 2018</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92614" start="0" end="22" title="Douglas Engelbart" label="Douglas Carl Engelbart"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="126" end="142" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q207434" start="199" end="225" title="human–computer interaction" label="human–computer interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820422" start="253" end="281" title="Augmentation Research Center" label="Augmentation Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="289" end="306" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="342" end="356" title="computer mouse" label="computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q93241" start="381" end="390" title="hypertext" label="hypertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="431" end="455" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="485" end="508" title="The Mother of All Demos" label="The Mother of All Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105190" start="518" end="538" title="Engelbart&amp;#x27;s law" label="Engelbart&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050365" start="638" end="641" title="NLS (computer system)" label="NLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="790" end="795" title="DARPA" label="DARPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860427" start="1085" end="1093" title="Tymshare" label="Tymshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q201815" start="1135" end="1152" title="McDonnell Douglas" label="McDonnell Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16964858" start="1468" end="1496" title="The Doug Engelbart Institute" label="The Doug Engelbart Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="1688" end="1700" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="1960" end="1976" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="2091" end="2097" title="Germans" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q165192" start="2099" end="2106" title="Swedes" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q188779" start="2111" end="2120" title="Norwegians" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708839" start="2453" end="2473" title="Franklin High School (Portland, Oregon)" label="Franklin High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q861888" start="2526" end="2549" title="Oregon State University" label="Oregon State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="2578" end="2596" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="2612" end="2617" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="2636" end="2647" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q211377" start="2687" end="2692" title="Leyte" label="Leyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q299595" start="2744" end="2757" title="Vannevar Bush" label="Vannevar Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q610709" start="2779" end="2794" title="As We May Think" label="As We May Think"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="2935" end="2957" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512359" start="3009" end="3026" title="Sigma Phi Epsilon" label="Sigma Phi Epsilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="3066" end="3109" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q181052" start="3117" end="3137" title="Ames Research Center" label="Ames Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232202" start="3409" end="3427" title="Portola State Park" label="Portola State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3510" end="3544" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="3636" end="3638" title="M.S." label="MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="3655" end="3658" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3648467" start="5310" end="5316" title="CALDIC" label="CALDIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669847" start="5428" end="5447" title="assistant professor" label="assistant professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q604924" start="5839" end="5856" title="SRI International" label="SRI International"/>
<link wikidata="Q74195" start="5904" end="5926" title="Menlo Park, California" label="Menlo Park, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748502" start="5950" end="5962" title="Hewitt Crane" label="Hewitt Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3607176" start="6288" end="6327" title="Air Force Office of Scientific Research" label="Air Force Office of Scientific Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q126897832" start="6335" end="6349" title="Rowena Swanson" label="Rowena Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q842017" start="6452" end="6482" title="Building Information Modelling" label="Building Information Modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386598" start="6570" end="6587" title="parametric design" label="parametric design"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820422" start="6717" end="6745" title="Augmentation Research Center" label="Augmentation Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195936" start="6864" end="6877" title="bootstrapping" label="bootstrapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050365" start="7043" end="7057" title="NLS (computer system)" label="oN-Line System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194708" start="7127" end="7133" title="bitmap" label="bitmap"/>
<link wikidata="Q661613" start="7481" end="7497" title="batch processing" label="batch processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922840" start="7543" end="7563" title="vertical application" label="vertical application"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="7613" end="7619" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="7697" end="7711" title="Mouse (computing)" label="computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q107602" start="8045" end="8051" title="Cursor (user interface)" label="cursor"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="8702" end="8716" title="Apple Computer" label="Apple Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q419894" start="8775" end="8791" title="chorded keyboard" label="chorded keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="8850" end="8873" title="The Mother of All Demos" label="The Mother of All Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="9077" end="9087" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="9234" end="9243" title="timesharing" label="timeshare"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="9318" end="9335" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76847" start="9590" end="9614" title="Erhard Seminars Training" label="Erhard Seminars Training"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9904" end="9923" title="Mike Mansfield#Mansfield Amendments" label="Mansfield Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="9995" end="10006" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q46611" start="10027" end="10041" title="Apollo program" label="Apollo program"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="10093" end="10097" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="10267" end="10290" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895807" start="10302" end="10317" title="Bertram Raphael" label="Bertram Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869080" start="10412" end="10432" title="Atherton, California" label="Atherton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="13217" end="13244" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q134471" start="13347" end="13351" title="Ajax (programming)" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q380153" start="13356" end="13368" title="Dynamic HTML" label="Dynamic HTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q432197" start="13726" end="13749" title="collective intelligence" label="collective intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061588" start="13983" end="13996" title="Yuri Rubinsky" label="Yuri Rubinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q80" start="14261" end="14276" title="Tim Berners-Lee" label="Tim Berners-Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700964" start="14542" end="14554" title="John Markoff" label="John Markoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524125" start="14798" end="14813" title="Thierry Bardini" label="Thierry Bardini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911297" start="14891" end="14905" title="Valerie Landau" label="Valerie Landau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349340" start="14910" end="14922" title="Eileen Clegg" label="Eileen Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059866" start="15123" end="15192" title="University of Santa Clara Center for Science, Technology, and Society" label="University of Santa Clara Center for Science, Technology, and Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437171" start="15194" end="15213" title="Foresight Institute" label="Foresight Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q487148" start="15215" end="15263" title="Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility" label="Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q7768226" start="15609" end="15638" title="the Tech Museum of Innovation" label="the Tech Museum of Innovation"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="15717" end="15731" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q62852" start="15779" end="15789" title="Ted Nelson" label="Ted Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="15917" end="15941" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q208841" start="16305" end="16316" title="coevolution" label="coevolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179677" start="16423" end="16457" title="Sapir–Whorf hypothesis" label="principle of linguistic relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q331853" start="16471" end="16489" title="Benjamin Lee Whorf" label="Benjamin Lee Whorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="17250" end="17256" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8061592" start="17316" end="17344" title="Yuri Rubinsky Memorial Award" label="Yuri Rubinsky Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q551250" start="17374" end="17392" title="Lemelson-MIT Prize" label="Lemelson-MIT Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="17486" end="17498" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q6039758" start="17613" end="17637" title="Institute for the Future" label="Institute for the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="17699" end="17708" title="symposium" label="symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="17712" end="17731" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366018" start="17815" end="17846" title="National Inventors Hall of Fame" label="National Inventors Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743510" start="17913" end="17952" title="American Computer &amp;amp; Robotics Museum" label="American Computer &amp;amp; Robotics Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q127992" start="17977" end="18012" title="Association for Computing Machinery" label="Association for Computing Machinery"/>
<link wikidata="Q963676" start="18019" end="18025" title="SIGCHI" label="SIGCHI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011173" start="18125" end="18136" title="CHI Academy" label="CHI Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q817496" start="18168" end="18218" title="The Franklin Institute Awards" label="The Franklin Institute&amp;#x27;s Certificate of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q817496" start="18235" end="18258" title="The Franklin Institute Awards" label="Benjamin Franklin Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="18621" end="18633" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q937629" start="18656" end="18684" title="National Medal of Technology and Innovation" label="National Medal of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q919096" start="18758" end="18782" title="British Computer Society" label="British Computer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258725" start="18790" end="18804" title="Lovelace Medal" label="Lovelace Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="18843" end="18866" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897956" start="19070" end="19090" title="Norbert Wiener Award for Social and Professional Responsibility" label="Norbert Wiener Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q487148" start="19119" end="19167" title="Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility" label="Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3938475" start="19169" end="19187" title="Robert X. Cringely" label="Robert X. Cringely"/>
<link wikidata="Q6995966" start="19258" end="19264" title="NerdTV" label="NerdTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521932" start="19385" end="19404" title="The Mother of All Demos" label="Mother of All Demos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174866" start="19669" end="19682" title="Jeff Rulifson" label="Jeff Rulifson"/>
<link wikidata="Q93038" start="19726" end="19736" title="Robert Taylor (computer scientist)" label="Bob Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571880" start="19793" end="19805" title="Andy van Dam" label="Andy van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="19810" end="19818" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091583" start="19973" end="19993" title="New Media Consortium" label="New Media Consortium"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970394" start="20103" end="20127" title="IEEE Intelligent Systems" label="IEEE Intelligent Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="20187" end="20195" title="Honorary degree" label="honorary"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="20245" end="20260" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318987" start="20292" end="20320" title="Dynamic knowledge repository" label="Dynamic knowledge repository"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946951" start="20323" end="20335" title="Global brain" label="Global brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q82529" start="20338" end="20374" title="List of pioneers in computer science" label="List of pioneers in computer science"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8082" wikidata="Q5283" url="?curid=8082" title="Diamond">
<text>Diamond is a solid form of the element carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal structure called diamond cubic. Diamond as a form of carbon is tasteless, odourless, strong, brittle solid, colourless in pure form, a poor conductor of electricity, and insoluble in water. Another solid form of carbon known as graphite is the chemically stable form of carbon at room temperature and pressure, but diamond is metastable and converts to it at a negligible rate under those conditions. Diamond has the highest hardness and thermal conductivity of any natural material, properties that are used in major industrial applications such as cutting and polishing tools. They are also the reason that diamond anvil cells can subject materials to pressures found deep in the Earth.

Because the arrangement of atoms in diamond is extremely rigid, few types of impurity can contaminate it (two exceptions are boron and nitrogen). Small numbers of defects or impurities (about one per million of lattice atoms) can color a diamond blue (boron), yellow (nitrogen), brown (defects), green (radiation exposure), purple, pink, orange, or red. Diamond also has a very high refractive index and a relatively high optical dispersion.

Most natural diamonds have ages between 1 billion and 3.5 billion years. Most were formed at depths between in the Earth&#x27;s mantle, although a few have come from as deep as . Under high pressure and temperature, carbon-containing fluids dissolved various minerals and replaced them with diamonds. Much more recently (hundreds to tens of million years ago), they were carried to the surface in volcanic eruptions and deposited in igneous rocks known as kimberlites and lamproites.

Synthetic diamonds can be grown from high-purity carbon under high pressures and temperatures or from hydrocarbon gases by chemical vapor deposition (CVD). Natural and synthetic diamonds are most commonly distinguished using optical techniques or thermal conductivity measurements. 

== Properties ==

Diamond is a solid form of pure carbon with its atoms arranged in a crystal. Solid carbon comes in different forms known as allotropes depending on the type of chemical bond. The two most common allotropes of pure carbon are diamond and graphite. In graphite, the bonds are sp2 orbital hybrids and the atoms form in planes, with each bound to three nearest neighbors, 120 degrees apart. In diamond, they are sp3 and the atoms form tetrahedra, with each bound to four nearest neighbors. Tetrahedra are rigid, the bonds are strong, and, of all known substances, diamond has the greatest number of atoms per unit volume, which is why it is both the hardest and the least compressible. It also has a high density, ranging from 3150 to 3530 kilograms per cubic metre (over three times the density of water) in natural diamonds and 3520 kg/m in pure diamond. In graphite, the bonds between nearest neighbors are even stronger, but the bonds between parallel adjacent planes are weak, so the planes easily slip past each other. Thus, graphite is much softer than diamond. However, the stronger bonds make graphite less flammable.

Diamonds have been adopted for many uses because of the material&#x27;s exceptional physical characteristics. It has the highest thermal conductivity and the highest sound velocity. It has low adhesion and friction, and its coefficient of thermal expansion is extremely low. Its optical transparency extends from the far infrared to the deep ultraviolet and it has high optical dispersion. It also has high electrical resistance. It is chemically inert, not reacting with most corrosive substances, and has excellent biological compatibility.

=== Thermodynamics ===

The equilibrium pressure and temperature conditions for a transition between graphite and diamond are well established theoretically and experimentally. The equilibrium pressure varies linearly with temperature, between at and at (the diamond/graphite/liquid triple point). However, the phases have a wide region about this line where they can coexist. At standard temperature and pressure, and , the stable phase of carbon is graphite, but diamond is metastable, with a significant kinetic energy barrier that the atoms must overcome in order to reach the lower energy state, and its rate of conversion to graphite is negligible, with a timescale of millions to billions of years. However, at temperatures above about , diamond rapidly converts to graphite. Experiments have found that diamond in the presence of H₂O passes through an intermediate linear carbon phase.

Rapid conversion of graphite to diamond requires pressures well above the equilibrium line: at , a pressure of (about 350,000 standard atmospheres) is needed.

Above the graphite–diamond–liquid carbon triple point, the melting point of diamond increases slowly with increasing pressure; but at pressures of hundreds of GPa, it decreases. At high pressures, silicon and germanium have a BC8 body-centered cubic crystal structure, and a similar structure is predicted for carbon at high pressures. At , the transition is predicted to occur at .

Results published in &quot;Nature Physics&quot; in 2010 suggest that, at ultra-high pressures and temperatures (about 10 million atmospheres or 1 TPa and 50,000 °C), diamond melts into a metallic fluid. The extreme conditions required for this to occur are present in the ice giant planets Neptune and Uranus, both of which are made up of approximately 10 percent carbon and could hypothetically contain oceans of liquid carbon. Since large quantities of metallic fluid can affect the magnetic field, this could serve to explain why the geographic and magnetic poles of the two planets are not aligned.

=== Crystal structure ===
The most common crystal structure of diamond is called diamond cubic. It is formed of unit cells (see the figure) stacked together. Although there are 18 atoms in the figure, each corner atom is shared by eight unit cells and each atom in the center of a face is shared by two, so there are a total of eight atoms per unit cell. The length of each side of the unit cell is denoted by &quot;a&quot; and is 3.567 angstroms.

The nearest neighbor distance in the diamond lattice is 1.732&quot;a&quot;/4 where &quot;a&quot; is the lattice constant, usually given in Angstrøms as &quot;a&quot; = 3.567 Å, which is 0.3567 nm.

A diamond cubic lattice can be thought of as two interpenetrating face-centered cubic lattices with one displaced by of the diagonal along a cubic cell, or as one lattice with two atoms associated with each lattice point. Viewed from a crystallographic direction, it is formed of layers stacked in a repeating ABCABC ... pattern. Diamonds can also form an ABAB ... structure, which is known as hexagonal diamond or lonsdaleite, but this is far less common and is formed under different conditions from cubic carbon.

=== Crystal habit ===

Diamonds occur most often as euhedral or rounded octahedra and twinned octahedra known as &quot;macles&quot;. As diamond&#x27;s crystal structure has a cubic arrangement of the atoms, they have many facets that belong to a cube, octahedron, rhombicosidodecahedron, tetrakis hexahedron, or disdyakis dodecahedron. The crystals can have rounded-off and unexpressive edges and can be elongated. Diamonds (especially those with rounded crystal faces) are commonly found coated in &quot;nyf&quot;, an opaque gum-like skin.

Some diamonds contain opaque fibers. They are referred to as &quot;opaque&quot; if the fibers grow from a clear substrate or &quot;fibrous&quot; if they occupy the entire crystal. Their colors range from yellow to green or gray, sometimes with cloud-like white to gray impurities. Their most common shape is cuboidal, but they can also form octahedra, dodecahedra, macles, or combined shapes. The structure is the result of numerous impurities with sizes between 1 and 5 microns. These diamonds probably formed in kimberlite magma and sampled the volatiles.

Diamonds can also form polycrystalline aggregates. There have been attempts to classify them into groups with names such as boart, ballas, stewartite, and framesite, but there is no widely accepted set of criteria. Carbonado, a type in which the diamond grains were sintered (fused without melting by the application of heat and pressure), is black in color and tougher than single crystal diamond. It has never been observed in a volcanic rock. There are many theories for its origin, including formation in a star, but no consensus.

=== Mechanical ===
==== Hardness ====

Diamond is the hardest material on the qualitative Mohs scale. To conduct the quantitative Vickers hardness test, samples of materials are struck with a pyramid of standardized dimensions using a known force – a diamond crystal is used for the pyramid to permit a wide range of materials to be tested. From the size of the resulting indentation, a Vickers hardness value for the material can be determined. Diamond&#x27;s great hardness relative to other materials has been known since antiquity, and is the source of its name. This does not mean that it is infinitely hard, indestructible, or unscratchable. Indeed, diamonds can be scratched by other diamonds and worn down over time even by softer materials, such as vinyl phonograph records.

Diamond hardness depends on its purity, crystalline perfection, and orientation: hardness is higher for flawless, pure crystals oriented to the &lt;111&gt; direction (along the longest diagonal of the cubic diamond lattice). Therefore, whereas it might be possible to scratch some diamonds with other materials, such as boron nitride, the hardest diamonds can only be scratched by other diamonds and nanocrystalline diamond aggregates.

The hardness of diamond contributes to its suitability as a gemstone. Because it can only be scratched by other diamonds, it maintains its polish extremely well. Unlike many other gems, it is well-suited to daily wear because of its resistance to scratching—perhaps contributing to its popularity as the preferred gem in engagement or wedding rings, which are often worn every day.

The hardest natural diamonds mostly originate from the Copeton and Bingara fields located in the New England area in New South Wales, Australia. These diamonds are generally small, perfect to semiperfect octahedra, and are used to polish other diamonds. Their hardness is associated with the crystal growth form, which is single-stage crystal growth. Most other diamonds show more evidence of multiple growth stages, which produce inclusions, flaws, and defect planes in the crystal lattice, all of which affect their hardness. It is possible to treat regular diamonds under a combination of high pressure and high temperature to produce diamonds that are harder than the diamonds used in hardness gauges.

Diamonds cut glass, but this does not positively identify a diamond because other materials, such as quartz, also lie above glass on the Mohs scale and can also cut it. Diamonds can scratch other diamonds, but this can result in damage to one or both stones. Hardness tests are infrequently used in practical gemology because of their potentially destructive nature. The extreme hardness and high value of diamond means that gems are typically polished slowly, using painstaking traditional techniques and greater attention to detail than is the case with most other gemstones; these tend to result in extremely flat, highly polished facets with exceptionally sharp facet edges. Diamonds also possess an extremely high refractive index and fairly high dispersion. Taken together, these factors affect the overall appearance of a polished diamond and most diamantaires still rely upon skilled use of a loupe (magnifying glass) to identify diamonds &quot;by eye&quot;.

==== Toughness ====
Somewhat related to hardness is another mechanical property &quot;toughness&quot;, which is a material&#x27;s ability to resist breakage from forceful impact. The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 50–65 MPa·m1/2. This value is good compared to other ceramic materials, but poor compared to most engineering materials such as engineering alloys, which typically exhibit toughness over 80MPa·m1/2. As with any material, the macroscopic geometry of a diamond contributes to its resistance to breakage. Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others. Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones before faceting them. &quot;Impact toughness&quot; is one of the main indexes to measure the quality of synthetic industrial diamonds.

==== Yield strength ====
Diamond has compressive yield strength of 130–140GPa. This exceptionally high value, along with the hardness and transparency of diamond, are the reasons that diamond anvil cells are the main tool for high pressure experiments. These anvils have reached pressures of . Much higher pressures may be possible with nanocrystalline diamonds.

==== Elasticity and tensile strength ====
Usually, attempting to deform bulk diamond crystal by tension or bending results in brittle fracture. However, when single crystalline diamond is in the form of micro/nanoscale wires or needles (~100–300nanometers in diameter, micrometers long), they can be elastically stretched by as much as 9–10 percent tensile strain without failure, with a maximum local tensile stress of about , very close to the theoretical limit for this material.

=== Electrical conductivity ===
Other specialized applications also exist or are being developed, including use as semiconductors: some blue diamonds are natural semiconductors, in contrast to most diamonds, which are excellent electrical insulators. The conductivity and blue color originate from boron impurity. Boron substitutes for carbon atoms in the diamond lattice, donating a hole into the valence band.

Substantial conductivity is commonly observed in nominally undoped diamond grown by chemical vapor deposition. This conductivity is associated with hydrogen-related species adsorbed at the surface, and it can be removed by annealing or other surface treatments.

Thin needles of diamond can be made to vary their electronic band gap from the normal 5.6 eV to near zero by selective mechanical deformation.

High-purity diamond wafers 5 cm in diameter exhibit perfect resistance in one direction and perfect conductance in the other, creating the possibility of using them for quantum data storage. The material contains only 3 parts per million of nitrogen. The diamond was grown on a stepped substrate, which eliminated cracking.

=== Surface property ===
Diamonds are naturally lipophilic and hydrophobic, which means the diamonds&#x27; surface cannot be wet by water, but can be easily wet and stuck by oil. This property can be utilized to extract diamonds using oil when making synthetic diamonds. However, when diamond surfaces are chemically modified with certain ions, they are expected to become so hydrophilic that they can stabilize multiple layers of water ice at human body temperature.

The surface of diamonds is partially oxidized. The oxidized surface can be reduced by heat treatment under hydrogen flow. That is to say, this heat treatment partially removes oxygen-containing functional groups. But diamonds (sp3C) are unstable against high temperature (above about ) under atmospheric pressure. The structure gradually changes into sp2C above this temperature. Thus, diamonds should be reduced below this temperature.

=== Chemical stability ===
At room temperature, diamonds do not react with any chemical reagents including strong acids and bases.

In an atmosphere of pure oxygen, diamond has an ignition point that ranges from to ; smaller crystals tend to burn more easily. It increases in temperature from red to white heat and burns with a pale blue flame, and continues to burn after the source of heat is removed. By contrast, in air the combustion will cease as soon as the heat is removed because the oxygen is diluted with nitrogen. A clear, flawless, transparent diamond is completely converted to carbon dioxide; any impurities will be left as ash. Heat generated from cutting a diamond will not ignite the diamond, and neither will a cigarette lighter, but house fires and blow torches are hot enough. Jewelers must be careful when molding the metal in a diamond ring.

Diamond powder of an appropriate grain size (around 50microns) burns with a shower of sparks after ignition from a flame. Consequently, pyrotechnic compositions based on synthetic diamond powder can be prepared. The resulting sparks are of the usual red-orange color, comparable to charcoal, but show a very linear trajectory which is explained by their high density. Diamond also reacts with fluorine gas above about .

=== Color ===

Diamond has a wide band gap of corresponding to the deep ultraviolet wavelength of 225nanometers. This means that pure diamond should transmit visible light and appear as a clear colorless crystal. Colors in diamond originate from lattice defects and impurities. The diamond crystal lattice is exceptionally strong, and only atoms of nitrogen, boron, and hydrogen can be introduced into diamond during the growth at significant concentrations (up to atomic percents). Transition metals nickel and cobalt, which are commonly used for growth of synthetic diamond by high-pressure high-temperature techniques, have been detected in diamond as individual atoms; the maximum concentration is 0.01% for nickel and even less for cobalt. Virtually any element can be introduced to diamond by ion implantation.

Nitrogen is by far the most common impurity found in gem diamonds and is responsible for the yellow and brown color in diamonds. Boron is responsible for the blue color. Color in diamond has two additional sources: irradiation (usually by alpha particles), that causes the color in green diamonds, and plastic deformation of the diamond crystal lattice. Plastic deformation is the cause of color in some brown and perhaps pink and red diamonds. In order of increasing rarity, yellow diamond is followed by brown, colorless, then by blue, green, black, pink, orange, purple, and red. &quot;Black&quot;, or carbonado, diamonds are not truly black, but rather contain numerous dark inclusions that give the gems their dark appearance. Colored diamonds contain impurities or structural defects that cause the coloration, while pure or nearly pure diamonds are transparent and colorless. Most diamond impurities replace a carbon atom in the crystal lattice, known as a carbon flaw. The most common impurity, nitrogen, causes a slight to intense yellow coloration depending upon the type and concentration of nitrogen present. The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) classifies low saturation yellow and brown diamonds as diamonds in the &quot;normal color range&quot;, and applies a grading scale from &quot;D&quot; (colorless) to &quot;Z&quot; (light yellow). Yellow diamonds of high color saturation or a different color, such as pink or blue, are called &quot;fancy colored&quot; diamonds and fall under a different grading scale.

In 2008, the Wittelsbach Diamond, a blue diamond once belonging to the King of Spain, fetched over US$24 million at a Christie&#x27;s auction. In May 2009, a blue diamond fetched the highest price per carat ever paid for a diamond when it was sold at auction for 10.5 million Swiss francs (6.97 million euros, or US$9.5 million at the time). That record was, however, beaten the same year: a vivid pink diamond was sold for US$10.8 million in Hong Kong on December 1, 2009.

=== Clarity ===
Clarity is one of the 4C&#x27;s (color, clarity, cut and carat weight) that helps in identifying the quality of diamonds. The Gemological Institute of America (GIA) developed 11 clarity scales to decide the quality of a diamond for its sale value. The GIA clarity scale spans from Flawless (FL) to included (I) having internally flawless (IF), very, very slightly included (VVS), very slightly included (VS) and slightly included (SI) in between. Impurities in natural diamonds are due to the presence of natural minerals and oxides. The clarity scale grades the diamond based on the color, size, location of impurity and quantity of clarity visible under 10x magnification. Inclusions in diamond can be extracted by optical methods. The process is to take pre-enhancement images, identifying the inclusion removal part and finally removing the diamond facets and noises.

=== Fluorescence ===

Between 25% and 35% of natural diamonds exhibit some degree of fluorescence when examined under invisible long-wave ultraviolet light or higher energy radiation sources such as X-rays and lasers. Incandescent lighting will not cause a diamond to fluoresce. Diamonds can fluoresce in a variety of colors including blue (most common), orange, yellow, white, green and very rarely red and purple. Although the causes are not well understood, variations in the atomic structure, such as the number of nitrogen atoms present are thought to contribute to the phenomenon.

=== Thermal conductivity ===
Diamonds can be identified by their high thermal conductivity (900–). Their high refractive index is also indicative, but other materials have similar refractivity.

== Geology ==
Diamonds are extremely rare, with concentrations of at most parts per billion in source rock. Before the 20th century, most diamonds were found in alluvial deposits. Loose diamonds are also found along existing and ancient shorelines, where they tend to accumulate because of their size and density. Rarely, they have been found in glacial till (notably in Wisconsin and Indiana), but these deposits are not of commercial quality. These types of deposit were derived from localized igneous intrusions through weathering and transport by wind or water.

Most diamonds come from the Earth&#x27;s mantle, and most of this section discusses those diamonds. However, there are other sources. Some blocks of the crust, or terranes, have been buried deep enough as the crust thickened so they experienced ultra-high-pressure metamorphism. These have evenly distributed &quot;microdiamonds&quot; that show no sign of transport by magma. In addition, when meteorites strike the ground, the shock wave can produce high enough temperatures and pressures for &quot;microdiamonds&quot; and &quot;nanodiamonds&quot; to form. Impact-type microdiamonds can be used as an indicator of ancient impact craters. Popigai impact structure in Russia may have the world&#x27;s largest diamond deposit, estimated at trillions of carats, and formed by an asteroid impact.

A common misconception is that diamonds form from highly compressed coal. Coal is formed from buried prehistoric plants, and most diamonds that have been dated are far older than the first land plants. It is possible that diamonds can form from coal in subduction zones, but diamonds formed in this way are rare, and the carbon source is more likely carbonate rocks and organic carbon in sediments, rather than coal.

=== Surface distribution ===
Diamonds are far from evenly distributed over the Earth. A rule of thumb known as Clifford&#x27;s rule states that they are almost always found in kimberlites on the oldest part of cratons, the stable cores of continents with typical ages of 2.5billion years or more. However, there are exceptions. The Argyle diamond mine in Australia, the largest producer of diamonds by weight in the world, is located in a &quot;mobile belt&quot;, also known as an &quot;orogenic belt&quot;, a weaker zone surrounding the central craton that has undergone compressional tectonics. Instead of kimberlite, the host rock is lamproite. Lamproites with diamonds that are not economically viable are also found in the United States, India, and Australia. In addition, diamonds in the Wawa belt of the Superior province in Canada and microdiamonds in the island arc of Japan are found in a type of rock called lamprophyre.

Kimberlites can be found in narrow (1 to 4 meters) dikes and sills, and in pipes with diameters that range from about 75 m to 1.5 km. Fresh rock is dark bluish green to greenish gray, but after exposure rapidly turns brown and crumbles. It is hybrid rock with a chaotic mixture of small minerals and rock fragments (clasts) up to the size of watermelons. They are a mixture of xenocrysts and xenoliths (minerals and rocks carried up from the lower crust and mantle), pieces of surface rock, altered minerals such as serpentine, and new minerals that crystallized during the eruption. The texture varies with depth. The composition forms a continuum with carbonatites, but the latter have too much oxygen for carbon to exist in a pure form. Instead, it is locked up in the mineral calcite ().

All three of the diamond-bearing rocks (kimberlite, lamproite and lamprophyre) lack certain minerals (melilite and kalsilite) that are incompatible with diamond formation. In kimberlite, olivine is large and conspicuous, while lamproite has Ti-phlogopite and lamprophyre has biotite and amphibole. They are all derived from magma types that erupt rapidly from small amounts of melt, are rich in volatiles and magnesium oxide, and are less oxidizing than more common mantle melts such as basalt. These characteristics allow the melts to carry diamonds to the surface before they dissolve.

=== Exploration ===
Kimberlite pipes can be difficult to find. They weather quickly (within a few years after exposure) and tend to have lower topographic relief than surrounding rock. If they are visible in outcrops, the diamonds are never visible because they are so rare. In any case, kimberlites are often covered with vegetation, sediments, soils, or lakes. In modern searches, geophysical methods such as aeromagnetic surveys, electrical resistivity, and gravimetry, help identify promising regions to explore. This is aided by isotopic dating and modeling of the geological history. Then surveyors must go to the area and collect samples, looking for kimberlite fragments or &quot;indicator minerals&quot;. The latter have compositions that reflect the conditions where diamonds form, such as extreme melt depletion or high pressures in eclogites. However, indicator minerals can be misleading; a better approach is geothermobarometry, where the compositions of minerals are analyzed as if they were in equilibrium with mantle minerals.

Finding kimberlites requires persistence, and only a small fraction contain diamonds that are commercially viable. The only major discoveries since about 1980 have been in Canada. Since existing mines have lifetimes of as little as 25 years, there could be a shortage of new natural diamonds in the future.

=== Ages ===
Diamonds are dated by analyzing inclusions using the decay of radioactive isotopes. Depending on the elemental abundances, one can look at the decay of rubidium to strontium, samarium to neodymium, uranium to lead, argon-40 to argon-39, or rhenium to osmium. Those found in kimberlites have ages ranging from , and there can be multiple ages in the same kimberlite, indicating multiple episodes of diamond formation. The kimberlites themselves are much younger. Most of them have ages between tens of millions and 300 million years old, although there are some older exceptions (Argyle, Premier and Wawa). Thus, the kimberlites formed independently of the diamonds and served only to transport them to the surface. Kimberlites are also much younger than the cratons they have erupted through. The reason for the lack of older kimberlites is unknown, but it suggests there was some change in mantle chemistry or tectonics. No kimberlite has erupted in human history.

=== Origin in mantle ===
Most gem-quality diamonds come from depths of 150–250 km in the lithosphere. Such depths occur below cratons in &quot;mantle keels&quot;, the thickest part of the lithosphere. These regions have high enough pressure and temperature to allow diamonds to form and they are not convecting, so diamonds can be stored for billions of years until a kimberlite eruption samples them.

Host rocks in a mantle keel include harzburgite and lherzolite, two type of peridotite. The most dominant rock type in the upper mantle, peridotite is an igneous rock consisting mostly of the minerals olivine and pyroxene; it is low in silica and high in magnesium. However, diamonds in peridotite rarely survive the trip to the surface. Another common source that does keep diamonds intact is eclogite, a metamorphic rock that typically forms from basalt as an oceanic plate plunges into the mantle at a subduction zone.

A smaller fraction of diamonds (about 150 have been studied) come from depths of 330–660 km, a region that includes the transition zone. They formed in eclogite but are distinguished from diamonds of shallower origin by inclusions of majorite (a form of garnet with excess silicon). A similar proportion of diamonds comes from the lower mantle at depths between 660 and 800 km.

Diamond is thermodynamically stable at high pressures and temperatures, with the phase transition from graphite occurring at greater temperatures as the pressure increases. Thus, underneath continents it becomes stable at temperatures of 950degrees Celsius and pressures of 4.5 gigapascals, corresponding to depths of 150kilometers or greater. In subduction zones, which are colder, it becomes stable at temperatures of 800 °C and pressures of 3.5gigapascals. At depths greater than 240 km, iron–nickel metal phases are present and carbon is likely to be either dissolved in them or in the form of carbides. Thus, the deeper origin of some diamonds may reflect unusual growth environments.

In 2018 the first known natural samples of a phase of ice called Ice VII were found as inclusions in diamond samples. The inclusions formed at depths between 400 and 800 km, straddling the upper and lower mantle, and provide evidence for water-rich fluid at these depths.

=== Carbon sources ===
The mantle has roughly one billion gigatonnes of carbon (for comparison, the atmosphere-ocean system has about 44,000 gigatonnes). Carbon has two stable isotopes, 12C and 13C, in a ratio of approximately 99:1 by mass. This ratio has a wide range in meteorites, which implies that it also varied a lot in the early Earth. It can also be altered by surface processes like photosynthesis. The fraction is generally compared to a standard sample using a ratio δ13C expressed in parts per thousand. Common rocks from the mantle such as basalts, carbonatites, and kimberlites have ratios between −8 and −2. On the surface, organic sediments have an average of −25 while carbonates have an average of 0.

Populations of diamonds from different sources have distributions of δ13C that vary markedly. Peridotitic diamonds are mostly within the typical mantle range; eclogitic diamonds have values from −40 to +3, although the peak of the distribution is in the mantle range. This variability implies that they are not formed from carbon that is &quot;primordial&quot; (having resided in the mantle since the Earth formed). Instead, they are the result of tectonic processes, although (given the ages of diamonds) not necessarily the same tectonic processes that act in the present. Diamond-forming carbon originates in the top 700 kilometers (430 mi) or so of the upper mantle closest to the surface, known as the asthenosphere.

=== Formation and growth ===

Diamonds in the mantle form through a &quot;metasomatic&quot; process where a C–O–H–N–S fluid or melt dissolves minerals in a rock and replaces them with new minerals. (The vague term C–O–H–N–S is commonly used because the exact composition is not known.) Diamonds form from this fluid either by reduction of oxidized carbon (e.g., CO2 or CO3) or oxidation of a reduced phase such as methane.

Using probes such as polarized light, photoluminescence, and cathodoluminescence, a series of growth zones can be identified in diamonds. The characteristic pattern in diamonds from the lithosphere involves a nearly concentric series of zones with very thin oscillations in luminescence and alternating episodes where the carbon is resorbed by the fluid and then grown again. Diamonds from below the lithosphere have a more irregular, almost polycrystalline texture, reflecting the higher temperatures and pressures as well as the transport of the diamonds by convection.

=== Transport to the surface ===

Geological evidence supports a model in which kimberlite magma rises at 4–20 meters per second, creating an upward path by hydraulic fracturing of the rock. As the pressure decreases, a vapor phase exsolves from the magma, and this helps to keep the magma fluid. At the surface, the initial eruption explodes out through fissures at high speeds (over ). Then, at lower pressures, the rock is eroded, forming a pipe and producing fragmented rock (breccia). As the eruption wanes, there is pyroclastic phase and then metamorphism and hydration produces serpentinites.

=== Double diamonds ===
In rare cases, diamonds have been found that contain a cavity within which is a second diamond. The first double diamond, the Matryoshka, was found by Alrosa in Yakutia, Russia, in 2019. Another one was found in the Ellendale Diamond Field in Western Australia in 2021.

=== In space ===

Although diamonds on Earth are rare, they are very common in space. In meteorites, about three percent of the carbon is in the form of nanodiamonds, having diameters of a few nanometers. Sufficiently small diamonds can form in the cold of space because their lower surface energy makes them more stable than graphite. The isotopic signatures of some nanodiamonds indicate they were formed outside the Solar System in stars.

High pressure experiments predict that large quantities of diamonds condense from methane into a &quot;diamond rain&quot; on the ice giant planets Uranus and Neptune. Some extrasolar planets may be almost entirely composed of diamond.

Diamonds may exist in carbon-rich stars, particularly white dwarfs. One theory for the origin of carbonado, the toughest form of diamond, is that it originated in a white dwarf or supernova. Diamonds formed in stars may have been the first minerals.

== Industry ==

The most familiar uses of diamonds today are as gemstones used for adornment, and as industrial abrasives for cutting hard materials. The markets for gem-grade and industrial-grade diamonds value diamonds differently.

=== Gem-grade diamonds ===
The dispersion of white light into spectral colors is the primary gemological characteristic of gem diamonds. In the 20th century, experts in gemology developed methods of grading diamonds and other gemstones based on the characteristics most important to their value as a gem. Four characteristics, known informally as the &quot;four Cs&quot;, are now commonly used as the basic descriptors of diamonds: these are its mass in &quot;carats&quot; (a carat being equal to 0.2grams), &quot;cut&quot; (quality of the cut is graded according to proportions, symmetry and polish), &quot;color&quot; (how close to white or colorless; for fancy diamonds how intense is its hue), and &quot;clarity&quot; (how free is it from inclusions). A large, flawless diamond is known as a paragon.

A large trade in gem-grade diamonds exists. Although most gem-grade diamonds are sold newly polished, there is a well-established market for resale of polished diamonds (e.g. pawnbroking, auctions, second-hand jewelry stores, diamantaires, bourses, etc.). One hallmark of the trade in gem-quality diamonds is its remarkable concentration: wholesale trade and diamond cutting is limited to just a few locations; in 2003, 92% of the world&#x27;s diamonds were cut and polished in Surat, India. Other important centers of diamond cutting and trading are the Antwerp diamond district in Belgium, where the International Gemological Institute is based, London, the Diamond District in New York City, the Diamond Exchange District in Tel Aviv and Amsterdam. One contributory factor is the geological nature of diamond deposits: several large primary kimberlite-pipe mines each account for significant portions of market share (such as the Jwaneng mine in Botswana, which is a single large-pit mine that can produce between of diamonds per year). Secondary alluvial diamond deposits, on the other hand, tend to be fragmented amongst many different operators because they can be dispersed over many hundreds of square kilometers (e.g., alluvial deposits in Brazil).

The production and distribution of diamonds is largely consolidated in the hands of a few key players, and concentrated in traditional diamond trading centers, the most important being Antwerp, where 80% of all rough diamonds, 50% of all cut diamonds and more than 50% of all rough, cut and industrial diamonds combined are handled. This makes Antwerp a de facto &quot;world diamond capital&quot;. The city of Antwerp also hosts the Antwerpsche Diamantkring, created in 1929 to become the first and biggest diamond bourse dedicated to rough diamonds. Another important diamond center is New York City, where almost 80% of the world&#x27;s diamonds are sold, including auction sales.

The De Beers company, as the world&#x27;s largest diamond mining company, holds a dominant position in the industry, and has done so since soon after its founding in 1888 by the British businessman Cecil Rhodes. De Beers is currently the world&#x27;s largest operator of diamond production facilities (mines) and distribution channels for gem-quality diamonds. The Diamond Trading Company (DTC) is a subsidiary of De Beers and markets rough diamonds from De Beers-operated mines. De Beers and its subsidiaries own mines that produce some 40% of annual world diamond production. For most of the 20th century over 80% of the world&#x27;s rough diamonds passed through De Beers, but by 2001–2009 the figure had decreased to around 45%, and by 2013 the company&#x27;s market share had further decreased to around 38% in value terms and even less by volume. De Beers sold off the vast majority of its diamond stockpile in the late 1990s – early 2000s and the remainder largely represents working stock (diamonds that are being sorted before sale). This was well documented in the press but remains little known to the general public.

As a part of reducing its influence, De Beers withdrew from purchasing diamonds on the open market in 1999 and ceased, at the end of 2008, purchasing Russian diamonds mined by the largest Russian diamond company Alrosa. As of January 2011, De Beers states that it only sells diamonds from the following four countries: Botswana, Namibia, South Africa and Canada. Alrosa had to suspend their sales in October 2008 due to the global energy crisis, but the company reported that it had resumed selling rough diamonds on the open market by October 2009. Apart from Alrosa, other important diamond mining companies include BHP, which is the world&#x27;s largest mining company; Rio Tinto, the owner of the Argyle (100%), Diavik (60%), and Murowa (78%) diamond mines; and Petra Diamonds, the owner of several major diamond mines in Africa.

Further down the supply chain, members of The World Federation of Diamond Bourses (WFDB) act as a medium for wholesale diamond exchange, trading both polished and rough diamonds. The WFDB consists of independent diamond bourses in major cutting centers such as Tel Aviv, Antwerp, Johannesburg and other cities across the US, Europe and Asia. In 2000, the WFDB and The International Diamond Manufacturers Association established the World Diamond Council to prevent the trading of diamonds used to fund war and inhumane acts. WFDB&#x27;s additional activities include sponsoring the World Diamond Congress every two years, as well as the establishment of the International Diamond Council (IDC) to oversee diamond grading.

Once purchased by Sightholders (which is a trademark term referring to the companies that have a three-year supply contract with DTC), diamonds are cut and polished in preparation for sale as gemstones (&#x27;industrial&#x27; stones are regarded as a by-product of the gemstone market; they are used for abrasives). The cutting and polishing of rough diamonds is a specialized skill that is concentrated in a limited number of locations worldwide. Traditional diamond cutting centers are Antwerp, Amsterdam, Johannesburg, New York City, and Tel Aviv. Recently, diamond cutting centers have been established in China, India, Thailand, Namibia and Botswana. Cutting centers with lower cost of labor, notably Surat in Gujarat, India, handle a larger number of smaller carat diamonds, while smaller quantities of larger or more valuable diamonds are more likely to be handled in Europe or North America. The recent expansion of this industry in India, employing low cost labor, has allowed smaller diamonds to be prepared as gems in greater quantities than was previously economically feasible.

Diamonds prepared as gemstones are sold on diamond exchanges called &quot;bourses&quot;. There are 28 registered diamond bourses in the world. Bourses are the final tightly controlled step in the diamond supply chain; wholesalers and even retailers are able to buy relatively small lots of diamonds at the bourses, after which they are prepared for final sale to the consumer. Diamonds can be sold already set in jewelry, or sold unset (&quot;loose&quot;). According to the Rio Tinto, in 2002 the diamonds produced and released to the market were valued at US$9 billion as rough diamonds, US$14 billion after being cut and polished, US$28 billion in wholesale diamond jewelry, and US$57 billion in retail sales.

==== Cutting ====

Mined rough diamonds are converted into gems through a multi-step process called &quot;cutting&quot;. Diamonds are extremely hard, but also brittle and can be split up by a single blow. Therefore, diamond cutting is traditionally considered as a delicate procedure requiring skills, scientific knowledge, tools and experience. Its final goal is to produce a faceted jewel where the specific angles between the facets would optimize the diamond luster, that is dispersion of white light, whereas the number and area of facets would determine the weight of the final product. The weight reduction upon cutting is significant and can be of the order of 50%. Several possible shapes are considered, but the final decision is often determined not only by scientific, but also practical considerations. For example, the diamond might be intended for display or for wear, in a ring or a necklace, singled or surrounded by other gems of certain color and shape. Some of them may be considered as classical, such as round, pear, marquise, oval, hearts and arrows diamonds, etc. Some of them are special, produced by certain companies, for example, Phoenix, Cushion, Sole Mio diamonds, etc.

The most time-consuming part of the cutting is the preliminary analysis of the rough stone. It needs to address a large number of issues, bears much responsibility, and therefore can last years in case of unique diamonds. The following issues are considered:
* The hardness of diamond and its ability to cleave strongly depend on the crystal orientation. Therefore, the crystallographic structure of the diamond to be cut is analyzed using X-ray diffraction to choose the optimal cutting directions.
* Most diamonds contain visible non-diamond inclusions and crystal flaws. The cutter has to decide which flaws are to be removed by the cutting and which could be kept.
* Splitting a diamond with a hammer is difficult, a well-calculated, angled blow can cut the diamond, piece-by-piece, but it can also ruin the diamond itself. Alternatively, it can be cut with a diamond saw, which is a more reliable method.

After initial cutting, the diamond is shaped in numerous stages of polishing. Unlike cutting, which is a responsible but quick operation, polishing removes material by gradual erosion and is extremely time-consuming. The associated technique is well developed; it is considered as a routine and can be performed by technicians. After polishing, the diamond is reexamined for possible flaws, either remaining or induced by the process. Those flaws are concealed through various diamond enhancement techniques, such as repolishing, crack filling, or clever arrangement of the stone in the jewelry. Remaining non-diamond inclusions are removed through laser drilling and filling of the voids produced.

==== Marketing ====
Marketing has significantly affected the image of diamond as a valuable commodity.

N. W. Ayer &amp; Son, the advertising firm retained by De Beers in the mid-20th century, succeeded in reviving the American diamond market and the firm created new markets in countries where no diamond tradition had existed before. N. W. Ayer&#x27;s marketing included product placement, advertising focused on the diamond product itself rather than the De Beers brand, and associations with celebrities and royalty. Without advertising the De Beers brand, De Beers was advertising its competitors&#x27; diamond products as well, but this was not a concern as De Beers dominated the diamond market throughout the 20th century. De Beers&#x27; market share dipped temporarily to second place in the global market below Alrosa in the aftermath of the global economic crisis of 2008, down to less than 29% in terms of carats mined, rather than sold. The campaign lasted for decades but was effectively discontinued by early 2011. De Beers still advertises diamonds, but the advertising now mostly promotes its own brands, or licensed product lines, rather than completely &quot;generic&quot; diamond products. The campaign was perhaps best captured by the slogan &quot;a diamond is forever&quot;. This slogan is now being used by De Beers Diamond Jewelers, a jewelry firm which is a 50/50% joint venture between the De Beers mining company and LVMH, the luxury goods conglomerate.

Brown-colored diamonds constituted a significant part of the diamond production, and were predominantly used for industrial purposes. They were seen as worthless for jewelry (not even being assessed on the diamond color scale). After the development of Argyle diamond mine in Australia in 1986, and marketing, brown diamonds have become acceptable gems. The change was mostly due to the numbers: the Argyle mine, with its of diamonds per year, makes about one-third of global production of natural diamonds; 80% of Argyle diamonds are brown.

=== Industrial-grade diamonds ===


Industrial diamonds are valued mostly for their hardness and thermal conductivity, making many of the gemological characteristics of diamonds, such as the 4 Cs, irrelevant for most applications. Eighty percent of mined diamonds (equal to about annually) are unsuitable for use as gemstones and are used industrially. In addition to mined diamonds, synthetic diamonds found industrial applications almost immediately after their invention in the 1950s; in 2014, of synthetic diamonds were produced, 90% of which were produced in China. Approximately 90% of diamond grinding grit is currently of synthetic origin.

The boundary between gem-quality diamonds and industrial diamonds is poorly defined and partly depends on market conditions (for example, if demand for polished diamonds is high, some lower-grade stones will be polished into low-quality or small gemstones rather than being sold for industrial use). Within the category of industrial diamonds, there is a sub-category comprising the lowest-quality, mostly opaque stones, which are known as bort.

Industrial use of diamonds has historically been associated with their hardness, which makes diamond the ideal material for cutting and grinding tools. As the hardest known naturally occurring material, diamond can be used to polish, cut, or wear away any material, including other diamonds. Common industrial applications of this property include diamond-tipped drill bits and saws, and the use of diamond powder as an abrasive. Less expensive industrial-grade diamonds (bort) with more flaws and poorer color than gems, are used for such purposes. Diamond is not suitable for machining ferrous alloys at high speeds, as carbon is soluble in iron at the high temperatures created by high-speed machining, leading to greatly increased wear on diamond tools compared to alternatives.

Specialized applications include use in laboratories as containment for high-pressure experiments (see diamond anvil cell), high-performance bearings, and limited use in specialized windows. With the continuing advances being made in the production of synthetic diamonds, future applications are becoming feasible. The high thermal conductivity of diamond makes it suitable as a heat sink for integrated circuits in electronics.

=== Mining ===
Approximately of diamonds are mined annually, with a total value of nearly US$9 billion, and about are synthesized annually.

Roughly 49% of diamonds originate from Central and Southern Africa, although significant sources of the mineral have been discovered in Canada, India, Russia, Brazil, and Australia. They are mined from kimberlite and lamproite volcanic pipes, which can bring diamond crystals, originating from deep within the Earth where high pressures and temperatures enable them to form, to the surface. The mining and distribution of natural diamonds are subjects of frequent controversy such as concerns over the sale of &quot;blood diamonds&quot; or &quot;conflict diamonds&quot; by African paramilitary groups. The diamond supply chain is controlled by a limited number of powerful businesses, and is also highly concentrated in a small number of locations around the world.

Only a very small fraction of the diamond ore consists of actual diamonds. The ore is crushed, during which care is required not to destroy larger diamonds, and then sorted by density. Today, diamonds are located in the diamond-rich density fraction with the help of X-ray fluorescence, after which the final sorting steps are done by hand. Before the use of X-rays became commonplace, the separation was done with grease belts; diamonds have a stronger tendency to stick to grease than the other minerals in the ore.


Historically, diamonds were found only in alluvial deposits in Guntur and Krishna district of the Krishna River delta in Southern India. India led the world in diamond production from the time of their discovery in approximately the 9th century BC to the mid-18th century AD, but the commercial potential of these sources had been exhausted by the late 18th century and at that time India was eclipsed by Brazil where the first non-Indian diamonds were found in 1725. Currently, one of the most prominent Indian mines is located at Panna.

Diamond extraction from primary deposits (kimberlites and lamproites) started in the 1870s after the discovery of the Diamond Fields in South Africa. Production has increased over time and now an accumulated total of have been mined since that date. Twenty percent of that amount has been mined in the last five years, and during the last 10 years, nine new mines have started production; four more are waiting to be opened soon. Most of these mines are located in Canada, Zimbabwe, Angola, and one in Russia.

In the U.S., diamonds have been found in Arkansas, Colorado, New Mexico, Wyoming, and Montana. In 2004, the discovery of a microscopic diamond in the U.S. led to the January 2008 bulk-sampling of kimberlite pipes in a remote part of Montana. The Crater of Diamonds State Park in Arkansas is open to the public, and is the only mine in the world where members of the public can dig for diamonds.

Today, most commercially viable diamond deposits are in Russia (mostly in Sakha Republic, for example Mir pipe and Udachnaya pipe), Botswana, Australia (Northern and Western Australia) and the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In 2005, Russia produced almost one-fifth of the global diamond output, according to the British Geological Survey. Australia boasts the richest diamantiferous pipe, with production from the Argyle diamond mine reaching peak levels of 42metric tons per year in the 1990s. There are also commercial deposits being actively mined in the Northwest Territories of Canada and Brazil. Diamond prospectors continue to search the globe for diamond-bearing kimberlite and lamproite pipes.

==== Political issues ====


In some of the more politically unstable central African and west African countries, revolutionary groups have taken control of diamond mines, using proceeds from diamond sales to finance their operations. Diamonds sold through this process are known as &quot;conflict diamonds&quot; or &quot;blood diamonds&quot;.

In response to public concerns that their diamond purchases were contributing to war and human rights abuses in central and western Africa, the United Nations, the diamond industry and diamond-trading nations introduced the Kimberley Process in 2002. The Kimberley Process aims to ensure that conflict diamonds do not become intermixed with the diamonds not controlled by such rebel groups. This is done by requiring diamond-producing countries to provide proof that the money they make from selling the diamonds is not used to fund criminal or revolutionary activities. Although the Kimberley Process has been moderately successful in limiting the number of conflict diamonds entering the market, some still find their way in. According to the International Diamond Manufacturers Association, conflict diamonds constitute 2–3% of all diamonds traded. Two major flaws still hinder the effectiveness of the Kimberley Process: (1) the relative ease of smuggling diamonds across African borders, and (2) the violent nature of diamond mining in nations that are not in a technical state of war and whose diamonds are therefore considered &quot;clean&quot;.

The Canadian Government has set up a body known as the Canadian Diamond Code of Conduct to help authenticate Canadian diamonds. This is a stringent tracking system of diamonds and helps protect the &quot;conflict free&quot; label of Canadian diamonds.

Mineral resource exploitation in general causes irreversible environmental damage, which must be weighed against the socio-economic benefits to a country.

== Synthetics, simulants, and enhancements ==
=== Synthetics ===
Synthetic diamonds are diamonds manufactured in a laboratory, as opposed to diamonds mined from the Earth. The gemological and industrial uses of diamond have created a large demand for rough stones. This demand has been satisfied in large part by synthetic diamonds, which have been manufactured by various processes for more than half a century. However, in recent years it has become possible to produce gem-quality synthetic diamonds of significant size. It is possible to make colorless synthetic gemstones that, on a molecular level, are identical to natural stones and so visually similar that only a gemologist with special equipment can tell the difference.

The majority of commercially available synthetic diamonds are yellow and are produced by so-called &quot;high-pressure high-temperature&quot; (HPHT) processes. The yellow color is caused by nitrogen impurities. Other colors may also be reproduced such as blue, green or pink, which are a result of the addition of boron or from irradiation after synthesis.

Another popular method of growing synthetic diamond is chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The growth occurs under low pressure (below atmospheric pressure). It involves feeding a mixture of gases (typically to hydrogen) into a chamber and splitting them into chemically active radicals in a plasma ignited by microwaves, hot filament, arc discharge, welding torch, or laser. This method is mostly used for coatings, but can also produce single crystals several millimeters in size (see picture).

As of 2010, nearly all 5,000 million carats (1,000tonnes) of synthetic diamonds produced per year are for industrial use. Around 50% of the 133 million carats of natural diamonds mined per year end up in industrial use. Mining companies&#x27; expenses average 40 to 60 US dollars per carat for natural colorless diamonds, while synthetic manufacturers&#x27; expenses average for synthetic, gem-quality colorless diamonds. However, a purchaser is more likely to encounter a synthetic when looking for a fancy-colored diamond because only 0.01% of natural diamonds are fancy-colored, while most synthetic diamonds are colored in some way.

=== Simulants ===

A diamond simulant is a non-diamond material that is used to simulate the appearance of a diamond, and may be referred to as diamante. Cubic zirconia is the most common. The gemstone moissanite (silicon carbide) can be treated as a diamond simulant, though more costly to produce than cubic zirconia. Both are produced synthetically.

=== Enhancements ===
Diamond enhancements are specific treatments performed on natural or synthetic diamonds (usually those already cut and polished into a gem), which are designed to better the gemological characteristics of the stone in one or more ways. These include laser drilling to remove inclusions, application of sealants to fill cracks, treatments to improve a white diamond&#x27;s color grade, and treatments to give fancy color to a white diamond.

Coatings are increasingly used to give a diamond simulant such as cubic zirconia a more &quot;diamond-like&quot; appearance. One such substance is diamond-like carbon—an amorphous carbonaceous material that has some physical properties similar to those of the diamond. Advertising suggests that such a coating would transfer some of these diamond-like properties to the coated stone, hence enhancing the diamond simulant. Techniques such as Raman spectroscopy should easily identify such a treatment.

=== Identification ===

Early diamond identification tests included a scratch test relying on the superior hardness of diamond. This test is destructive, as a diamond can scratch another diamond, and is rarely used nowadays. Instead, diamond identification relies on its superior thermal conductivity. Electronic thermal probes are widely used in the gemological centers to separate diamonds from their imitations. These probes consist of a pair of battery-powered thermistors mounted in a fine copper tip. One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip: if the stone being tested is a diamond, it will conduct the tip&#x27;s thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop. This test takes about two to three seconds.

Whereas the thermal probe can separate diamonds from most of their simulants, distinguishing between various types of diamond, for example synthetic or natural, irradiated or non-irradiated, etc., requires more advanced, optical techniques. Those techniques are also used for some diamonds simulants, such as silicon carbide, which pass the thermal conductivity test. Optical techniques can distinguish between natural diamonds and synthetic diamonds. They can also identify the vast majority of treated natural diamonds. &quot;Perfect&quot; crystals (at the atomic lattice level) have never been found, so both natural and synthetic diamonds always possess characteristic imperfections, arising from the circumstances of their crystal growth, that allow them to be distinguished from each other.

Laboratories use techniques such as spectroscopy, microscopy, and luminescence under shortwave ultraviolet light to determine a diamond&#x27;s origin. They also use specially made instruments to aid them in the identification process. Two screening instruments are the &quot;DiamondSure&quot; and the &quot;DiamondView&quot;, both produced by the DTC and marketed by the GIA.

Several methods for identifying synthetic diamonds can be performed, depending on the method of production and the color of the diamond. CVD diamonds can usually be identified by an orange fluorescence. D–J colored diamonds can be screened through the Swiss Gemmological Institute&#x27;s Diamond Spotter. Stones in the D–Z color range can be examined through the DiamondSure UV/visible spectrometer, a tool developed by De Beers. Similarly, natural diamonds usually have minor imperfections and flaws, such as inclusions of foreign material, that are not seen in synthetic diamonds.

Screening devices based on diamond type detection can be used to make a distinction between diamonds that are certainly natural and diamonds that are potentially synthetic. Those potentially synthetic diamonds require more investigation in a specialized lab. Examples of commercial screening devices are D-Screen (WTOCD / HRD Antwerp), Alpha Diamond Analyzer (Bruker / HRD Antwerp), and D-Secure (DRC Techno).

== Etymology, earliest use and composition discovery ==
The name &quot;diamond&quot; is derived from (&quot;adámas&quot;), &#x27;proper, unalterable, unbreakable, untamed&#x27;, from ἀ- (&quot;a-&quot;), &#x27;not&#x27; + (&quot;damáō&quot;), &#x27;to overpower, tame&#x27;. Diamonds are thought to have been first recognized and mined in India, where significant alluvial deposits of the stone could be found many centuries ago along the rivers Penner, Krishna, and Godavari. Diamonds have been known in India for at least 3,000years but most likely 6,000years.

Diamonds have been treasured as gemstones since their use as religious icons in ancient India. Their usage in engraving tools also dates to early human history. The popularity of diamonds has risen since the 19th century because of increased supply, improved cutting and polishing techniques, growth in the world economy, and innovative and successful advertising campaigns.

In 1772, the French scientist Antoine Lavoisier used a lens to concentrate the rays of the sun on a diamond in an atmosphere of oxygen, and showed that the only product of the combustion was carbon dioxide, proving that diamond is composed of carbon. Later, in 1797, the English chemist Smithson Tennant repeated and expanded that experiment. By demonstrating that burning diamond and graphite releases the same amount of gas, he established the chemical equivalence of these substances.

== See also ==

* Deep carbon cycle
* Diamondoid
* List of diamonds
** List of largest rough diamonds
* List of minerals
* Superhard material

== Citations ==
== General and cited references ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* 

== External links ==

* Properties of diamond: Ioffe database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5283" start="0" end="7" title="Diamond" label="Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q622460" start="13" end="45" title="Allotropes of carbon" label="solid form of the element carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="75" end="92" title="crystal structure" label="crystal structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q905169" start="100" end="113" title="diamond cubic" label="diamond cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="311" end="319" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q903517" start="327" end="344" title="Chemical stability" label="chemically stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="363" end="392" title="Standard temperature and pressure" label="room temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="409" end="419" title="metastable" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125523" start="508" end="516" title="Scratch hardness" label="hardness"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="521" end="541" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208616" start="692" end="710" title="diamond anvil cell" label="diamond anvil cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="898" end="903" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="908" end="916" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q898226" start="936" end="943" title="lattice defect" label="defects"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="1156" end="1172" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="1195" end="1213" title="optical dispersion" label="optical dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="1344" end="1350" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692360" start="1613" end="1630" title="volcanic eruption" label="volcanic eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="1649" end="1661" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q204376" start="1672" end="1682" title="kimberlite" label="kimberlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260198" start="1688" end="1697" title="lamproite" label="lamproite"/>
<link wikidata="Q751479" start="1701" end="1718" title="Synthetic diamond" label="Synthetic diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="1803" end="1814" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="1824" end="1849" title="chemical vapor deposition" label="chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q81915" start="2127" end="2136" title="allotrope" label="allotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q622460" start="2198" end="2223" title="allotropes of carbon" label="allotropes of pure carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="2240" end="2248" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q274511" start="2281" end="2296" title="orbital hybridisation" label="orbital hybrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067817" start="2671" end="2683" title="compressibility" label="compressible"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="3256" end="3276" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583695" start="3366" end="3383" title="thermal expansion" label="thermal expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434654" start="3444" end="3456" title="far infrared" label="far infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="3469" end="3480" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="3497" end="3515" title="optical dispersion" label="optical dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q106410" start="3954" end="3966" title="triple point" label="triple point"/>
<link wikidata="Q102145" start="4051" end="4084" title="standard temperature and pressure" label="standard temperature and pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q849516" start="4147" end="4157" title="metastable" label="metastable"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="4923" end="4930" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="4935" end="4944" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="4956" end="4975" title="Cubic crystal system" label="body-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108381" start="5137" end="5151" title="Nature Physics" label="Nature Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319599" start="5382" end="5391" title="ice giant" label="ice giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="5392" end="5398" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="5400" end="5407" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="5412" end="5418" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q905169" start="5795" end="5808" title="diamond cubic" label="diamond cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11878049" start="5826" end="5835" title="unit cell" label="unit cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q81454" start="6151" end="6159" title="angstrom" label="angstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="6427" end="6446" title="face-centered cubic" label="face-centered cubic"/>
<link wikidata="Q849699" start="6597" end="6623" title="Miller index" label="crystallographic direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q411827" start="6776" end="6787" title="lonsdaleite" label="lonsdaleite"/>
<link wikidata="Q492700" start="6930" end="6938" title="euhedral" label="euhedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q188884" start="6950" end="6959" title="octahedron" label="octahedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856" start="6964" end="6971" title="crystal twinning" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q17000075" start="6997" end="7002" title="macle" label="macle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268495" start="7100" end="7105" title="facet" label="facet"/>
<link wikidata="Q812880" start="7124" end="7128" title="cube (geometry)" label="cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q672521" start="7142" end="7164" title="rhombicosidodecahedron" label="rhombicosidodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q664307" start="7166" end="7185" title="tetrakis hexahedron" label="tetrakis hexahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586734" start="7190" end="7212" title="disdyakis dodecahedron" label="disdyakis dodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465738" start="8103" end="8108" title="boart" label="boart"/>
<link wikidata="Q9164686" start="8110" end="8116" title="ballas" label="ballas"/>
<link wikidata="Q429950" start="8194" end="8203" title="Carbonado" label="Carbonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="8245" end="8253" title="sintering" label="sintered"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268708" start="8593" end="8604" title="qualitative property" label="qualitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="8605" end="8615" title="Mohs scale of mineral hardness" label="Mohs scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="8632" end="8644" title="unit of measurement" label="quantitative"/>
<link wikidata="Q223404" start="8645" end="8666" title="Vickers hardness test" label="Vickers hardness test"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="9279" end="9296" title="phonograph record" label="phonograph record"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9444" end="9455" title="Miller index#Case of cubic structures" label="&amp;lt;111&amp;gt;"/>
<link wikidata="Q410193" start="9620" end="9633" title="boron nitride" label="boron nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q393356" start="9700" end="9734" title="Aggregated diamond nanorod" label="nanocrystalline diamond aggregates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929" start="10058" end="10068" title="engagement ring" label="engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q842096" start="10072" end="10084" title="wedding ring" label="wedding ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168547" start="10175" end="10182" title="Copeton Dam" label="Copeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q863749" start="10187" end="10194" title="Bingara" label="Bingara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467315" start="10217" end="10228" title="New England (Australia)" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="10237" end="10252" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q185154" start="10412" end="10426" title="crystal growth" label="crystal growth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41472" start="10964" end="10974" title="Mohs scale" label="Mohs scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208613" start="11682" end="11693" title="diamantaire" label="diamantaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474207" start="11728" end="11733" title="loupe" label="loupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q486802" start="11978" end="11987" title="toughness" label="toughness"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="12034" end="12037" title="Megapascal" label="MPa"/>
<link wikidata="Q107400" start="12344" end="12358" title="cleavage plane" label="cleavage plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q930442" start="12423" end="12438" title="Diamond cutting" label="Diamond cutters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208616" start="12800" end="12813" title="diamond anvil" label="diamond anvil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964018" start="12953" end="12968" title="nanocrystalline material" label="nanocrystalline"/>
<link wikidata="Q11456" start="13579" end="13592" title="semiconductor" label="semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449765" start="13600" end="13612" title="blue diamond" label="blue diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q178150" start="13692" end="13713" title="insulator (electricity)" label="electrical insulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q528769" start="13862" end="13874" title="valence band" label="valence band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130571" start="13936" end="13943" title="doping (semiconductor)" label="undoped"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="13961" end="13986" title="chemical vapor deposition of diamond" label="chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="14025" end="14033" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187360" start="14100" end="14109" title="annealing (metallurgy)" label="annealing"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="14201" end="14209" title="band gap" label="band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q898401" start="14657" end="14667" title="lipophilicity" label="lipophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="14672" end="14683" title="hydrophobe" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192197" start="14985" end="14996" title="hydrophile" label="hydrophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23392" start="15040" end="15049" title="ice" label="water ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679262" start="15053" end="15075" title="human body temperature" label="human body temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q941667" start="15696" end="15710" title="ignition point" label="ignition point"/>
<link wikidata="Q909182" start="16518" end="16541" title="pyrotechnic composition" label="pyrotechnic composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q751479" start="16552" end="16569" title="synthetic diamond" label="synthetic diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q806352" start="16837" end="16845" title="band gap" label="band gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="16875" end="16886" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="17152" end="17160" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="17162" end="17167" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="17173" end="17181" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="17304" end="17310" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q740" start="17315" end="17321" title="cobalt" label="cobalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672013" start="17923" end="17942" title="plastic deformation" label="plastic deformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q429950" start="18226" end="18235" title="carbonado" label="carbonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q895901" start="18557" end="18572" title="crystal lattice" label="crystal lattice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037965" start="18585" end="18596" title="carbon flaw" label="carbon flaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759392" start="18746" end="18778" title="Gemological Institute of America" label="Gemological Institute of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q728710" start="19167" end="19186" title="Wittelsbach Diamond" label="Wittelsbach Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449765" start="19190" end="19202" title="blue diamond" label="blue diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q28449765" start="19312" end="19324" title="blue diamond" label="blue diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759392" start="19771" end="19803" title="Gemological Institute of America" label="Gemological Institute of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="21216" end="21232" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="21462" end="21478" title="alluvial deposit" label="alluvial deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="21538" end="21543" title="shore" label="shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q427711" start="21647" end="21659" title="glacial till" label="glacial till"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="21672" end="21681" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415" start="21686" end="21693" title="Indiana" label="Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q354025" start="21805" end="21815" title="intrusive rock" label="intrusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="21824" end="21834" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7445303" start="21839" end="21848" title="sediment transport" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8094" start="21852" end="21856" title="wind" label="wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="21860" end="21865" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="21896" end="21915" title="Mantle (geology)" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q509037" start="22031" end="22038" title="terrane" label="terrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291617" start="22113" end="22145" title="ultra-high-pressure metamorphism" label="ultra-high-pressure metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439836" start="22398" end="22410" title="Detonation nanodiamond" label="nanodiamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q594483" start="22507" end="22531" title="Popigai impact structure" label="Popigai impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="22730" end="22734" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192154" start="22851" end="22862" title="embryophyte" label="land plants"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="22915" end="22930" title="subduction zone" label="subduction zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="23012" end="23021" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q204376" start="23256" end="23266" title="kimberlite" label="kimberlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191110" start="23290" end="23296" title="craton" label="craton"/>
<link wikidata="Q652475" start="23412" end="23431" title="Argyle diamond mine" label="Argyle diamond mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="23435" end="23444" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184554" start="23567" end="23580" title="orogeny" label="orogenic belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204376" start="23688" end="23698" title="kimberlite" label="kimberlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260198" start="23717" end="23726" title="lamproite" label="lamproite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724310" start="23874" end="23883" title="Algoman orogeny" label="Wawa belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q21071091" start="23891" end="23908" title="Superior Craton" label="Superior province"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="23912" end="23918" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11526209" start="23944" end="23963" title="Northeastern Japan arc" label="island arc of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q774790" start="23999" end="24010" title="lamprophyre" label="lamprophyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q204376" start="24013" end="24023" title="Kimberlite" label="Kimberlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q612133" start="24329" end="24335" title="clastic rock" label="clasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q488640" start="24390" end="24399" title="xenocryst" label="xenocryst"/>
<link wikidata="Q488640" start="24405" end="24413" title="xenolith" label="xenolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q335249" start="24529" end="24539" title="Serpentine subgroup" label="serpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q195178" start="24667" end="24678" title="carbonatite" label="carbonatite"/>
<link wikidata="Q171917" start="24793" end="24800" title="calcite" label="calcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q414123" start="24908" end="24916" title="melilite" label="melilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884622" start="24921" end="24930" title="kalsilite" label="kalsilite"/>
<link wikidata="Q204376" start="24981" end="24991" title="kimberlite" label="kimberlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="24993" end="25000" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422977" start="25050" end="25060" title="phlogopite" label="phlogopite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105794" start="25081" end="25088" title="biotite" label="biotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17159" start="25093" end="25102" title="amphibole" label="amphibole"/>
<link wikidata="Q908990" start="25201" end="25210" title="Volatility (chemistry)" label="volatiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q214769" start="25215" end="25230" title="magnesium oxide" label="magnesium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="25245" end="25254" title="redox" label="oxidizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="25293" end="25299" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q204376" start="25415" end="25425" title="Kimberlite" label="Kimberlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747649" start="25778" end="25797" title="geophysical survey" label="geophysical methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q381526" start="25806" end="25825" title="aeromagnetic survey" label="aeromagnetic survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q488986" start="25828" end="25850" title="electrical resistivity tomography" label="electrical resistivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q499964" start="25856" end="25866" title="gravimetry" label="gravimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q729546" start="26239" end="26247" title="eclogite" label="eclogite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509603" start="26318" end="26336" title="geothermobarometry" label="geothermobarometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499814" start="26913" end="26934" title="Rubidium–strontium dating" label="rubidium to strontium"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408853" start="26936" end="26957" title="Samarium–neodymium dating" label="samarium to neodymium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930710" start="26959" end="26974" title="Uranium–lead dating" label="uranium to lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4789695" start="26976" end="26996" title="Argon–argon dating" label="argon-40 to argon-39"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148046" start="27001" end="27018" title="Rhenium–osmium dating" label="rhenium to osmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576349" start="27348" end="27355" title="Premier Mine" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q83296" start="27817" end="27828" title="lithosphere" label="lithosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q664311" start="28167" end="28178" title="harzburgite" label="harzburgite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822510" start="28183" end="28193" title="lherzolite" label="lherzolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q239918" start="28207" end="28217" title="peridotite" label="peridotite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009467" start="28254" end="28266" title="upper mantle (Earth)" label="upper mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="28285" end="28297" title="igneous rock" label="igneous rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q22693" start="28332" end="28339" title="olivine" label="olivine"/>
<link wikidata="Q192880" start="28344" end="28352" title="pyroxene" label="pyroxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="28367" end="28373" title="Silicon dioxide" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="28386" end="28395" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q729546" start="28525" end="28533" title="eclogite" label="eclogite"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="28537" end="28548" title="metamorphic" label="metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="28580" end="28586" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q176318" start="28636" end="28651" title="Subduction" label="subduction zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638707" start="28774" end="28789" title="Transition zone (Earth)" label="transition zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070946" start="28888" end="28896" title="majorite" label="majorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="28908" end="28914" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309" start="29136" end="29144" title="graphite" label="graphite"/>
<link wikidata="Q241906" start="29631" end="29638" title="carbide" label="carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q125745585" start="29789" end="29796" title="Ice VII" label="Ice VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q191118" start="30055" end="30065" title="tonne" label="gigatonnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q878130" start="30166" end="30181" title="stable nuclide" label="stable isotopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058364" start="30183" end="30186" title="carbon-12" label="12C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770822" start="30191" end="30194" title="carbon-13" label="13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q11982" start="30390" end="30404" title="photosynthesis" label="photosynthesis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30476" end="30480" title="isotopic signature#Carbon isotopes" label="δ13C"/>
<link wikidata="Q166257" start="31425" end="31438" title="asthenosphere" label="asthenosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q222814" start="31515" end="31526" title="metasomatism" label="metasomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="31855" end="31862" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q614893" start="31903" end="31920" title="photoluminescence" label="photoluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q369794" start="31926" end="31945" title="cathodoluminescence" label="cathodoluminescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="32595" end="32615" title="hydraulic fracturing" label="hydraulic fracturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q787619" start="32670" end="32678" title="exsolution" label="exsolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q191250" start="32918" end="32925" title="breccia" label="breccia"/>
<link wikidata="Q512121" start="32960" end="32971" title="Pyroclastic rock" label="pyroclastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q737339" start="33023" end="33035" title="serpentinite" label="serpentinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q85784330" start="33189" end="33199" title="Matryoshka (diamond)" label="Matryoshka"/>
<link wikidata="Q294508" start="33214" end="33220" title="Alrosa" label="Alrosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="33224" end="33231" title="Sakha Republic" label="Yakutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106310819" start="33279" end="33302" title="Ellendale Diamond Field" label="Ellendale Diamond Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="33306" end="33323" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="33373" end="33378" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="33423" end="33432" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16870989" start="33487" end="33498" title="nanodiamond" label="nanodiamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q901959" start="33617" end="33631" title="surface energy" label="surface energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="33859" end="33866" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q324" start="33924" end="33930" title="Uranus" label="Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="33935" end="33942" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="34067" end="34078" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q429950" start="34110" end="34119" title="carbonado" label="carbonado"/>
<link wikidata="Q3937" start="34193" end="34202" title="supernova" label="supernova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4470686" start="34347" end="34356" title="adornment" label="adornment"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="34530" end="34540" title="Dispersion (optics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q910300" start="34561" end="34575" title="spectral color" label="spectral color"/>
<link wikidata="Q261247" start="34959" end="34965" title="Carat (unit)" label="carats"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103146" start="35013" end="35016" title="Diamond cut" label="cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3420076" start="35066" end="35077" title="aspect ratio" label="proportions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12485" start="35079" end="35087" title="symmetry" label="symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054722" start="35092" end="35098" title="polishing" label="polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q723995" start="35107" end="35112" title="Diamond color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030054" start="35207" end="35214" title="Diamond clarity" label="clarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q728944" start="35242" end="35252" title="inclusion (mineral)" label="inclusions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7134591" start="35295" end="35302" title="Paragon (diamond)" label="paragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629" start="35783" end="35788" title="Surat" label="Surat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="35790" end="35795" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4777485" start="35860" end="35884" title="Antwerp diamond district" label="Antwerp diamond district"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="35888" end="35895" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987051" start="35907" end="35942" title="International Gemological Institute" label="International Gemological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="35953" end="35959" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907772" start="35965" end="35981" title="Diamond District" label="Diamond District"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="35985" end="35998" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916896" start="36004" end="36029" title="Diamond Exchange District" label="Diamond Exchange District"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="36033" end="36041" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="36046" end="36055" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160014" start="36238" end="36250" title="Jwaneng diamond mine" label="Jwaneng mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10371097" start="36775" end="36788" title="rough diamond" label="rough diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q20638775" start="36997" end="37021" title="Antwerpsche Diamantkring" label="Antwerpsche Diamantkring"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="37252" end="37260" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825" start="37446" end="37458" title="Cecil Rhodes" label="Cecil Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q867147" start="37561" end="37582" title="Distribution (business)" label="distribution channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q294508" start="38590" end="38596" title="Alrosa" label="Alrosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356061" start="38802" end="38822" title="2000s energy crisis" label="global energy crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q625713" start="38996" end="38999" title="BHP" label="BHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q821293" start="39051" end="39060" title="Rio Tinto (corporation)" label="Rio Tinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q652475" start="39079" end="39085" title="Argyle diamond mine" label="Argyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209233" start="39094" end="39100" title="Diavik Diamond Mine" label="Diavik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938857" start="39112" end="39118" title="Murowa diamond mine" label="Murowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901022" start="39144" end="39158" title="Petra Diamonds" label="Petra Diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q971023" start="39259" end="39294" title="World Federation of Diamond Bourses" label="World Federation of Diamond Bourses"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035647" start="39645" end="39666" title="World Diamond Council" label="World Diamond Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035645" start="39795" end="39817" title="World Diamond Congress" label="World Diamond Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035647" start="39871" end="39900" title="International Diamond Council" label="International Diamond Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="40433" end="40442" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="40560" end="40568" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="40651" end="40665" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q179076" start="41102" end="41109" title="Exchange (organized market)" label="bourses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103146" start="42767" end="42772" title="Diamond cut" label="round"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103146" start="42774" end="42778" title="Pear Cut Diamond" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103146" start="42780" end="42788" title="Marquise Cut Diamond" label="marquise"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103146" start="42790" end="42794" title="Oval Cut Diamond" label="oval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12103146" start="42796" end="42813" title="hearts and arrows" label="hearts and arrows"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42899" end="42906" title="Phoenix Cut Diamond" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42908" end="42915" title="Cushion Cut Diamond" label="Cushion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="42917" end="42925" title="Sole Mio Cut Diamond" label="Sole Mio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101244" start="43382" end="43399" title="X-ray diffraction" label="X-ray diffraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798164" start="43806" end="43817" title="diamond saw" label="diamond saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270955" start="44330" end="44349" title="diamond enhancement" label="diamond enhancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3869335" start="44657" end="44677" title="N. W. Ayer &amp;amp; Son" label="N. W. Ayer &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="44712" end="44720" title="De Beers" label="De Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q749457" start="44926" end="44943" title="product placement" label="product placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q471891" start="45822" end="45842" title="a diamond is forever" label="a diamond is forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q504998" start="45997" end="46001" title="LVMH" label="LVMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q723995" start="46241" end="46254" title="diamond color" label="diamond color"/>
<link wikidata="Q17413599" start="46769" end="46773" title="4 Cs" label="4 Cs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680646" start="47178" end="47191" title="Grinding (abrasive cutting)" label="grinding grit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465738" start="47667" end="47671" title="bort" label="bort"/>
<link wikidata="Q335283" start="48037" end="48046" title="drill bit" label="drill bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q372301" start="48094" end="48102" title="abrasive" label="abrasive"/>
<link wikidata="Q428946" start="48262" end="48269" title="ferrous" label="ferrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="48270" end="48275" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241719" start="48530" end="48555" title="Pressure experiment" label="high-pressure experiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208616" start="48561" end="48579" title="diamond anvil cell" label="diamond anvil cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q190100" start="48599" end="48607" title="bearing (mechanical)" label="bearings"/>
<link wikidata="Q35473" start="48640" end="48646" title="window" label="window"/>
<link wikidata="Q487005" start="48782" end="48802" title="thermal conductivity" label="thermal conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796959" start="48837" end="48846" title="heat sink" label="heat sink"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="48874" end="48885" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="49068" end="49075" title="Central Africa" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q27394" start="49080" end="49095" title="Southern Africa" label="Southern Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="49165" end="49171" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="49173" end="49178" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="49180" end="49186" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="49188" end="49194" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="49200" end="49209" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q464026" start="49545" end="49558" title="blood diamond" label="blood diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q207320" start="49610" end="49622" title="paramilitary" label="paramilitary"/>
<link wikidata="Q898974" start="50063" end="50081" title="X-ray fluorescence" label="X-ray fluorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="50155" end="50160" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="50358" end="50374" title="alluvial deposit" label="alluvial deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15341" start="50379" end="50385" title="Guntur district" label="Guntur"/>
<link wikidata="Q15382" start="50390" end="50406" title="Krishna district" label="Krishna district"/>
<link wikidata="Q193499" start="50414" end="50427" title="Krishna River" label="Krishna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="50437" end="50451" title="Southern India" label="Southern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341630" start="50848" end="50853" title="Panna District" label="Panna"/>
<link wikidata="Q125905" start="50974" end="50988" title="Diamond Fields" label="Diamond Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="51408" end="51416" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="51418" end="51426" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="51428" end="51438" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="51453" end="51460" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261752" start="51563" end="51578" title="kimberlite pipe" label="kimberlite pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q750623" start="51613" end="51642" title="Crater of Diamonds State Park" label="Crater of Diamonds State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612" start="51646" end="51654" title="Arkansas" label="Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="51837" end="51851" title="Sakha Republic" label="Sakha Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369879" start="51865" end="51873" title="Mir Mine" label="Mir pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q372112" start="51878" end="51892" title="Udachnaya pipe" label="Udachnaya pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="51895" end="51903" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017944" start="51916" end="51924" title="Northern Australia" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="51929" end="51946" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="51956" end="51988" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q919304" start="52079" end="52104" title="British Geological Survey" label="British Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007" start="52325" end="52346" title="Northwest Territories" label="Northwest Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q87769621" start="52628" end="52641" title="List of diamond mines" label="diamond mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="52905" end="52924" title="human rights abuses" label="human rights abuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q27433" start="52928" end="52935" title="central Africa" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="52940" end="52947" title="West Africa" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="52960" end="52974" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q977187" start="53040" end="53057" title="Kimberley Process" label="Kimberley Process"/>
<link wikidata="Q751479" start="55255" end="55259" title="HPHT" label="HPHT"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="55302" end="55310" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="55426" end="55431" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737837" start="55440" end="55451" title="irradiation" label="irradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q505668" start="55525" end="55550" title="chemical vapor deposition" label="chemical vapor deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="55678" end="55686" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="55745" end="55753" title="radical (chemistry)" label="radicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10251" start="55759" end="55765" title="plasma (physics)" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q127995" start="55777" end="55787" title="microwaves" label="microwaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5909576" start="55789" end="55801" title="hot filament" label="hot filament"/>
<link wikidata="Q207456" start="55803" end="55816" title="electric arc" label="arc discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q118568" start="55818" end="55831" title="welding torch" label="welding torch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="55836" end="55841" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q225666" start="56757" end="56771" title="Cubic zirconia" label="Cubic zirconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q418215" start="56805" end="56815" title="moissanite" label="moissanite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389419" start="57566" end="57585" title="diamond-like carbon" label="diamond-like carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862228" start="57860" end="57878" title="Raman spectroscopy" label="Raman spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q175973" start="58386" end="58396" title="thermistor" label="thermistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5270935" start="59866" end="59869" title="Diamond Trading Company" label="DTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7658875" start="60148" end="60176" title="Swiss Gemmological Institute" label="Swiss Gemmological Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61074" end="61076" title=":wiktionary:ἀ-" label="ἀ-"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="61230" end="61235" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="61255" end="61271" title="alluvial deposit" label="alluvial deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1877489" start="61337" end="61343" title="Penner River" label="Penner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193499" start="61345" end="61352" title="Krishna River" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q191314" start="61358" end="61366" title="Godavari River" label="Godavari"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="61516" end="61531" title="icon" label="religious icons"/>
<link wikidata="Q846025" start="61535" end="61548" title="Kingdoms of Ancient India" label="ancient India"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="61601" end="61614" title="human history" label="human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="61861" end="61878" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="61959" end="61965" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="62022" end="62036" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q377800" start="62118" end="62134" title="Smithson Tennant" label="Smithson Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091609" start="62338" end="62355" title="Deep carbon cycle" label="Deep carbon cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q419631" start="62358" end="62368" title="Diamondoid" label="Diamondoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414809" start="62371" end="62387" title="List of diamonds" label="List of diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625039" start="62391" end="62421" title="List of largest rough diamonds" label="List of largest rough diamonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q243479" start="62424" end="62440" title="List of minerals" label="List of minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557782" start="62443" end="62461" title="Superhard material" label="Superhard material"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8083" wikidata="Q6078" url="?curid=8083" title="Dr. Dre">
<text>Andre Romell Young (born February 18, 1965), known professionally as Dr. Dre, is an American rapper, record producer, music executive, and actor. He is the founder and CEO of Aftermath Entertainment and Beats Electronics, and co-founder of Death Row Records. Dre began his career as a member of the World Class Wreckin&#x27; Cru in 1984, and later found fame with the gangsta rap group N.W.A. The group popularized explicit lyrics in hip-hop to detail the violence of street life. During the early 1990s, Dre was credited as a key figure in the crafting and popularization of West Coast G-funk, a subgenre of hip-hop characterized by a synthesizer foundation and slow, heavy production.

Released as Death Row&#x27;s first major project, Dr. Dre&#x27;s debut solo album, &quot;The Chronic&quot; (1992), made him one of the best-selling American music artists of 1993. It earned him a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance with its single &quot;Let Me Ride&quot;, as well as several accolades for the single &quot;Nuthin&#x27; but a &#x27;G&#x27; Thang&quot; (featuring Snoop Dogg). That same year, he produced Death Row labelmate Snoop Dogg&#x27;s debut album &quot;Doggystyle&quot;, and mentored producers such as his stepbrother Warren G (leading to the multi-platinum debut &quot;Regulate... G Funk Era&quot; in 1994) and Snoop Dogg&#x27;s cousin Daz Dillinger (leading to the double-platinum debut &quot;Dogg Food&quot; by Tha Dogg Pound in 1995), as well as other producers including Mel-Man and Scott Storch. In 1996, Dre left Death Row Records to establish his own label, Aftermath Entertainment; his compilation album, &quot;Dr. Dre Presents: The Aftermath&quot; (1996) and second studio album, &quot;2001&quot; (1999) followed thereafter.

During the 2000s, Dr. Dre shifted focus onto production for other artists, occasionally contributing vocals. He signed Eminem in 1998 and 50 Cent in 2002, while extensively contributing to releases by both artists. Aftermath has since signed other artists including the Game, Kendrick Lamar, Anderson .Paak, Silk Sonic, Busta Rhymes, Eve, and Rakim, among others. He has won seven Grammy Awards, including Producer of the Year, Non-Classical. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked him number 56 on the list of 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. Outside of music, Dre has acted in films such as &quot;Set It Off&quot;, &quot;The Wash&quot;, and &quot;Training Day&quot;.

Accusations of Dr. Dre&#x27;s violence against women have been widely publicized. He pled no contest to his assault of television host Dee Barnes, for which he was given two years&#x27; probation; a related civil suit was settled out of court. In 2015, ex-partner Michel&#x27;le accused him of domestic violence. Another of his ex-partners made further accusations, and was granted a restraining order against him. Former labelmate Tairrie B claimed that Dre assaulted her at a party in 1990. Following the release of his third album, &quot;Compton&quot; (2015), he issued a public apology.

==Early life==
Andre Romell Young was born in Compton, California, on February 18, 1965, the son of Theodore and Verna Young. His middle name is derived from the Romells, his father&#x27;s amateur R&amp;B group. His parents married in 1964, separated in 1968, and divorced in 1972. His mother later remarried to Curtis Crayon and had three children: sons Jerome and Tyree (both deceased) and daughter Shameka.

In 1976, Dre began attending Vanguard Junior High School in Compton, but due to gang violence, he transferred to the safer suburban Roosevelt Junior High School. The family moved often and lived in apartments and houses in Compton, Carson, Long Beach, and the Watts and South Central neighborhoods of Los Angeles. Dre has said that he was mostly raised by his grandmother in the New Wilmington Arms housing project in Compton. His mother later married Warren Griffin, which added three step-sisters and one step-brother to the family; the latter would eventually begin rapping under the name Warren G. Dre is also the cousin of producer Sir Jinx.
Dre attended Centennial High School in Compton during his freshman year in 1979, but transferred to Fremont High School in South Central Los Angeles due to poor grades. He attempted to enroll in an apprenticeship program at Northrop Aviation Company, but was ineligible due to poor grades. Thereafter, he focused on his social life and entertainment for the remainder of his high school years.

Dre&#x27;s frequent absences from school jeopardized his position as a diver on his school&#x27;s swim team. After high school, he attended Chester Adult School in Compton following his mother&#x27;s demands for him to get a job or continue his education. After brief attendance at a radio broadcasting school, he relocated to the residence of his father and residence of his grandparents before returning to his mother&#x27;s house.

==Musical career==
===1984–1986: World Class Wreckin&#x27; Cru===
Inspired by the Grandmaster Flash song &quot;The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel&quot;, Dr. Dre often attended a club called Eve&#x27;s After Dark to watch many DJs and rappers performing live. He subsequently became a DJ in the club, initially under the name &quot;Dr. J&quot;, based on the nickname of Julius Erving, his favorite basketball player. At the club, he met aspiring rapper Antoine Carraby, later to become member DJ Yella of N.W.A. Soon afterwards he adopted the moniker Dr. Dre, a mix of previous alias Dr. J and his first name, referring to himself as the &quot;Master of Mixology&quot;.

Eve After Dark had a back room with a small four-track studio where Dre and Yella recorded several demos. In their first recording session, they recorded a song entitled &quot;Surgery&quot; in 1984. Dr. Dre&#x27;s earliest recordings were released in 1994 on a compilation titled &quot;Concrete Roots&quot;. Critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described the compiled music, released &quot;several years before Dre developed a distinctive style&quot;, as &quot;surprisingly generic and unengaging&quot; and &quot;for dedicated fans only&quot;.

Dre later joined the musical group World Class Wreckin&#x27; Cru, which released its debut album under the Kru-Cut label in 1985. The group would become stars of the electro-hop scene that dominated early-mid 1980s West Coast hip-hop. &quot;Surgery&quot;, which was officially released after being recorded prior to the group&#x27;s official formation, would prominently feature Dr. Dre on the turntable. The record would become the group&#x27;s first hit, selling 50,000 copies within the Compton area. Dr. Dre and DJ Yella also performed mixes for local radio station KDAY, boosting ratings for its afternoon rush-hour show &quot;The Traffic Jam&quot;.

===1986–1991: N.W.A and Ruthless Records===

In 1986, Dr. Dre met rapper O&#x27;Shea Jackson—known as Ice Cube—who collaborated with him to record songs for Ruthless Records, a hip-hop record label run by local rapper Eazy-E. N.W.A and fellow West Coast rapper Ice-T are widely credited as seminal artists of the gangsta rap genre, a profanity-heavy subgenre of hip-hop, replete with gritty depictions of urban crime and gang lifestyle. Not feeling constricted to racially charged political issues pioneered by rap artists such as Public Enemy or Boogie Down Productions, N.W.A favored themes and uncompromising lyrics, offering stark descriptions of violent, inner-city streets. Propelled by the hit &quot;Fuck tha Police&quot;, the group&#x27;s first full album &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot; (1989) became a major success, despite an almost complete absence of radio airplay or major concert tours. The Federal Bureau of Investigation sent Ruthless Records a warning letter in response to the song&#x27;s content.

After Ice Cube left N.W.A in 1989 over financial disputes, Dr. Dre produced and performed for much of the group&#x27;s second album &quot;Efil4zaggin&quot;. He also produced tracks for a number of other acts on Ruthless Records, including Eazy-E&#x27;s 1988 solo debut &quot;Eazy-Duz-It&quot;, Above the Law&#x27;s 1990 debut &quot;Livin&#x27; Like Hustlers&quot;, Michel&#x27;le&#x27;s 1989 self-titled debut, the D.O.C.&#x27;s 1989 debut &quot;No One Can Do It Better&quot;, J.J. Fad&#x27;s 1988 debut &quot;Supersonic&quot; and funk rock musician Jimmy Z&#x27;s 1991 album &quot;Muzical Madness&quot;.

===1991–1996: &quot;The Chronic&quot; and Death Row Records===
After a dispute with Eazy-E, Dre left the group at the peak of its popularity in 1991 under the advice of friend, and N.W.A lyricist, the D.O.C. and his bodyguard at the time, Suge Knight. Knight, a notorious strongman and intimidator, was able to have Eazy-E release Young from his contract and, using Dr. Dre as his flagship artist, founded Death Row Records. In 1992, Young released his first single, the title track to the film &quot;Deep Cover&quot;, a collaboration with rapper Snoop Dogg, whom he met through Warren G. Dr. Dre&#x27;s debut solo album was &quot;The Chronic&quot;, released under Death Row Records with Suge Knight as executive producer. Young ushered in a new style of rap, both in terms of musical style and lyrical content, including introducing a number of artists to the industry including Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, Daz Dillinger, RBX, the Lady of Rage, Nate Dogg and Jewell.
On the strength of singles such as &quot;Nuthin&#x27; but a &#x27;G&#x27; Thang&quot;, &quot;Let Me Ride&quot;, and &quot;Fuck wit Dre Day (and Everybody&#x27;s Celebratin&#x27;)&quot; (known as &quot;Dre Day&quot; for radio and television play), all of which featured Snoop Dogg as guest vocalist, &quot;The Chronic&quot; became a cultural phenomenon, its G-funk sound dominating much of hip-hop music for the early 1990s. In 1993, the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) certified the album triple platinum, and Dr. Dre also won the Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance for his performance on &quot;Let Me Ride&quot;. For that year, &quot;Billboard&quot; magazine also ranked Dr. Dre as the eighth-best-selling musical artist, &quot;The Chronic&quot; as the sixth-best-selling album, and &quot;Nuthin&#x27; but a &#x27;G&#x27; Thang&quot; as the 11th-best-selling single.
Besides working on his own material, Dr. Dre produced Snoop Dogg&#x27;s debut album &quot;Doggystyle&quot;, which became the first debut album for an artist to enter the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album charts at number one. In 1994 Dr. Dre produced some songs on the soundtracks to the films &quot;Above the Rim&quot; and &quot;Murder Was the Case&quot;. He collaborated with fellow N.W.A member Ice Cube for the song &quot;Natural Born Killaz&quot; in 1995. For the film &quot;Friday&quot;, Dre recorded &quot;Keep Their Heads Ringin&#x27;&quot;, which reached number ten on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and number 1 on the Hot Rap Singles (now Hot Rap Tracks) charts.

In 1995, Death Row Records signed rapper 2Pac, and began to position him as their major star: he collaborated with Dr. Dre on the commercially successful single &quot;California Love&quot;, which became both artists&#x27; first song to top the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. However, in March 1996 Young left the label amidst a contract dispute and growing concerns that label boss Suge Knight was corrupt, financially dishonest and out of control. Later that year, he formed his own label, Aftermath Entertainment, under the distribution label for Death Row Records, Interscope Records. Subsequently, Death Row Records suffered poor sales by 1997, especially following the death of 2Pac and the racketeering charges brought against Knight.

Dr. Dre also appeared on the single &quot;No Diggity&quot; by R&amp;B group Blackstreet in 1996: it too was a sales success, topping the Hot 100 for four consecutive weeks, and later won the award for Best R&amp;B Vocal by a Duo or Group at the 1997 Grammy Awards. After hearing it for the first time, several of Dr. Dre&#x27;s former Death Row colleagues, including 2Pac, recorded and attempted to release a song titled &quot;Toss It Up&quot;, containing numerous insults aimed at Dr. Dre and using a deliberately similar instrumental to &quot;No Diggity&quot;, but were forced to replace the production after Blackstreet sent the label a cease and desist letter stopping them from distributing the song.

===1996–2000: Move to Aftermath Entertainment and &quot;2001&quot;===

The &quot;Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath&quot; album, released on November 26, 1996, featured songs by Dr. Dre himself, as well as by newly signed Aftermath Entertainment artists, and a solo track &quot;Been There, Done That&quot;, intended as a symbolic farewell to gangsta rap. Despite being certified platinum by the RIAA, the album was not very popular among music fans. In October 1996, Dre performed &quot;Been There, Done That&quot; on &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. In 1997, Dr. Dre produced several tracks on the Firm&#x27;s &quot;The Album&quot;; it was met with largely negative reviews from critics. Rumors began to abound that Aftermath was facing financial difficulties. Aftermath Entertainment also faced a trademark infringement lawsuit by the underground thrash metal band Aftermath.

&quot;First Round Knock Out&quot;, a compilation of various tracks produced and performed by Dr. Dre, was also released in 1996, with material ranging from World Class Wreckin&#x27; Cru to N.W.A to Death Row recordings. Dr. Dre chose to take no part in the ongoing East Coast–West Coast hip-hop rivalry of the time, instead producing for, and appearing on, several New York artists&#x27; releases, such as Nas&#x27; &quot;Nas Is Coming&quot;, LL Cool J&#x27;s &quot;Zoom&quot; and Jay-Z&#x27;s &quot;Watch Me&quot;.

The turning point for Aftermath came in 1998, when Dre&#x27;s close friend, Jimmy Iovine, the co-founder of Interscope Records (parent label for Aftermath), suggested that Dr. Dre sign Eminem, a white rapper from Detroit. Dre produced three songs and provided vocals for two on Eminem&#x27;s successful and controversial debut album &quot;The Slim Shady LP&quot;, released in 1999. The Dr. Dre-produced lead single from that album, &quot;My Name Is&quot;, brought Eminem to public attention for the first time, and the success of &quot;The Slim Shady LP&quot; – it reached number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and received general acclaim from critics – revived the label&#x27;s commercial ambitions and viability.

Dr. Dre&#x27;s second solo album, &quot;2001&quot;, released on November 16, 1999, was considered an ostentatious return to his gangsta rap roots. It was initially titled &quot;The Chronic 2000&quot; to imply being a sequel to his debut solo effort &quot;The Chronic&quot; but was re-titled &quot;2001&quot; after Death Row Records released an unrelated compilation album with the title &quot;Suge Knight Represents: Chronic 2000&quot; in May 1999. Other tentative titles included &quot;The Chronic 2001&quot; and &quot;Dr. Dre&quot;.

The album featured numerous collaborators, including Devin the Dude, Snoop Dogg, Kurupt, Xzibit, Nate Dogg, Eminem, Knoc-turn&#x27;al, King T, Defari, Kokane, Mary J. Blige and new protégé Hittman, as well as co-production between Dre and new Aftermath producer Mel-Man. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of the website AllMusic described the sound of the album as &quot;adding ominous strings, soulful vocals, and reggae&quot; to Dr. Dre&#x27;s style. The album was highly successful, charting at number two on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 charts and has since been certified six times platinum, validating a recurring theme on the album: Dr. Dre was still a force to be reckoned with, despite the lack of major releases in the previous few years. The album included popular hit singles &quot;Still D.R.E.&quot; and &quot;Forgot About Dre&quot;, both of which Dr. Dre performed on NBC&#x27;s &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; on October 23, 1999. Dr. Dre won the Grammy Award for Producer of the Year, Non-Classical in 2000, and joined the Up in Smoke Tour with fellow rappers Eminem, Snoop Dogg, and Ice Cube that year as well.

===2000–2010: Focus on production and &quot;Detox&quot;===

Following the success of &quot;2001&quot;, Dr. Dre focused on producing songs and albums for other artists. He co-produced six tracks on Eminem&#x27;s landmark &quot;Marshall Mathers LP&quot;, including the Grammy-winning lead single, &quot;The Real Slim Shady&quot;. The album itself earned a Grammy and proved to be the fastest-selling rap album of all time, moving 1.76 million units in its first week alone. He produced the single &quot;Family Affair&quot; by R&amp;B singer Mary J. Blige for her album &quot;No More Drama&quot; in 2001. He also produced &quot;Let Me Blow Ya Mind&quot;, a duet by rapper Eve and No Doubt lead singer Gwen Stefani and signed R&amp;B singer Truth Hurts to Aftermath in 2001.

Dr. Dre produced and rapped on singer and Interscope labelmate Bilal&#x27;s 2001 single &quot;Fast Lane&quot;, which barely missed the Top 40 of the R&amp;B charts. He later assisted in the production of Bilal&#x27;s second album, &quot;Love for Sale&quot;, which Interscope controversially shelved because of its creative direction. Dr. Dre was the executive producer of Eminem&#x27;s 2002 release, &quot;The Eminem Show&quot;. He produced three songs on the album, one of which was released as a single, and he appeared in the video for &quot;Without Me&quot;. He also produced the D.O.C.&#x27;s 2003 album &quot;Deuce&quot;, where he made a guest appearance on the tracks &quot;Psychic Pymp Hotline&quot;, &quot;Gorilla Pympin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Judgment Day&quot;.

In 2002, Dr. Dre signed rapper 50 Cent to Aftermath in a joint venture between Interscope and Eminem&#x27;s Shady Records. Dr. Dre served as executive producer for 50 Cent&#x27;s commercially successful February 2003 debut studio album &quot;Get Rich or Die Tryin&#x27;&quot;. Dr. Dre produced or co-produced four tracks on the album, including the hit single &quot;In da Club&quot;. Eminem&#x27;s fourth album since joining Aftermath, &quot;Encore&quot;, again saw Dre taking on the role of executive producer, and this time he was more actively involved in the music, producing or co-producing a total of eight tracks, including three singles.

Dr. Dre also produced &quot;How We Do&quot;, a 2005 hit single from rapper the Game from his album &quot;The Documentary&quot;, as well as tracks on 50 Cent&#x27;s successful second album &quot;The Massacre&quot;. For an issue of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine in April 2005, Dr. Dre was ranked 54th out of 100 artists for &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine&#x27;s list &quot;The Immortals: The Greatest Artists of All Time&quot;. Kanye West wrote the summary for Dr. Dre, where he stated Dr. Dre&#x27;s song &quot;Xxplosive&quot; as where he &quot;got (his) whole sound from&quot;.

In November 2006, Dr. Dre began working with Raekwon on his album &quot;Only Built 4 Cuban Linx II&quot;. He also produced tracks for the rap albums &quot;Buck the World&quot; by Young Buck, &quot;Curtis&quot; by 50 Cent, &quot;Tha Blue Carpet Treatment&quot; by Snoop Dogg, and &quot;Kingdom Come&quot; by Jay-Z. Dre also appeared on Timbaland&#x27;s track &quot;Bounce&quot;, from his 2007 solo album, &quot;Timbaland Presents Shock Value&quot; alongside, Missy Elliott, and Justin Timberlake. During this period, the D.O.C. stated that Dre had been working with him on his fourth album &quot;Voices through Hot Vessels&quot;, which he planned to release after &quot;Detox&quot; arrived.

Planned but unreleased albums during Dr. Dre&#x27;s tenure at Aftermath have included a full-length reunion with Snoop Dogg titled &quot;Breakup to Makeup&quot;, an album with fellow former N.W.A member Ice Cube which was to be titled &quot;Heltah Skeltah&quot;, an N.W.A reunion album, and a joint album with fellow producer Timbaland titled &quot;Chairmen of the Board&quot;.

In 2007, Dr. Dre&#x27;s third studio album, formerly known as &quot;Detox&quot;, was slated to be his final studio album. Work for the upcoming album dates back to 2001, where its first version was called &quot;the most advanced rap album ever&quot;, by producer Scott Storch. Later that same year, he decided to stop working on the album to focus on producing for other artists, but then changed his mind; the album had initially been set for a fall 2005 release. Producers confirmed to work on the album include DJ Khalil, Nottz, Bernard &quot;Focus&quot; Edwards Jr., Hi-Tek, J.R. Rotem, RZA, and Jay-Z. Snoop Dogg claimed that &quot;Detox&quot; was finished, according to a June 2008 report by &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine.

After another delay based on producing other artists&#x27; work, &quot;Detox&quot; was then scheduled for a 2010 release, coming after 50 Cent&#x27;s &quot;Before I Self Destruct&quot; and Eminem&#x27;s &quot;Relapse&quot;, an album for which Dr. Dre handled the bulk of production duties. In a Dr Pepper commercial that debuted on May 28, 2009, he premiered the first official snippet of &quot;Detox&quot;. 50 Cent and Eminem asserted in a 2009 interview on BET&#x27;s &quot;106 &amp; Park&quot; that Dr. Dre had around a dozen songs finished for &quot;Detox&quot;.

On December 15, 2008, Dre appeared in the remix of the song &quot;Set It Off&quot; by Canadian rapper Kardinal Offishall (also with Pusha T); the remix debuted on DJ Skee&#x27;s radio show. At the beginning of 2009, Dre produced, and made a guest vocal performance on, the single &quot;Crack a Bottle&quot; by Eminem and the single sold a record 418,000 downloads in its first week and reached the top of the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart on the week of February 12, 2009. Along with this single, in 2009 Dr. Dre produced or co-produced 19 of 20 tracks on Eminem&#x27;s album &quot;Relapse&quot;. These included other hit singles &quot;We Made You&quot;, &quot;Old Time&#x27;s Sake&quot;, and &quot;3 a.m.&quot; (The only track Dre did not produce was the Eminem-produced single &quot;Beautiful&quot;.).

On April 20, 2010, &quot;Under Pressure&quot;, featuring Jay-Z and co-produced with Scott Storch, was confirmed by Jimmy Iovine and Dr. Dre during an interview at Fenway Park as the album&#x27;s first single. The song leaked prior to its intended release in an unmixed, unmastered form without a chorus on June 16, 2010; however, critical reaction to the song was lukewarm, and Dr. Dre later announced in an interview that the song, along with any other previously leaked tracks from &quot;Detox&quot;″s recording process, would not appear on the final version of the album.

Two genuine singles – &quot;Kush&quot;, a collaboration with Snoop Dogg and fellow rapper Akon, and &quot;I Need a Doctor&quot; with Eminem and singer Skylar Grey – were released in the United States during November 2010 and February 2011 respectively: the latter achieved international chart success, reaching number four on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and later being certified double platinum by the RIAA and the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA). On June 25, 2010, the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers honored Dr. Dre with its Founders Award for inspiring other musicians.

===2010–2020: &quot;The Planets&quot;, hiatus, Coachella, and &quot;Compton&quot;===

In an August 2010 interview, Dr. Dre stated that an instrumental album, &quot;The Planets&quot;, was in its first stages of production; each song being named after a planet in the Solar System. On September 3, Dr. Dre showed support to longtime protégé Eminem, and appeared on his and Jay-Z&#x27;s Home &amp; Home Tour, performing hit songs such as &quot;Still D.R.E.&quot;, &quot;Nuthin&#x27; but a &#x27;G&#x27; Thang&quot;, and &quot;Crack a Bottle&quot;, alongside Eminem and another protégé, 50 Cent. Sporting an &quot;R.I.P. Proof&quot; shirt, Dre was honored by Eminem telling Detroit&#x27;s Comerica Park to do the same. They did so, by chanting &quot;DEEE-TOX&quot;, to which he replied, &quot;I&#x27;m coming!&quot;

On November 14, 2011, Dre announced that he would be taking a break from music after he finished producing for artists Slim the Mobster and Kendrick Lamar. In this break, he stated that he would &quot;work on bringing his Beats By Dre to a standard as high as Apple&quot; and would also spend time with his family. On January 9, 2012, Dre headlined the final nights of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2012.

In June 2014, Marsha Ambrosius stated that she had been working on Detox, but added that the album would be known under another title . In September 2014, Aftermath in-house producer Dawaun Parker confirmed the title change and stated that over 300 beats had been created for the album over the years, but few of them have had vocals recorded over them.

The length of time that &quot;Detox&quot; had been recorded for, as well as the limited amount of material that had been officially released or leaked from the recording sessions, had given it considerable notoriety within the music industry. Numerous release dates (including the ones mentioned above) had been given for the album over the years since it was first announced, although none of them transpired to be genuine. Several musicians closely affiliated with Dr. Dre, including Snoop Dogg, fellow rappers 50 Cent, the Game and producer DJ Quik, had speculated in interviews that the album will never be released, due to Dr. Dre&#x27;s business and entrepreneurial ventures having interfered with recording work, as well as causing him to lose motivation to record new material.

On August 1, 2015, Dre announced that he would release what would be his final album, titled &quot;Compton&quot;. It is inspired by the N.W.A biopic, &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot;, and is a compilation-style album, featuring a number of frequent collaborators, including Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Kendrick Lamar, Xzibit and the Game, among others. It was initially released on Apple Music on August 7, with a retail version releasing on August 21. In an interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, he revealed that he had about 20 to 40 tracks for &quot;Detox&quot; but he did not release it because it did not meet his standards. Dre also revealed that he suffers from social anxiety and due to this, remains secluded and out of attention.

On February 12, 2016, it was revealed that Apple would create its first original scripted television series for its then-upcoming Apple TV+ streaming service. Titled &quot;Vital Signs&quot;, it was set to reflect Dre&#x27;s life. He was also an executive producer on the show before the show&#x27;s cancellation sometime in September 2018, due to its graphic depictions of drugs, gun violence and sex. In October 2016, Sean Combs brought out Dr. Dre, Snoop Dogg and others on his Bad Boy reunion tour.

In 2018, he produced four songs on &quot;Oxnard&quot; by Anderson .Paak. He was the executive producer on the album, as so its follow-up, 2019&#x27;s &quot;Ventura&quot;.

===2020–2023: return to production and Super Bowl halftime show ===
Dr. Dre was the executive producer of Eminem&#x27;s 2020 release, &quot;Music to Be Murdered By&quot;. He produced four songs on the album. He also produced two songs on the deluxe edition of the album, &quot;Side B&quot;, and appeared on the song, &quot;Gunz Blazing&quot;. On September 30, 2021, it was revealed that Dre would perform at the Super Bowl LVI halftime show alongside Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Mary J. Blige, and Kendrick Lamar. 
In December 2021, an update for the video game, &quot;Grand Theft Auto Online&quot;, predominantly featured Dre and added some of his previously unreleased tracks which was released as an EP, &quot;The Contract&quot;, on February 3, 2022. Around this time, Dre announced he was collaborating with Marsha Ambrosius on &quot;Casablanco&quot;, and with Mary J. Blige on an upcoming album. Later that year, Snoop Dogg announced that he and Dr. Dre are in the process of recording their new album, &quot;Missionary&quot;. Snoop said the album will be released via Death Row and Aftermath.

On February 13, 2022, Dr. Dre performed at the Super Bowl LVI halftime show alongside Eminem, Snoop Dogg, Kendrick Lamar, and Mary J. Blige, with surprise appearances from 50 Cent and Anderson .Paak. The performance was met with critical acclaim and is the first Super Bowl halftime show to win the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live). The show also won the Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Production Design for a Variety Special and Outstanding Music Direction. The same year, he produced numerous songs including &quot;The King and I&quot;, a collaboration between Eminem and CeeLo Green for the 2022 biopic, &quot;Elvis,&quot; and a remix of Kanye West&#x27;s song &quot;Use This Gospel&quot; for DJ Khaled&#x27;s album &quot;God Did,&quot; the latter of whom was originally intended for Kanye West and Dr. Dre&#x27;s joint gospel album, &quot;Jesus Is King Part II&quot;, which remains unreleased, even though it surfaced online in leaks around September 2023.

In September 2022, it was reported that Dr. Dre will compose the original score for the upcoming animated series, &quot;Death for Hire: The Origin of Tehk City&quot;. The show is created by Ice-T and Arabian Prince; based on the graphic novel of the same title, it features the voice talent of Ice-T, his wife Coco Austin, Snoop Dogg, Busta Rhymes, and Treach among others.

In February 2023, Dre and Marsha Ambrosius held a listening party for the &quot;Casablanco&quot; album in Los Angeles. The album was released on June 28, 2024, through Aftermath Entertainment and received critical acclaim.

===2024–present: &quot;Missionary&quot;, Collaboration with Snoop Dogg ===

In February 2024, Snoop launched a range of pre-mixed cocktails with Dr. Dre named after their hit single, Gin and Juice. Flavours include Apricot, Citrus, Melon and Passionfruit. A short prohibition themed trailer was created to support the release.

He also produced two songs on Eminem&#x27;s 12th studio album &quot;The Death of Slim Shady (Coup de Grâce)&quot; released on July 12, 2024&quot;,&quot; namely &quot;Lucifer and Road Rage.&quot; The album received generally mixed reviews from music critics.

Later in 2024, Snoop Dogg announced a new album coming out called &quot;Missionary&quot;, entirely produced by Dr. Dre, serving as a spiritual sequel to Snoop Dogg&#x27;s first album &quot;Doggystyle&quot;, which was also produced by Dr. Dre. The album&#x27;s first single &quot;Gorgeous&quot; was released on November 1, 2024, followed by the album&#x27;s release on December 13, 2024, via Death Row/Aftermath and Interscope, while the latter label serving as its new signee. The album features guest appearances from Eminem, Dr. Dre, 50 Cent, Method Man, and Sting, and received generally favorable reviews with praise directed towards Snoop&#x27;s lyrics and Dr. Dre&#x27;s production.

==Other ventures==
===Film appearances===
Dr. Dre made his first on screen appearance as a weapons dealer in the 1996 bank robbery movie &quot;Set It Off&quot;. In 2001, Dr. Dre also appeared in the movies &quot;The Wash&quot; and &quot;Training Day&quot;. A song of his, &quot;Bad Intentions&quot; (featuring Knoc-Turn&#x27;Al and produced by Mahogany), was featured on &quot;The Wash&quot; soundtrack. Dr. Dre also appeared on two other songs &quot;On the Blvd.&quot; and &quot;The Wash&quot; along with his co-star Snoop Dogg. 

===Crucial Films===

In February 2007, it was announced that Dr. Dre would produce dark comedies and horror films for New Line Cinema-owned company Crucial Films, along with longtime video director Phillip Atwell. Dr. Dre announced &quot;This is a natural switch for me, since I&#x27;ve directed a lot of music videos, and I eventually want to get into directing.&quot; Along with fellow member Ice Cube, Dr. Dre produced &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot; (2015), a biographical film about N.W.A.

===Entrepreneurship===

==== Beats Electronics ====

In 2006, Dre co-founded Beats Electronics with his partner, Jimmy Iovine. Its first brand of headphones were launched in July 2008. The line consisted of Beats Studio, a circumaural headphone; Beats Tour, an in-ear headphone; Beats Solo &amp; Solo HD, a supra-aural headphone; Beats Spin; Heartbeats by Lady Gaga, also an in-ear headphone; and Diddy Beats. In late 2009, Hewlett-Packard participated in a deal to bundle Beats By Dr. Dre with some HP laptops and headsets. HP and Dr. Dre announced the deal on October 9, 2009, at a press event. An exclusive laptop, known as the HP ENVY 15 Beats limited edition, was released for sale October 22. In January 2014, Beats Music was introduced and launched as a streaming service. Then, in May, technology giant Apple purchased the Beats brand for $3.4 billion. The deal made Dr. Dre the &quot;richest man in hip-hop&quot;. Dr. Dre became an Apple employee in an executive role, and worked with Apple for years. As of 2022, it was found that Apple had subtracted $200 million from the deal after entertainer Tyrese Gibson revealed the news of the acquisition on social media a month before it was completed without the company&#x27;s permission.

===Philanthropy===
During May 2013, Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine donated a $70-million endowment to the University of Southern California to create the USC Jimmy Iovine and Andre Young Academy for Arts, Technology and the Business of Innovation. The goal of the academy has been stated as &quot;to shape the future by nurturing the talents, passions, leadership and risk-taking of uniquely qualified students who are motivated to explore and create new art forms, technologies, and business models.&quot; The first class of the academy began in September 2014.

In June 2017, it was announced that Dr. Dre had committed $10 million to the construction of a performing arts center for the new Compton High School. The center will encompass creative resources and a 1,200-seat theater, and is expected to break ground in 2020. The project is a partnership between Dr. Dre and the Compton Unified School District.

===Commercial endorsements===
In 2002 and 2003, Dr. Dre appeared in TV commercials for Coors Light beer.

Beginning in 2009, Dr. Dre appeared in TV commercials that also featured his Beats Electronics product line. A 2009 commercial for the Dr Pepper soft drink had Dr. Dre DJing with Beats headphones and playing a brief snippet off the never-released &quot;Detox&quot; album. In 2010, Dr. Dre had a cameo in a commercial for HP laptops that featured a plug for Beats Audio. Then in 2011, the Chrysler 300S &quot;Imported from Detroit&quot; ad campaign had a commercial narrated by Dr. Dre and including a plug for Beats Audio.

===Dr. Dre started Burning Man rumors===
An urban legend surfaced in 2011 when a Tumblr blog titled Dr. Dre Started Burning Man began promulgating the notion that the producer, rapper and entrepreneur had discovered Burning Man in 1995 during a music video shoot and offered to cover the cost of the event&#x27;s permit from the Nevada Bureau of Land Management under an agreement with the festival&#x27;s organizers that he could institute an entrance fee system, which had not existed before his participation. This claim was supported by an alleged letter from Dre to Nicole Threatt Young that indicated that Dre had shared his experience witnessing the Burning Man festival with her.

&quot;Business Insider&quot; mentions the portion of the letter where Dr. Dre purportedly states &quot;someone should get behind this ... and make some money off these fools&quot; and compares Dr. Dre&#x27;s potential entrepreneurial engagement with Burning Man as a parallel to Steve Jobs&#x27;s efforts to centralize and profit from the otherwise unorganized online music industry. According to &quot;Salon&quot;, Dr. Dre&#x27;s ethos seems to be aligned with seven of the ten principles of the Burning Man community: &quot;radical self-reliance, radical self-expression, communal effort, civic responsibility, leaving no trace, participation and immediacy.&quot;

==Musical influences and style==
===Production style===

Dre is noted for his evolving production style, while always keeping in touch with his early musical sound and re-shaping elements from previous work. At the beginning of his career as a producer for the World Class Wreckin Cru with DJ Alonzo Williams in the mid-1980s, his music was in the electro-hop style pioneered by the Unknown DJ, and that of early hip-hop groups like the Beastie Boys and Whodini.

From &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot; on, Dre uses live musicians to replay old melodies rather than sampling them. With Ruthless Records, collaborators included guitarist Mike &quot;Crazy Neck&quot; Sims, multi-instrumentalist Colin Wolfe, DJ Yella and sound engineer Donovan &quot;The Dirt Biker&quot; Sound. Dre is receptive of new ideas from other producers, one example being his fruitful collaboration with Above the Law&#x27;s producer Cold 187um while at Ruthless. Cold 187 um was at the time experimenting with 1970s P-Funk samples (Parliament, Funkadelic, Bootsy Collins, George Clinton etc.), that Dre also used. Dre has since been accused of &quot;stealing&quot; the concept of G-funk from Cold 187 um.

Upon leaving Ruthless and forming Death Row Records in 1991, Dre called on veteran West Coast DJ Chris &quot;the Glove&quot; Taylor and sound engineer Greg &quot;Gregski&quot; Royal, along with Colin Wolfe, to help him on future projects. His 1992 album &quot;The Chronic&quot; is thought to be one of the most well-produced hip-hop albums of all time. Musical themes included hard-hitting synthesizer solos played by Wolfe, bass-heavy compositions, background female vocals and Dre fully embracing 1970s funk samples. Dre used a minimoog synth to replay the melody from Leon Haywood&#x27;s 1972 song &quot;I Wanna Do Somethin&#x27; Freaky to You&quot; for the Chronic&#x27;s first single &quot;Nuthin&#x27; but a &#x27;G&#x27; Thang&quot; which became a global hit. For his new protégé Snoop Doggy Dogg&#x27;s album &quot;Doggystyle&quot;, Dre collaborated with then 19-year-old producer Daz Dillinger, who received co-production credits on songs &quot;Serial Killa&quot; and &quot;For all My Niggaz &amp; Bitches&quot;, The Dramatics bass player Tony &quot;T. Money&quot; Green, guitarist Ricky Rouse, keyboardists Emanuel &quot;Porkchop&quot; Dean and Sean &quot;Barney Rubble&quot; Thomas and engineer Tommy Daugherty, as well as Warren G and Sam Sneed, who are credited with bringing several samples to the studio.

The influence of &quot;The Chronic&quot; and &quot;Doggystyle&quot; on the popular music of the 1990s went not only far beyond the West Coast, but beyond hip-hop as a genre. Artists as diverse as Master P (&quot;Bout It, Bout It&quot;), George Michael (&quot;Fastlove&quot;), Mariah Carey (&quot;Fantasy&quot;), Adina Howard (&quot;Freak Like Me&quot;), Luis Miguel (&quot;Dame&quot;), and The Spice Girls (&quot;Say You&#x27;ll Be There&quot;) used G-funk instrumentation in their songs. Bad Boy Records producer Chucky Thompson stated in the April 2004 issue of &quot;XXL&quot; magazine that the sound of &quot;Doggystyle&quot; and &quot;The Chronic&quot; was the basis for the Notorious B.I.G.&#x27;s 1995 hit single &quot;Big Poppa&quot;:

In 1994, starting with the &quot;Murder was the Case&quot; soundtrack, Dre attempted to push the boundaries of G-funk further into a darker sound. In songs such as &quot;Murder was the Case&quot; and &quot;Natural Born Killaz&quot;, the synthesizer pitch is higher and the drum tempo is slowed down to 91 BPM (87 BPM in the remix) to create a dark and gritty atmosphere. Percussion instruments, particularly sleigh bells, are also present. Dre&#x27;s frequent collaborators from this period included Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania natives Stuart &quot;Stu-B-Doo&quot; Bullard, a multi-instrumentalist from the Ozanam Strings Orchestra, Sam Sneed, Stephen &quot;Bud&#x27;da&quot; Anderson, and percussionist Carl &quot;Butch&quot; Small. This style of production has been influential far beyond the West Coast. The beat for the Houston-based group Geto Boys 1996 song &quot;Still&quot; follows the same drum pattern as &quot;Natural Born Killaz&quot; and Eazy E&#x27;s &quot;Wut Would U Do&quot; (a diss to Dre) is similar to the original &quot;Murder was the Case&quot; instrumental. This style of production is usually accompanied by horror and occult-themed lyrics and imagery, being crucial to the creation of horrorcore.

By 1996, Dre was again looking to innovate his sound. He recruited keyboardist Camara Kambon to play the keys on &quot;Been There, Done That&quot;, and through Bud&#x27;da and Sam Sneed he was introduced to fellow Pittsburgh native Melvin &quot;Mel-Man&quot; Bradford. At this time, he also switched from using the E-mu SP-1200 to the Akai MPC3000 drum kit and sampler, which he still uses today. Beginning with his 1996 compilation Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath, Dre&#x27;s production has taken a less sample-based approach, with loud, layered snare drums dominating the mix, while synthesizers are still omnipresent. In his critically acclaimed second album, 2001, live instrumentation takes the place of sampling, a famous example being &quot;The Next Episode&quot;, in which keyboardist Camara Kambon re-played live the main melody from David McCallum&#x27;s 1967 jazz-funk work &quot;The Edge&quot;. For every song on &quot;2001&quot;, Dre had a keyboardist, guitarist and bassist create the basic parts of the beat, while he himself programmed the drums, did the sequencing and overdubbing and added sound effects, and later mixed the songs. During this period, Dre&#x27;s signature &quot;west coast whistle&quot; riffs are still present albeit in a lower pitch, as in &quot;Light Speed&quot;, &quot;Housewife&quot;, &quot;Some L.A. Niggaz&quot; and Eminem&#x27;s &quot;Guilty Conscience&quot; hook. The sound of &quot;2001&quot; had tremendous influence on hip-hop production, redefining the West Coast&#x27;s sound and expanding the G-funk of the early 1990s. To produce the album, Dre and Mel-Man relied on the talents of Scott Storch and Camara Kambon on the keys, Mike Elizondo and Colin Wolfe on bass guitar, Sean Cruse on lead guitar and sound engineers Richard &quot;Segal&quot; Huredia and Mauricio &quot;Veto&quot; Iragorri.

From the mid-2000s, Dr. Dre has taken on a more soulful production style, using more of a classical piano instead of a keyboard, and having claps replace snares, as evidenced in songs such as Snoop Dogg&#x27;s &quot;Imagine&quot; and &quot;Boss&#x27; Life&quot;, Busta Rhymes&#x27; &quot;Get You Some&quot; and &quot;Been Through the Storm&quot;, Stat Quo&#x27;s &quot;Get Low&quot; and &quot;The Way It Be&quot;, Jay-Z&#x27;s &quot;Lost One&quot;, Nas&#x27; &quot;Hustlers&quot;, and several beats on Eminem&#x27;s Relapse album. Soul and R&amp;B pianist Mark Batson, having previously worked with The Dave Matthews Band, Seal and Maroon 5 has been credited as the architect of this sound. Besides Batson, Aftermath producer and understudy of Dre&#x27;s, Dawaun Parker, who has named Q-Tip and J Dilla as his primary influences, is thought to be responsible for giving Dre&#x27;s newest beats an East Coast feel.

Despite an occasional hint of trap about the beats and an intriguingly warped use of autotune in his &quot;Compton&quot; song, &quot;Darkside/Gone&quot;, his production seems to stand slightly apart from current trends in hip-hop like Eminem&#x27;s song &quot;Little Engine&quot; with an ominous horrorcore beat — reminiscent of some of his works on Eminem&#x27;s album Relapse – or the West Coast joint Lock It Up.

===Production equipment===
Dr. Dre has said that his primary instrument in the studio is the Akai MPC3000, a drum machine and sampler, and that he often uses as many as four or five to produce a single recording. He cites 1970s funk musicians such as George Clinton, Isaac Hayes and Curtis Mayfield as his primary musical influences. Unlike most rap producers, he tries to avoid samples as much as possible, preferring to have studio musicians re-play pieces of music he wants to use, because it allows him more flexibility to change the pieces in rhythm and tempo. In 2001 he told &quot;Time&quot; magazine, &quot;I may hear something I like on an old record that may inspire me, but I&#x27;d rather use musicians to re-create the sound or elaborate on it. I can control it better.&quot;

Other equipment he uses includes the E-mu SP-1200 drum machine and other keyboards from such manufacturers as Korg, Rhodes, Wurlitzer, Moog, and Roland. Dr. Dre also stresses the importance of equalizing drums properly, telling &quot;Scratch&quot; in 2004 that he &quot;used the same drum sounds on a couple of different songs on one album before but you&#x27;d never be able to tell the difference because of the EQ&quot;. Dr. Dre also uses the digital audio workstation Pro Tools and uses the software to combine hardware drum machines and vintage analog keyboards and synthesizers.

After founding Aftermath Entertainment in 1996, Dr. Dre took on producer Mel-Man as a co-producer, and his music took on a more synthesizer-based sound, using fewer vocal samples (as he had used on &quot;Lil&#x27; Ghetto Boy&quot; and &quot;Let Me Ride&quot; on &quot;The Chronic&quot;, for example). Mel-Man has not shared co-production credits with Dr. Dre since approximately 2002, but fellow Aftermath producer Focus has credited Mel-Man as a key architect of the signature Aftermath sound.

In 1999, Dr. Dre started working with Mike Elizondo, a bassist, guitarist, and keyboardist who has also produced, written and played on records for female singers such as Poe, Fiona Apple and Alanis Morissette, In the past few years Elizondo has since worked for many of Dr. Dre&#x27;s productions. Dr. Dre also told &quot;Scratch&quot; magazine in a 2004 interview that he has been studying piano and music theory formally, and that a major goal is to accumulate enough musical theory to score movies. In the same interview he stated that he has collaborated with famed 1960s songwriter Burt Bacharach by sending him hip-hop beats to play over, and hopes to have an in-person collaboration with him in the future.

===Work ethic===
Dr. Dre has stated that he is a perfectionist and is known to pressure the artists with whom he records to give flawless performances. In 2006, Snoop Dogg told the website Dubcnn.com that Dr. Dre had made new artist Bishop Lamont re-record a single bar of vocals 107 times. Dr. Dre has also stated that Eminem is a fellow perfectionist, and attributes his success on Aftermath to his similar work ethic. He gives a lot of input into the delivery of the vocals and will stop an MC during a take if it is not to his liking. However, he gives MCs that he works with room to write lyrics without too much instruction unless it is a specifically conceptual record, as noted by Bishop Lamont in the book &quot;How to Rap&quot;.

A consequence of his perfectionism is that some artists who initially sign deals with Dr. Dre&#x27;s Aftermath label never release albums. In 2001, Aftermath released the soundtrack to the movie &quot;The Wash&quot;, featuring a number of Aftermath acts such as Shaunta, Daks, Joe Beast and Toi. To date, none have released full-length albums on Aftermath and have apparently ended their relationships with the label and Dr. Dre. Other noteworthy acts to leave Aftermath without releasing albums include King Tee, &quot;2001&quot; vocalist Hittman, Joell Ortiz, Raekwon and Rakim.

===Collaborators and co-producers===

Over the years, word of other collaborators who have contributed to Dr. Dre&#x27;s work has surfaced. During his tenure at Death Row Records, it was alleged that Dr. Dre&#x27;s stepbrother Warren G and Tha Dogg Pound member Daz made many uncredited contributions to songs on his solo album &quot;The Chronic&quot; and Snoop Doggy Dogg&#x27;s album &quot;Doggystyle&quot; (Daz received production credits on Snoop&#x27;s similar-sounding, albeit less successful album &quot;Tha Doggfather&quot; after Young left Death Row Records).

It is known that Scott Storch, who has since gone on to become a successful producer in his own right, contributed to Dr. Dre&#x27;s second album &quot;2001&quot;; Storch is credited as a songwriter on several songs and played keyboards on several tracks. In 2006 he told &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;:

Current collaborator Mike Elizondo, when speaking about his work with Young, describes their recording process as a collaborative effort involving several musicians. In 2004 he claimed to &quot;Songwriter Universe&quot; magazine that he had written the foundations of the hit Eminem song &quot;The Real Slim Shady&quot;, stating, &quot;I initially played a bass line on the song, and Dr. Dre, Tommy Coster Jr. and I built the track from there. Eminem then heard the track, and he wrote the rap to it.&quot; This account is essentially confirmed by Eminem in his book &quot;Angry Blonde&quot;, stating that the tune for the song was composed by a studio bassist and keyboardist while Dr. Dre was out of the studio but Young later programmed the song&#x27;s beat after returning.

A group of disgruntled former associates of Dr. Dre complained that they had not received their full due for work on the label in the September 2003 issue of &quot;The Source&quot;. A producer named Neff-U claimed to have produced the songs &quot;Say What You Say&quot; and &quot;My Dad&#x27;s Gone Crazy&quot; on &quot;The Eminem Show&quot;, the songs &quot;If I Can&#x27;t&quot; and &quot;Back Down&quot; on 50 Cent&#x27;s &quot;Get Rich or Die Tryin&#x27;&quot;, and the beat featured on Dr. Dre&#x27;s commercial for Coors beer.

Although Young studies piano and music theory, he serves as more of a conductor than a musician himself, as Josh Tyrangiel of &quot;Time&quot; magazine has noted:

Although Snoop Dogg retains working relationships with Warren G and Daz, who are alleged to be uncredited contributors on the hit albums &quot;The Chronic&quot; and &quot;Doggystyle&quot;, he states that Dr. Dre is capable of making beats without the help of collaborators, and that he is responsible for the success of his numerous albums. Dr. Dre&#x27;s prominent studio collaborators, including Scott Storch, Elizondo, Mark Batson and Dawaun Parker, have shared co-writing, instrumental, and more recently co-production credits on the songs where he is credited as the producer.

Anderson .Paak also praised Dr. Dre in a 2016 interview with &quot;Music Times&quot;, telling the publication that it was a dream come true to work with Dre.

===Ghostwriters===
It is acknowledged that most of Dr. Dre&#x27;s raps are written for him by others, though he retains ultimate control over his lyrics and the themes of his songs. As Aftermath producer Mahogany told &quot;Scratch&quot;: &quot;It&#x27;s like a class room in [the booth]. He&#x27;ll have three writers in there. They&#x27;ll bring in something, he&#x27;ll recite it, then he&#x27;ll say, &#x27;Change this line, change this word,&#x27; like he&#x27;s grading papers.&quot;
As seen in the credits for tracks Young has appeared on, there are often multiple people who contribute to his songs (although often in hip-hop many people are officially credited as a writer for a song, even the producer).

In the book &quot;How to Rap&quot;, RBX explains that writing &quot;The Chronic&quot; was a &quot;team effort&quot; and details how he ghostwrote &quot;Let Me Ride&quot; for Dre. In regard to ghostwriting lyrics he says, &quot;Dre doesn&#x27;t profess to be no super-duper rap dude – Dre is a super-duper producer&quot;. As a member of N.W.A, the D.O.C. wrote lyrics for him while he stuck with producing. Jay-Z ghostwrote lyrics for the single &quot;Still D.R.E.&quot; from Dr. Dre&#x27;s album &quot;2001&quot;.

==Personal life==
On December 15, 1981, when Dre was 16 years old and his then-girlfriend Cassandra Joy Greene was 15 years old, the two had a son named Curtis, who was brought up by Greene and first met Dre 20 years later. Curtis performed as a rapper under the name Hood Surgeon.

 Dre and Lisa Johnson had a daughter named La Tanya Danielle Young. Dre and Johnson have three daughters together.

In 1988, Dre and Jenita Porter had a son named Andre Young Jr. In 1990, Porter sued Dre, seeking $5,000 of child support per month. On August 23, 2008, Andre died at the age of 20 from an overdose of heroin and morphine at his mother&#x27;s Woodland Hills home.

From 1987 to 1996, Dre dated singer Michel&#x27;le, who frequently contributed vocals to Ruthless Records and Death Row Records albums. In 1991, they had a son named Marcel.

In April 1992, after a verbal dispute with his engineer, Dre was consequently shot four times in his leg.

On May 25, 1996, Dre married Nicole (née Plotzker) Threatt, who was previously married to basketball player Sedale Threatt. They have two children together: a son named Truice (born 1997) and a daughter named Truly (born 2001).

In 2001, Dre earned a total of about US$52 million from selling part of his share of Aftermath Entertainment to Interscope Records and his production of such hit songs that year as &quot;Family Affair&quot; by Mary J. Blige. &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; magazine thus named him the second highest-paid artist of the year. Dr. Dre was ranked 44th in 2004 from earnings of $11.4 million, primarily from production royalties from such projects as albums from G-Unit and D12 and the single &quot;Rich Girl&quot; by singer Gwen Stefani and rapper Eve. &quot;Forbes&quot; estimated his net worth at US$270 million in 2012. The same publication later reported that he acquired US$110 million via his various endeavors in 2012, making him the highest–paid artist of the year. Income from the 2014 sale of Beats to Apple, contributing to what &quot;Forbes&quot; termed &quot;the biggest single-year payday of any musician in history&quot;, made Dr. Dre the world&#x27;s richest musical performer of 2015. He remains one of the wealthiest musical artists.

In 2014, Dre purchased a $40 million home in the Brentwood neighborhood of Los Angeles from its previous owners, NFL player Tom Brady and supermodel Gisele Bündchen.

It was reported that Dre suffered a brain aneurysm on January 5, 2021, and that he was admitted to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center&#x27;s ICU in Los Angeles, California. Hours after his admission to the hospital, Dre&#x27;s home was targeted for an attempted burglary. He eventually received support from LeBron James, Martin Lawrence, LL Cool J, Missy Elliott, Snoop Dogg, Eminem, Ice Cube, 50 Cent, Ellen DeGeneres, Ciara, her husband Russell Wilson, T.I., Quincy Jones and others. In February, he was released with a following message on Instagram: &quot;Thanks to my family, friends and fans for their interest and well wishes. I&#x27;m doing great and getting excellent care from my medical team. I will be out of the hospital and back home soon. Shout out to all the great medical professionals at Cedars. One Love!!&quot; In March 2024, Dre revealed that during his hospitalization following the brain aneurysm, he also suffered three strokes.

In December 2021, Dre finalized his divorce from Nicole Threatt for a reported sum of $100 million of his estate.

Dre is a fan of both the Los Angeles Rams of the NFL, and the Los Angeles Lakers of the NBA.

==Controversies and legal issues==
===Violence against women===
Dre has been accused of multiple incidents of violence against women.

On January 27, 1991, at a music industry party at the Po Na Na Souk club in Hollywood, Dr. Dre assaulted television host Dee Barnes of the Fox television program &quot;Pump it Up!&quot;, following an episode of the show. Barnes had interviewed NWA, which was followed by an interview with Ice Cube in which Cube mocked NWA. Barnes filed a $22.7 million lawsuit in response to the incident. Subsequently, Dr. Dre was fined $2,500, given two years&#x27; probation, ordered to undergo 240 hours of community service, and given a spot on an anti-violence public service announcement on television. The civil suit was settled out of court. Barnes stated that he &quot;began slamming her face and the right side of her body repeatedly against a wall near the stairway&quot;. Dr. Dre later commented: &quot;People talk all this shit, but you know, somebody fucks with me, I&#x27;m gonna fuck with them. I just did it, you know. Ain&#x27;t nothing you can do now by talking about it. Besides, it ain&#x27;t no big thing – I just threw her through a door.&quot;

In March 2015, Michel&#x27;le, the mother of one of Dre&#x27;s children, accused him of subjecting her to domestic violence during their time together as a couple, but did not initiate legal action. Their abusive relationship is portrayed in her 2016 biopic &quot;Surviving Compton: Dre, Suge &amp; Michel&#x27;le&quot;. Dre threatened a lawsuit against Lifetime, Sony Pictures and filmmakers of &quot;Surviving Compton&quot; in a cease and desist letter, but never ultimately took action.

Interviewed by Ben Westhoff for the book &quot;Original Gangstas: the Untold Story of Dr Dre, Eazy-E, Ice Cube, Tupac Shakur, and the Birth of West Coast Rap&quot;, Lisa Johnson stated that Dre beat her many times, including while she was pregnant. She was granted a restraining order against him.

Former labelmate Tairrie B claimed that Dre assaulted her at a post-Grammy party in 1990, in response to her track &quot;Ruthless Bitch&quot;.

During press for the 2015 film &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot;, questions about the portrayal and behavior of Dre and other prominent figures in the rap community about violence against women – and the question about its absence in the film – were raised. The discussion about the film led to Dre addressing his past behavior in the press. In August 2015, in an interview with &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, Dre lamented his abusive past, saying, &quot;I made some fucking horrible mistakes in my life. I was young, fucking stupid. I would say all the allegations aren&#x27;t true—some of them are. Those are some of the things that I would like to take back. It was really fucked up. But I paid for those mistakes, and there&#x27;s no way in hell that I will ever make another mistake like that again.&quot;

In a statement to &quot;The New York Times&quot; on August 21, 2015, exactly two weeks after his album, &quot;Compton&quot;, was released, Dre again addressed his abusive past, stating, &quot;25 years ago I was a young man drinking too much and in over my head with no real structure in my life. However, none of this is an excuse for what I did. I&#x27;ve been married for 19 years and every day I&#x27;m working to be a better man for my family, seeking guidance along the way. I&#x27;m doing everything I can so I never resemble that man again. ... I apologize to the women I&#x27;ve hurt. I deeply regret what I did and know that it has forever impacted all of our lives.&quot;

In the 2017 film &quot;The Defiant Ones&quot;, Dr. Dre explained about the Dee Barnes incident again, &quot;This was a very low point in my life. I&#x27;ve done a lot of stupid shit in my life. A lot of things I wish I could go and take back. I&#x27;ve experienced abuse. I&#x27;ve watched my mother get abused. So there&#x27;s absolutely no excuse for it. No woman should ever be treated that way. Any man that puts his hands on a female is a fucking idiot. He&#x27;s out of his fucking mind, and I was out of my fucking mind at the time. I fucked up, I paid for it, I&#x27;m sorry for it, and I apologize for it. I have this dark cloud that follows me, and it&#x27;s going to be attached to me forever. It&#x27;s a major blemish on who I am as a man.&quot;

=== Second divorce ===
Dre&#x27;s wife, Nicole Plotzker-Young, filed for divorce in June 2020, citing irreconcilable differences. In November 2020, she filed legal claims that Dre engaged in verbal violence and infidelity during their marriage. She also stated that he tore up their prenuptial agreement that he wanted her to sign out of anger. Dre&#x27;s representative responded, calling her claims of infidelity and violence in their marriage &quot;false&quot;.

Before being released from the Cedar-Sinai Medical Center, he was ordered to pay Plotzker-Young $2 million in temporary spousal support. Between the spring and summer of the year, Dre was ordered by the Los Angeles County judge to pay his ex-wife over $300,000 a month in spousal support. The $2 million extension request was also dismissed, due to insufficient claims.

In July 2021, Dr. Dre was ordered by the Los Angeles Superior Court Judge to pay an additional $293,306 a month to his estranged wife in spousal support starting August 1 until she decides to remarry or &quot;further order of the Court&quot;. Then, in August, the judge denied his wife&#x27;s request for a protective order, due to her being afraid of Dre after a snippet leaked on Instagram of him rapping about the divorce proceedings and his possible brain aneurysm earlier that February; in this snippet, he called his wife a &quot;greedy bitch&quot;.

In mid-October, Dr. Dre was served more divorce papers, during his grandmother&#x27;s funeral. That same month, Dre was officially deemed &quot;single&quot; by the judge. The financial owings in this case included expenses of Dre&#x27;s Malibu, Palisades and Hollywood Hills homes, but not his stock in past ownership of Beats Electronics, prior to its sale to Apple in 2014. In December 2021, the divorce proceedings entered their final stages. On December 28, the divorce was settled with Dre keeping most of his assets and income due to the prenuptial agreement, although he would have to pay a 9-figure settlement within one year.

In October 2024, Dr. Dre was hit with a $10 million lawsuit by a psychiatrist who had served as Dre&#x27;s marriage counselor during his marriage and divorce. The counselor alleged that Dre sent a &quot;barrage&quot; of threatening, harassing, and intimidatory messages, including homophobic rhetoric, to his counselor.

===Copyright lawsuits===
During the course of &quot;2001&quot;″s popularity, Dr. Dre was involved in several lawsuits. Lucasfilm Ltd., the film company behind the Star Wars film franchise, sued him over the use of the THX-trademarked &quot;Deep Note&quot;. The Fatback Band also sued Dr. Dre over alleged infringement regarding its song &quot;Backstrokin&#x27;&quot; in his song &quot;Let&#x27;s Get High&quot; from the &quot;2001&quot; album; Dr. Dre was ordered to pay $1.5 million to the band in 2003. French jazz musician Jacques Loussier sued Aftermath for $10 million in March 2002, claiming that the Dr. Dre-produced Eminem track &quot;Kill You&quot; plagiarized his composition &quot;Pulsion&quot;. The online music file-sharing company Napster also settled a lawsuit with him and metal band Metallica in mid-2001, agreeing to block access to certain files that artists do not want to have shared on the network.

Another copyright-related lawsuit hit Dr. Dre in the fall of 2002, when Sa Re Ga Ma, a film and music company based in Calcutta, India, sued Aftermath Entertainment over an uncredited sample of the Lata Mangeshkar song &quot;Thoda Resham Lagta Hai&quot; on the Aftermath-produced song &quot;Addictive&quot; by singer Truth Hurts. In February 2003, a judge ruled that Aftermath would have to halt sales of Truth Hurts&#x27; album &quot;Truthfully Speaking&quot; if the company would not credit Mangeshkar.

===Other===
On June 28, 1992, hours before midnight, a barbecue grill and an overfill of charcoal caused Dre&#x27;s Calabasas mansion to set on fire. Two firefighters were treated in the hospital for minor injuries. The fire caused over $125,000 in home damages.

Dre pleaded guilty in October 1992 in a case of battery of a police officer and was convicted on two additional battery counts stemming from a brawl in the lobby of the New Orleans hotel in May 1991.

In 1993, he was convicted of battery after an altercation with a man who stood outside the front porch of his Woodland Hills home in front of the musician&#x27;s girlfriend. He claimed that Dre broke his jaw as a result.

On January 10, 1994, Dre was arrested after leading police on a 90 mph pursuit through Beverly Hills in his 1987 Ferrari. It was revealed that Dr. Dre had a blood alcohol of 0.16, twice the state of California&#x27;s legal limit. The conviction violated the conditions of parole following Dre&#x27;s battery conviction in 1993; he pleaded no contest and was sentenced to eight months in prison in September 1994. He was ordered to pay a $1,053 fine and attend an alcohol education program.

In November 2004, at the &quot;Vibe&quot; magazine awards show in Los Angeles, Dr. Dre was attacked by a fan named Jimmy James Johnson, who was supposedly asking for an autograph. In the resulting scuffle, then-G-Unit rapper Young Buck stabbed the man. Johnson claimed that Suge Knight, president of Death Row Records, paid him $5,000 to assault Dre in order to humiliate him before he received his Lifetime Achievement Award. Knight immediately went on CBS&#x27;s &quot;The Late Late Show&quot; to deny involvement and insisted that he supported Dr. Dre and wanted Johnson charged. In September 2005, Johnson was sentenced to a year in prison and ordered to stay away from Dr. Dre until 2008.

On October 30, 2015, Ruthless co-founder Jerry Heller filed suit against Dre, Ice Cube, Eazy-E&#x27;s widow, Tomica Woods-Wright, director F. Gary Gray and Universal Pictures for defamation of character and copyright infringement over the biopic, &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot;. The lawsuit states that depictions of Heller in the film, portrayed by Paul Giamatti, were wrongfully taken from an autobiography he wrote about his involvement with Ruthless and N.W.A. The case was taken to court in June 2016 where a judge criticized the filing, saying that the film was &quot;approved to portray these facts in &quot;colorful and hyperbolic&quot; terms&quot;. On September 2, 2016, Jerry Heller died of a car accident, preceded by a heart attack. However, his lawsuit kept on through his legal team and members of his estate. In October 2018, the lawsuit was dropped, costing Heller&#x27;s estate $35 million for punitive and $75 million for compensatory damages.

On April 4, 2016, TMZ and the &quot;New York Daily News&quot; reported that Suge Knight had accused Dre and the Los Angeles Sheriff&#x27;s Department of a kill-for-hire plot in the 2014 shooting of Knight in club 1 OAK. Three months later, in July, Dre was reportedly detained by police after confronting a next-door neighbor in Malibu about a test drive. It was also alleged that he brandished a handgun on the neighbor, but no evidence would be linked and Dre was soon released.

On May 8, 2018, Dre lost a name trademark filing to a Pennsylvania gynecologist named Draion Burch, who previously filed a trademark petition in 2015 to use his nickname, Dr. Drai. Then, on June 26, Dre and Jimmy Iovine were ordered to pay $25 million to former partner and creative designer Steven Lamar, who sued the two co-founders for $100 million in unpaid royalties for designing the early Beats headphone models. The lawsuit was filed in 2015 after news broke out of Apple&#x27;s acquisition of the headphone brand a year prior.

In August 2021, Dr. Dre&#x27;s oldest daughter LaTanya Young spoke out about being homeless and unable to support her four children. She is currently working for UberEats and DoorDash, and she also works at warehouse jobs. She is living in debt in her SUV while her children are living with friends. Dr. Dre has allegedly stopped supporting LaTanya financially since January 2020 because she has &quot;spoken about him in the press&quot;.

==Discography==

Studio albums
* &quot;The Chronic&quot; (1992)
* &quot;2001&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Compton&quot; (2015)

EPs
* &quot;GTA Online: The Contract&quot; (2022)

Collaborative albums
* &quot;World Class&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Rapped in Romance&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Niggaz4Life&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Missionary&quot; (2024)

==Awards and nominations==
In March 2024, Dr. Dre received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 6840 Hollywood Boulevard.

===American Music Awards===

===BET Hip Hop Awards===
| 2014
| rowspan=&quot;3&quot;| Himself
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| Hustler of the Year
|-
| 2015
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| 2016
| Producer of the Year
|-
| &quot;Compton&quot;
| Album of the Year
|}

===Grammy Awards===
Dr. Dre has won eight Grammy Awards. Four of them are for his production work.
|align=center|1990
|&quot;We&#x27;re All in the Same Gang&quot;
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;| Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|1994
|&quot;Nuthin&#x27; but a &#x27;G&#x27; Thang&quot; 
|-
|&quot;Let Me Ride&quot;
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|Best Rap Solo Performance
|-
|align=center|1996
|&quot;Keep Their Heads Ringin&#x27;&quot;
|-
|align=center|1997
|&quot;California Love&quot; 
|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|1998
||&quot;No Diggity&quot; 
|Best R&amp;B Song
|-
| rowspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2000
|&quot;Still D.R.E.&quot; 
|rowspan=&quot;4&quot;|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
|&quot;Guilty Conscience&quot; 
|-
| rowspan=&quot;6&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2001
|&quot;Forgot About Dre&quot; 
|-
|&quot;The Next Episode&quot; 
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|&quot;The Marshall Mathers LP&quot; 
|Album of the Year
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|Best Rap Album 
|-
|&quot;2001&quot;
|-
|rowspan=&quot;3&quot;|Himself
|rowspan=&quot;3&quot;|Producer of the Year, Non-Classical
|-
|align=center|2002
|-
|rowspan=&quot;3&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2003
|-
|&quot;Knoc&quot; 
|Best Music Video, Short Form
|-
|&quot;The Eminem Show&quot; 
|Album of the Year
|-
|style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2004
|&quot;In da Club&quot; 
|Best Rap Song
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2006
|&quot;Love. Angel. Music. Baby.&quot; 
|Album of the Year
|-
|&quot;Encore&quot; 
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2010
|&quot;Crack a Bottle&quot; 
|-
|&quot;Relapse&quot; 
|Best Rap Album
|-
|style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2011
|&quot;Recovery&quot; 
|Album of the Year
|-
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2012
|rowspan=&quot;2&quot;|&quot;I Need a Doctor&quot; 
|Best Rap/Sung Collaboration
|-
|Best Rap Song
|-
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2014
|&quot;good kid, m.A.A.d city&quot; 
|Album of the Year
|-
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2016
|&quot;Compton&quot;
|Best Rap Album
|-
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2017
|&quot;Straight Outta Compton&quot;
| Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media
|-
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2020 
|&quot;Ventura&quot; 
|Best R&amp;B Album
|-
| style=&quot;text-align:center;&quot;|2024 
|Himself 
|Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award


===MTV Video Music Awards===
===Primetime Emmy Awards===
| 2022
| &quot;The Pepsi Super Bowl LVI Halftime Show&quot;
| Outstanding Variety Special (Live)
|}

==Filmography==


==Tours==
* The Chronic Tour (1993)
* Up in Smoke Tour (2000)

==References==
===Works cited===
* 
* 

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="0" end="18" title="Dr. Dre" label="Andre Romell Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="69" end="76" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="168" end="171" title="CEO" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q389284" start="175" end="198" title="Aftermath Entertainment" label="Aftermath Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961036" start="203" end="220" title="Beats Electronics" label="Beats Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q847018" start="240" end="257" title="Death Row Records" label="Death Row Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701447" start="299" end="328" title="World Class Wreckin&amp;#x27; Cru" label="World Class Wreckin&amp;#x27; Cru"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="368" end="379" title="gangsta rap" label="gangsta rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="386" end="391" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="434" end="441" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q429264" start="576" end="586" title="West Coast hip-hop" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045541" start="587" end="593" title="G-funk" label="G-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="636" end="647" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q749154" start="777" end="788" title="The Chronic" label="The Chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709112" start="884" end="926" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530738" start="949" end="960" title="Let Me Ride" label="Let Me Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933481" start="1018" end="1056" title="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang" label="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="1135" end="1145" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q753494" start="1171" end="1181" title="Doggystyle" label="Doggystyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319585" start="1236" end="1244" title="Warren G" label="Warren G"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414932" start="1288" end="1310" title="Regulate... G Funk Era" label="Regulate... G Funk Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q551154" start="1355" end="1368" title="Daz Dillinger" label="Daz Dillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q653828" start="1413" end="1422" title="Dogg Food" label="Dogg Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070141" start="1432" end="1446" title="Tha Dogg Pound" label="Tha Dogg Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q946516" start="1494" end="1501" title="Mel-Man" label="Mel-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q451821" start="1506" end="1518" title="Scott Storch" label="Scott Storch"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1638" end="1669" title="Dr. Dre Presents: The Aftermath" label="Dr. Dre Presents: The Aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="Q182280" start="1714" end="1718" title="2001 (Dr. Dre album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="1873" end="1879" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="1892" end="1899" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q189936" start="2020" end="2028" title="The Game (rapper)" label="the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="2030" end="2044" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810369" start="2046" end="2060" title="Anderson .Paak" label="Anderson .Paak"/>
<link wikidata="Q105813956" start="2062" end="2072" title="Silk Sonic" label="Silk Sonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185" start="2074" end="2086" title="Busta Rhymes" label="Busta Rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="2088" end="2091" title="Eve (rapper)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q364214" start="2097" end="2102" title="Rakim" label="Rakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2135" end="2147" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15692068" start="2160" end="2195" title="Producer of the Year, Non-Classical" label="Producer of the Year, Non-Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="2203" end="2216" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3833781" start="2259" end="2291" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 100 Greatest Artists of All Time" label="100 Greatest Artists of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q962544" start="2348" end="2358" title="Set It Off (film)" label="Set It Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579201" start="2372" end="2380" title="The Wash (2001 film)" label="The Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q308929" start="2398" end="2410" title="Training Day" label="Training Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733896" start="2509" end="2519" title="no contest" label="no contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249879" start="2554" end="2564" title="Dee Barnes" label="Dee Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="2605" end="2614" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931208" start="2683" end="2697" title="Michel&amp;#x27;le" label="Michel&amp;#x27;le"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="2713" end="2730" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="2803" end="2820" title="restraining order" label="restraining order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514059" start="2851" end="2860" title="Tairrie B" label="Tairrie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q20750718" start="2954" end="2973" title="Compton (album)" label="&amp;quot;Compton&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q487119" start="3057" end="3076" title="Compton, California" label="Compton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="3208" end="3215" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q275186" start="3502" end="3515" title="gang violence" label="gang violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q494690" start="3654" end="3660" title="Carson, California" label="Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="3662" end="3672" title="Long Beach" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687279" start="3682" end="3687" title="Watts, Los Angeles" label="Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q587064" start="3692" end="3705" title="South Los Angeles" label="South Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q319585" start="4014" end="4022" title="Warren G" label="Warren G"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527533" start="4059" end="4067" title="Sir Jinx" label="Sir Jinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059155" start="4082" end="4104" title="Centennial High School (Compton, California)" label="Centennial High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6224415" start="4169" end="4188" title="John C. Fremont High School" label="Fremont High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q587064" start="4192" end="4217" title="South Central Los Angeles" label="South Central Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q912979" start="4293" end="4318" title="Northrop Corporation" label="Northrop Aviation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q506900" start="4981" end="4998" title="Grandmaster Flash" label="Grandmaster Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409389" start="5010" end="5068" title="The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel" label="The Adventures of Grandmaster Flash on the Wheels of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209921" start="5292" end="5305" title="Julius Erving" label="Julius Erving"/>
<link wikidata="Q470609" start="5415" end="5423" title="DJ Yella" label="DJ Yella"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="5427" end="5432" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159060" start="5879" end="5893" title="Concrete Roots" label="Concrete Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="5908" end="5931" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="5935" end="5943" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701447" start="6179" end="6208" title="World Class Wreckin&amp;#x27; Cru" label="World Class Wreckin&amp;#x27; Cru"/>
<link wikidata="Q429264" start="6359" end="6377" title="West Coast hip-hop" label="West Coast hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6325955" start="6714" end="6718" title="KBLA" label="KDAY"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="6902" end="6910" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q575026" start="6957" end="6973" title="Ruthless Records" label="Ruthless Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q36804" start="7018" end="7024" title="Eazy-E" label="Eazy-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="7026" end="7031" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q309941" start="7061" end="7066" title="Ice-T" label="Ice-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="7331" end="7343" title="Public Enemy" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q892968" start="7347" end="7370" title="Boogie Down Productions" label="Boogie Down Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2533270" start="7507" end="7522" title="Fuck tha Police" label="Fuck tha Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q644326" start="7570" end="7592" title="Straight Outta Compton" label="Straight Outta Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="7710" end="7741" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q508644" start="7960" end="7971" title="Efil4zaggin" label="Efil4zaggin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935187" start="8097" end="8108" title="Eazy-Duz-It" label="Eazy-Duz-It"/>
<link wikidata="Q323178" start="8116" end="8129" title="Above the Law (group)" label="Above the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939825" start="8154" end="8179" title="Livin&amp;#x27; Like Hustlers" label="Livin&amp;#x27; Like Hustlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931208" start="8187" end="8201" title="Michel&amp;#x27;le" label="Michel&amp;#x27;le"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836233" start="8214" end="8231" title="Michel&amp;#x27;le (album)" label="self-titled debut"/>
<link wikidata="Q935714" start="8268" end="8291" title="No One Can Do It Better" label="No One Can Do It Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106062" start="8299" end="8307" title="J.J. Fad" label="J.J. Fad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644157" start="8332" end="8342" title="Supersonic (J. J. Fad album)" label="Supersonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201642" start="8372" end="8379" title="Jimmy Z" label="Jimmy Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201642" start="8404" end="8419" title="Muzical Madness" label="Muzical Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q455880" start="8667" end="8678" title="Suge Knight" label="Suge Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q847018" start="8834" end="8851" title="Death Row Records" label="Death Row Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q935103" start="8899" end="8910" title="Deep Cover (song)" label="title track"/>
<link wikidata="Q662779" start="8929" end="8939" title="Deep Cover" label="Deep Cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="8975" end="8985" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q749154" start="9059" end="9070" title="The Chronic" label="The Chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q448930" start="9320" end="9326" title="Kurupt" label="Kurupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q551154" start="9328" end="9341" title="Daz Dillinger" label="Daz Dillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041341" start="9343" end="9346" title="RBX" label="RBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q963740" start="9348" end="9364" title="the Lady of Rage" label="the Lady of Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q47159" start="9366" end="9375" title="Nate Dogg" label="Nate Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q538389" start="9380" end="9386" title="Jewell (singer)" label="Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933481" start="9429" end="9467" title="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang" label="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530738" start="9481" end="9492" title="Let Me Ride" label="Let Me Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530953" start="9510" end="9566" title="Fuck wit Dre Day (and Everybody&amp;#x27;s Celebratin&amp;#x27;)" label="Fuck wit Dre Day (and Everybody&amp;#x27;s Celebratin&amp;#x27;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045541" start="9745" end="9751" title="G-funk" label="G-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="9825" end="9866" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="Recording Industry Association of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709112" start="9936" end="9978" title="Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="10048" end="10057" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q753494" start="10371" end="10381" title="Doggystyle" label="Doggystyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="10451" end="10476" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128630" start="10579" end="10592" title="Above the Rim" label="Above the Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179389" start="10609" end="10628" title="Murder Was the Case" label="Murder Was the Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499682" start="10705" end="10724" title="Natural Born Killaz" label="Natural Born Killaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q673486" start="10759" end="10765" title="Friday (1995 film)" label="Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123552" start="10792" end="10821" title="Keep Their Heads Ringin&amp;#x27;" label="Keep Their Heads Ringin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107" start="10998" end="11002" title="2Pac" label="2Pac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990281" start="11124" end="11139" title="California Love" label="California Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q231694" start="11525" end="11543" title="Interscope Records" label="Interscope Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="11653" end="11665" title="racketeering" label="racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044110" start="11741" end="11751" title="No Diggity" label="No Diggity"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="11761" end="11768" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q222517" start="11775" end="11786" title="Blackstreet" label="Blackstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542308" start="11944" end="11962" title="1997 Grammy Awards" label="1997 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q653647" start="12126" end="12136" title="Toss It Up" label="Toss It Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="12339" end="12362" title="cease and desist letter" label="cease and desist letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764643" start="12487" end="12517" title="Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath" label="Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="Q389284" start="12624" end="12647" title="Aftermath Entertainment" label="Aftermath Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543041" start="12680" end="12701" title="Been There, Done That (Dr. Dre song)" label="Been There, Done That"/>
<link wikidata="Q753679" start="12744" end="12755" title="gangsta rap" label="gangsta rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="12926" end="12945" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765475" start="12997" end="13005" title="The Firm (hip hop group)" label="the Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965559" start="13019" end="13028" title="The Album (The Firm album)" label="The Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q98091506" start="13201" end="13223" title="trademark infringement" label="trademark infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453772" start="13287" end="13308" title="First Round Knock Out" label="First Round Knock Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277806" start="13546" end="13583" title="East Coast–West Coast hip-hop rivalry" label="East Coast–West Coast hip-hop rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q194220" start="13687" end="13690" title="Nas" label="Nas"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="13724" end="13733" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074139" start="13747" end="13751" title="Zoom (Dr. Dre song)" label="Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="13762" end="13767" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q718427" start="13874" end="13886" title="Jimmy Iovine" label="Jimmy Iovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="13983" end="13989" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="14011" end="14018" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q383459" start="14137" end="14154" title="The Slim Shady LP" label="The Slim Shady LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457851" start="14236" end="14246" title="My Name Is" label="My Name Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q182280" start="14561" end="14565" title="2001 (Dr. Dre album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14914" end="14950" title="Suge Knight Represents: Chronic 2000" label="Suge Knight Represents: Chronic 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206920" start="15110" end="15124" title="Devin the Dude" label="Devin the Dude"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="15126" end="15136" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q448930" start="15138" end="15144" title="Kurupt" label="Kurupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189078" start="15146" end="15152" title="Xzibit" label="Xzibit"/>
<link wikidata="Q47159" start="15154" end="15163" title="Nate Dogg" label="Nate Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="15165" end="15171" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422739" start="15173" end="15190" title="Knoc-turn&amp;#x27;al" label="Knoc-turn&amp;#x27;al"/>
<link wikidata="Q325718" start="15192" end="15198" title="King T" label="King T"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778919" start="15208" end="15214" title="Kokane" label="Kokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="15216" end="15229" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q946516" start="15319" end="15326" title="Mel-Man" label="Mel-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q976031" start="15328" end="15351" title="Stephen Thomas Erlewine" label="Stephen Thomas Erlewine"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="15367" end="15375" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q326426" start="15433" end="15440" title="strings (music)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="15462" end="15468" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="15563" end="15588" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q370983" start="15842" end="15854" title="Still D.R.E." label="Still D.R.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q2384402" start="15871" end="15887" title="Forgot About Dre" label="Forgot About Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="16010" end="16022" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15692068" start="16027" end="16062" title="Producer of the Year, Non-Classical" label="Producer of the Year, Non-Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q528272" start="16087" end="16103" title="Up in Smoke Tour" label="Up in Smoke Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q153607" start="16403" end="16422" title="Marshall Mathers LP" label="Marshall Mathers LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463257" start="16478" end="16497" title="The Real Slim Shady" label="The Real Slim Shady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129536" start="16678" end="16691" title="Family Affair (Mary J. Blige song)" label="Family Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="16716" end="16729" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q743469" start="16750" end="16763" title="No More Drama" label="No More Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452945" start="16802" end="16821" title="Let Me Blow Ya Mind" label="Let Me Blow Ya Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="16846" end="16849" title="Eve (entertainer)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="16854" end="16862" title="No Doubt" label="No Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="16875" end="16887" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q274096" start="16914" end="16925" title="Truth Hurts (singer)" label="Truth Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q860283" start="17012" end="17017" title="Bilal (American singer)" label="Bilal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436949" start="17043" end="17052" title="Fast Lane (Bilal song)" label="Fast Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148929" start="17084" end="17090" title="Top 40" label="Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691772" start="17186" end="17199" title="Love for Sale (Bilal album)" label="Love for Sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q155339" start="17355" end="17370" title="The Eminem Show" label="The Eminem Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q549433" start="17447" end="17453" title="Business (song)" label="single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479183" start="17494" end="17504" title="Without Me (Eminem song)" label="Without Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q952300" start="17564" end="17569" title="Deuce (The D.O.C. album)" label="Deuce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="17753" end="17760" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q756782" start="17964" end="17991" title="Get Rich or Die Tryin&amp;#x27;" label="Get Rich or Die Tryin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q673947" start="18088" end="18098" title="In da Club" label="In da Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q638412" start="18164" end="18170" title="Encore (Eminem album)" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2106210" start="18397" end="18406" title="How We Do (song)" label="How We Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q189936" start="18444" end="18452" title="The Game (rapper)" label="the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q652943" start="18474" end="18489" title="The Documentary" label="The Documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q839810" start="18563" end="18575" title="The Massacre" label="The Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="18804" end="18814" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q320167" start="19002" end="19009" title="Raekwon" label="Raekwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q613722" start="19029" end="19055" title="Only Built 4 Cuban Linx II" label="Only Built 4 Cuban Linx II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337462" start="19112" end="19126" title="Buck the World" label="Buck the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q311244" start="19136" end="19146" title="Young Buck" label="Young Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q826146" start="19154" end="19160" title="Curtis (50 Cent album)" label="Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q735959" start="19185" end="19210" title="Tha Blue Carpet Treatment" label="Tha Blue Carpet Treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471112" start="19242" end="19254" title="Kingdom Come (Jay-Z album)" label="Kingdom Come"/>
<link wikidata="Q179257" start="19292" end="19301" title="Timbaland" label="Timbaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q835777" start="19367" end="19397" title="Timbaland Presents Shock Value" label="Timbaland Presents Shock Value"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="19415" end="19428" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="19434" end="19451" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q179257" start="19974" end="19983" title="Timbaland" label="Timbaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q451821" start="20290" end="20302" title="Scott Storch" label="Scott Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q246929" start="20541" end="20550" title="DJ Khalil" label="DJ Khalil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110109" start="20552" end="20557" title="Nottz" label="Nottz"/>
<link wikidata="Q718856" start="20598" end="20604" title="Hi-Tek" label="Hi-Tek"/>
<link wikidata="Q716053" start="20606" end="20616" title="J.R. Rotem" label="J.R. Rotem"/>
<link wikidata="Q52447" start="20618" end="20621" title="RZA" label="RZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="20627" end="20632" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="20634" end="20644" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q791982" start="20918" end="20940" title="Before I Self Destruct" label="Before I Self Destruct"/>
<link wikidata="Q245353" start="20971" end="20978" title="Relapse (Eminem album)" label="Relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="21057" end="21066" title="Dr Pepper" label="Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="21221" end="21224" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284141" start="21238" end="21252" title="106 &amp;amp; Park" label="106 &amp;amp; Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q130052" start="21396" end="21406" title="Set It Off (Kardinal Offishall song)" label="Set It Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q371238" start="21432" end="21450" title="Kardinal Offishall" label="Kardinal Offishall"/>
<link wikidata="Q744772" start="21462" end="21469" title="Clipse" label="Pusha T"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700439" start="21493" end="21500" title="DJ Skee" label="DJ Skee"/>
<link wikidata="Q21095" start="21616" end="21630" title="Crack a Bottle" label="Crack a Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="21640" end="21646" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q245353" start="21918" end="21925" title="Relapse (Eminem album)" label="Relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278472" start="21972" end="21983" title="We Made You" label="We Made You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2318086" start="21997" end="22017" title="Old Time&amp;#x27;s Sake" label="Old Time&amp;#x27;s Sake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278938" start="22035" end="22041" title="3 a.m. (Eminem song)" label="3 a.m."/>
<link wikidata="Q2146230" start="22121" end="22130" title="Beautiful (Eminem song)" label="Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="22198" end="22203" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q451821" start="22225" end="22237" title="Scott Storch" label="Scott Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="22304" end="22315" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748696" start="22745" end="22749" title="Kush (song)" label="Kush"/>
<link wikidata="Q32849" start="22807" end="22811" title="Akon" label="Akon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576279" start="22823" end="22838" title="I Need a Doctor" label="I Need a Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q233750" start="22868" end="22879" title="Skylar Grey" label="Skylar Grey"/>
<link wikidata="Q550239" start="23139" end="23180" title="Australian Recording Industry Association" label="Australian Recording Industry Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q373087" start="23211" end="23264" title="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers" label="American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="23475" end="23487" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q634" start="23589" end="23595" title="planet" label="planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="23603" end="23615" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="23676" end="23682" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="23708" end="23713" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613055" start="23721" end="23741" title="The Home &amp;amp; Home Tour" label="Home &amp;amp; Home Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q868482" start="24022" end="24035" title="Comerica Park" label="Comerica Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294204" start="24269" end="24285" title="Slim the Mobster" label="Slim the Mobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="24290" end="24304" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q889872" start="24523" end="24563" title="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival" label="Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q974238" start="24594" end="24610" title="Marsha Ambrosius" label="Marsha Ambrosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178477" start="24763" end="24776" title="Dawaun Parker" label="Dawaun Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="25448" end="25455" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q189936" start="25457" end="25465" title="The Game (rapper)" label="the Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154246" start="25479" end="25486" title="DJ Quik" label="DJ Quik"/>
<link wikidata="Q20750718" start="25821" end="25828" title="Compton (album)" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="25858" end="25863" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154625" start="25878" end="25900" title="Straight Outta Compton (film)" label="Straight Outta Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056642" start="26098" end="26109" title="Apple Music" label="Apple Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="26196" end="26209" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557657" start="26389" end="26403" title="social anxiety" label="social anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q62446736" start="26591" end="26600" title="Apple TV+" label="Apple TV+"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="26880" end="26890" title="Sean Combs" label="Sean Combs"/>
<link wikidata="Q59769673" start="26999" end="27017" title="Oxnard (album)" label="&amp;quot;Oxnard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810369" start="27021" end="27035" title="Anderson .Paak" label="Anderson .Paak"/>
<link wikidata="Q63110722" start="27120" end="27127" title="Ventura (Anderson .Paak album)" label="Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q82663017" start="27276" end="27299" title="Music to Be Murdered By" label="Music to Be Murdered By"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27413" end="27419" title="Music to Be Murdered By#Music to Be Murdered By – Side B (Deluxe Edition)" label="Side B"/>
<link wikidata="Q108784928" start="27548" end="27576" title="Super Bowl LVI halftime show" label="Super Bowl LVI halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="27587" end="27593" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="27595" end="27605" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="27607" end="27620" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="27626" end="27640" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14594724" start="27697" end="27720" title="Grand Theft Auto Online" label="Grand Theft Auto Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q974238" start="27940" end="27956" title="Marsha Ambrosius" label="Marsha Ambrosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q130305761" start="27966" end="27976" title="Casablanco" label="Casablanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q108784928" start="28275" end="28303" title="Super Bowl LVI halftime show" label="Super Bowl LVI halftime show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="28314" end="28320" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="28322" end="28332" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="28334" end="28348" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="28354" end="28367" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="28400" end="28407" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810369" start="28412" end="28426" title="Anderson .Paak" label="Anderson .Paak"/>
<link wikidata="Q28445711" start="28527" end="28586" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live)" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30633602" start="28636" end="28687" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Production Design for a Variety Special" label="Outstanding Production Design for a Variety Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q30633600" start="28692" end="28719" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music Direction" label="Outstanding Music Direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042" start="28836" end="28847" title="CeeLo Green" label="CeeLo Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q84362533" start="28875" end="28880" title="Elvis (2022 film)" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="28903" end="28913" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q76874554" start="28932" end="28947" title="Use This Gospel" label="Use This Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80805" start="28958" end="28967" title="DJ Khaled" label="DJ Khaled"/>
<link wikidata="Q113620570" start="28987" end="28994" title="God Did" label="God Did"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29099" end="29132" title="Jesus Is King#Sequels" label="&amp;quot;Jesus Is King Part II&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q309941" start="29414" end="29419" title="Ice-T" label="Ice-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256420" start="29424" end="29438" title="Arabian Prince" label="Arabian Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185" start="29559" end="29571" title="Busta Rhymes" label="Busta Rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q542910" start="29577" end="29583" title="Treach" label="Treach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010545" start="30006" end="30019" title="Gin and Juice" label="Gin and Juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q46388" start="30087" end="30098" title="prohibition" label="prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q125621694" start="30219" end="30258" title="The Death of Slim Shady (Coup de Grâce)" label="The Death of Slim Shady (Coup de Grâce)"/>
<link wikidata="Q122662640" start="30482" end="30492" title="Missionary (Snoop Dogg album)" label="Missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q753494" start="30599" end="30609" title="Doggystyle" label="Doggystyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="30929" end="30935" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="30946" end="30953" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q298694" start="30955" end="30965" title="Method Man" label="Method Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="30971" end="30976" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q962544" start="31243" end="31253" title="Set It Off (film)" label="Set It Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579201" start="31312" end="31320" title="The Wash (2001 film)" label="The Wash"/>
<link wikidata="Q308929" start="31337" end="31349" title="Training Day" label="Training Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6422739" start="31410" end="31427" title="Knoc-Turn&amp;#x27;Al" label="Knoc-Turn&amp;#x27;Al"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376030" start="31471" end="31502" title="The Wash (soundtrack)" label="&amp;quot;The Wash&amp;quot; soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q79202" start="31750" end="31765" title="New Line Cinema" label="New Line Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q637715" start="31830" end="31844" title="Phillip Atwell" label="Phillip Atwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154625" start="32060" end="32082" title="Straight Outta Compton (2015 film)" label="Straight Outta Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="32354" end="32365" title="circumaural" label="circumaural"/>
<link wikidata="Q186819" start="32438" end="32449" title="supra-aural" label="supra-aural"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="32487" end="32496" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q216936" start="32528" end="32533" title="Diddy" label="Diddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="32555" end="32570" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155126" start="32847" end="32858" title="Beats Music" label="Beats Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="32942" end="32947" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q311232" start="33238" end="33251" title="Tyrese Gibson" label="Tyrese Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q718427" start="33425" end="33437" title="Jimmy Iovine" label="Jimmy Iovine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="33477" end="33510" title="University of Southern California" label="University of Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157165" start="34065" end="34084" title="Compton High School" label="Compton High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168060" start="34372" end="34383" title="Coors Light" label="Coors Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961036" start="34468" end="34485" title="Beats Electronics" label="Beats Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q623561" start="34526" end="34535" title="Dr Pepper" label="Dr Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q21404084" start="34712" end="34714" title="HP Inc." label="HP"/>
<link wikidata="Q390055" start="34779" end="34792" title="Chrysler 300" label="Chrysler 300S"/>
<link wikidata="Q384060" start="34996" end="35002" title="Tumblr" label="Tumblr"/>
<link wikidata="Q152518" start="35131" end="35142" title="Burning Man" label="Burning Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q286707" start="35610" end="35626" title="Business Insider" label="Business Insider"/>
<link wikidata="Q19837" start="35883" end="35893" title="Steve Jobs" label="Steve Jobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="36001" end="36018" title="Salon (website)" label="&amp;quot;Salon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701447" start="36532" end="36555" title="World Class Wreckin Cru" label="World Class Wreckin Cru"/>
<link wikidata="Q601235" start="36619" end="36630" title="electro-hop" label="electro-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915478" start="36650" end="36664" title="the Unknown DJ" label="the Unknown DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="36708" end="36720" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109520" start="36725" end="36732" title="Whodini" label="Whodini"/>
<link wikidata="Q644326" start="36746" end="36768" title="Straight Outta Compton" label="Straight Outta Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q575026" start="36858" end="36874" title="Ruthless Records" label="Ruthless Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q470609" start="36978" end="36986" title="DJ Yella" label="DJ Yella"/>
<link wikidata="Q323178" start="37150" end="37163" title="Above the Law (group)" label="Above the Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744865" start="37180" end="37190" title="Cold 187um" label="Cold 187um"/>
<link wikidata="Q3353842" start="37263" end="37269" title="P-Funk" label="P-Funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892425" start="37279" end="37289" title="Parliament (band)" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q523957" start="37291" end="37301" title="Funkadelic" label="Funkadelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q452411" start="37303" end="37317" title="Bootsy Collins" label="Bootsy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="37319" end="37333" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045541" start="37427" end="37433" title="G-funk" label="G-funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q847018" start="37487" end="37504" title="Death Row Records" label="Death Row Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105660" start="37550" end="37584" title="Chris &amp;quot;The Glove&amp;quot; Taylor" label="Chris &amp;quot;the Glove&amp;quot; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q749154" start="37713" end="37724" title="The Chronic" label="The Chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q734687" start="37983" end="37991" title="minimoog" label="minimoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524681" start="38024" end="38036" title="Leon Haywood" label="Leon Haywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933481" start="38148" end="38186" title="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang" label="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="38240" end="38256" title="Snoop Doggy Dogg" label="Snoop Doggy Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q753494" start="38276" end="38286" title="Doggystyle" label="Doggystyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q551154" start="38342" end="38355" title="Daz Dillinger" label="Daz Dillinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051054" start="38475" end="38488" title="The Dramatics" label="The Dramatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345634" start="38501" end="38532" title="Edward Tony Green" label="Tony &amp;quot;T. Money&amp;quot; Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q319585" start="38687" end="38695" title="Warren G" label="Warren G"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408193" start="38700" end="38709" title="Sam Sneed" label="Sam Sneed"/>
<link wikidata="Q722042" start="38970" end="38978" title="Master P" label="Master P"/>
<link wikidata="Q130311" start="39011" end="39025" title="George Michael" label="George Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822507" start="39033" end="39041" title="Fastlove" label="Fastlove"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="39050" end="39062" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q996033" start="39070" end="39077" title="Fantasy (Mariah Carey song)" label="Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q357327" start="39086" end="39098" title="Adina Howard" label="Adina Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452122" start="39106" end="39119" title="Freak Like Me" label="Freak Like Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069140" start="39128" end="39139" title="Luis Miguel" label="Luis Miguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641" start="39164" end="39179" title="The Spice Girls" label="The Spice Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349439" start="39187" end="39211" title="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There" label="Say You&amp;#x27;ll Be There"/>
<link wikidata="Q798658" start="39263" end="39278" title="Bad Boy Records" label="Bad Boy Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115893" start="39288" end="39303" title="Chucky Thompson" label="Chucky Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063886" start="39344" end="39347" title="XXL (magazine)" label="XXL"/>
<link wikidata="Q179157" start="39454" end="39470" title="Notorious B.I.G." label="Notorious B.I.G."/>
<link wikidata="Q940822" start="39500" end="39509" title="Big Poppa" label="Big Poppa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179389" start="39551" end="39570" title="Murder was the Case" label="Murder was the Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499682" start="39724" end="39743" title="Natural Born Killaz" label="Natural Born Killaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="39889" end="39899" title="Percussion" label="Percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q956406" start="39926" end="39937" title="sleigh bell" label="sleigh bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="40018" end="40042" title="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania" label="Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408193" start="40148" end="40157" title="Sam Sneed" label="Sam Sneed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983745" start="40173" end="40184" title="Bud&amp;#x27;da" label="Bud&amp;#x27;da"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="40339" end="40346" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519986" start="40359" end="40368" title="Geto Boys" label="Geto Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q16575965" start="40647" end="40653" title="Horror fiction" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="40658" end="40664" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139136" start="40725" end="40735" title="horrorcore" label="horrorcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240411" start="40817" end="40830" title="Camara Kambon" label="Camara Kambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543041" start="40857" end="40878" title="Been There, Done That (Dr. Dre song)" label="Been There, Done That"/>
<link wikidata="Q946516" start="40970" end="41005" title="Melvin &amp;quot;Mel-Man&amp;quot; Bradford" label="Melvin &amp;quot;Mel-Man&amp;quot; Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764643" start="41171" end="41201" title="Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath" label="Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="Q208421" start="41284" end="41294" title="snare drum" label="snare drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182280" start="41400" end="41404" title="2001 (Dr. Dre album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q978310" start="41485" end="41501" title="The Next Episode" label="The Next Episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240411" start="41530" end="41543" title="Camara Kambon" label="Camara Kambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313023" start="41580" end="41594" title="David McCallum" label="David McCallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075651" start="41690" end="41701" title="keyboardist" label="keyboardist"/>
<link wikidata="Q855091" start="41703" end="41712" title="guitarist" label="guitarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q584301" start="41717" end="41724" title="bassist" label="bassist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="41793" end="41798" title="drums" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="41808" end="41818" title="music sequencer" label="sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="41823" end="41834" title="overdubbing" label="overdubbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507857" start="42115" end="42132" title="Guilty Conscience (song)" label="Guilty Conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q451821" start="42370" end="42382" title="Scott Storch" label="Scott Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q106240411" start="42387" end="42400" title="Camara Kambon" label="Camara Kambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q972438" start="42414" end="42427" title="Mike Elizondo" label="Mike Elizondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322478" start="42721" end="42726" title="clapping" label="claps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451914" start="42821" end="42836" title="Boss&amp;#x27; Life" label="Boss&amp;#x27; Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185" start="42844" end="42856" title="Busta Rhymes" label="Busta Rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q587852" start="42928" end="42936" title="Stat Quo" label="Stat Quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246456" start="43014" end="43022" title="Lost One" label="Lost One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293994" start="43137" end="43148" title="Mark Batson" label="Mark Batson"/>
<link wikidata="Q832086" start="43180" end="43202" title="The Dave Matthews Band" label="The Dave Matthews Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q218091" start="43204" end="43208" title="Seal (musician)" label="Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182223" start="43213" end="43221" title="Maroon 5" label="Maroon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178477" start="43337" end="43350" title="Dawaun Parker" label="Dawaun Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q42025" start="43366" end="43371" title="Q-Tip (musician)" label="Q-Tip"/>
<link wikidata="Q352218" start="43376" end="43383" title="J Dilla" label="J Dilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327157" start="44006" end="44018" title="Akai MPC3000" label="Akai MPC3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="44141" end="44145" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q336272" start="44164" end="44178" title="George Clinton (funk musician)" label="George Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q206439" start="44180" end="44191" title="Isaac Hayes" label="Isaac Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310170" start="44196" end="44211" title="Curtis Mayfield" label="Curtis Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="44501" end="44505" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321533" start="44740" end="44752" title="E-mu SP-1200" label="E-mu SP-1200"/>
<link wikidata="Q104531076" start="44896" end="44906" title="Equalization (audio)" label="equalizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438815" start="44937" end="44944" title="Scratch (magazine)" label="Scratch"/>
<link wikidata="Q247670" start="45175" end="45184" title="Pro Tools" label="Pro Tools"/>
<link wikidata="Q946516" start="45362" end="45369" title="Mel-Man" label="Mel-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q972438" start="45823" end="45836" title="Mike Elizondo" label="Mike Elizondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q535762" start="45956" end="45959" title="Ann Danielewski" label="Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q228968" start="45961" end="45972" title="Fiona Apple" label="Fiona Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742" start="45977" end="45994" title="Alanis Morissette" label="Alanis Morissette"/>
<link wikidata="Q212762" start="46373" end="46387" title="Burt Bacharach" label="Burt Bacharach"/>
<link wikidata="Q849420" start="46734" end="46747" title="Bishop Lamont" label="Bishop Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="46995" end="46997" title="MC" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q849420" start="47190" end="47203" title="Bishop Lamont" label="Bishop Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040802" start="47222" end="47232" title="How to Rap" label="How to Rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q325718" start="47745" end="47753" title="King Tee" label="King Tee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372747" start="47790" end="47801" title="Joell Ortiz" label="Joell Ortiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q320167" start="47803" end="47810" title="Raekwon" label="Raekwon"/>
<link wikidata="Q364214" start="47815" end="47820" title="Rakim" label="Rakim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070141" start="48063" end="48077" title="Tha Dogg Pound" label="Tha Dogg Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q551154" start="48085" end="48088" title="Daz Dillinger" label="Daz"/>
<link wikidata="Q753494" start="48215" end="48225" title="Doggystyle" label="Doggystyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q451821" start="48410" end="48422" title="Scott Storch" label="Scott Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q972438" start="48714" end="48727" title="Mike Elizondo" label="Mike Elizondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463257" start="48987" end="49006" title="The Real Slim Shady" label="The Real Slim Shady"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="49137" end="49143" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140254" start="49636" end="49646" title="The Source" label="The Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q155339" start="49792" end="49807" title="The Eminem Show" label="The Eminem Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q756782" start="49903" end="49930" title="Get Rich or Die Tryin&amp;#x27;" label="Get Rich or Die Tryin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407305" start="49993" end="50003" title="Coors Brewing Company" label="Coors beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989196" start="50076" end="50085" title="conductor (music)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q451821" start="50568" end="50580" title="Scott Storch" label="Scott Storch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293994" start="50592" end="50603" title="Mark Batson" label="Mark Batson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178477" start="50608" end="50621" title="Dawaun Parker" label="Dawaun Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20810369" start="50753" end="50767" title="Anderson .Paak" label="Anderson .Paak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040802" start="51645" end="51655" title="How to Rap" label="How to Rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041341" start="51663" end="51666" title="RBX" label="RBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q749154" start="51695" end="51706" title="The Chronic" label="The Chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q623386" start="51762" end="51772" title="ghostwrote" label="ghostwrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530738" start="51779" end="51790" title="Let Me Ride" label="Let Me Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q62766" start="52033" end="52038" title="Jay-Z" label="Jay-Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="52741" end="52747" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q81225" start="52752" end="52760" title="morphine" label="morphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337818" start="52782" end="52796" title="Woodland Hills, California" label="Woodland Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931208" start="52840" end="52854" title="Michel&amp;#x27;le" label="Michel&amp;#x27;le"/>
<link wikidata="Q979041" start="53194" end="53208" title="Sedale Threatt" label="Sedale Threatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q231694" start="53427" end="53445" title="Interscope Records" label="Interscope Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129536" start="53502" end="53515" title="Family Affair (Mary J. Blige song)" label="Family Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q228909" start="53525" end="53538" title="Mary J. Blige" label="Mary J. Blige"/>
<link wikidata="Q308644" start="53768" end="53774" title="G-Unit" label="G-Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q154543" start="53779" end="53782" title="D12" label="D12"/>
<link wikidata="Q890210" start="53804" end="53813" title="Rich Girl (Gwen Stefani song)" label="Rich Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="53830" end="53842" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="53854" end="53857" title="Eve (entertainer)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="53865" end="53871" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961036" start="54109" end="54114" title="Beats Electronics" label="Beats"/>
<link wikidata="Q126616621" start="54330" end="54356" title="List of music artists by net worth" label="wealthiest musical artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q909975" start="54408" end="54417" title="Brentwood, Los Angeles" label="Brentwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="54472" end="54475" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q313381" start="54483" end="54492" title="Tom Brady" label="Tom Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q152208" start="54508" end="54523" title="Gisele Bündchen" label="Gisele Bündchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198391" start="54562" end="54576" title="brain aneurysm" label="brain aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052562" start="54625" end="54652" title="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center" label="Cedars-Sinai Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q36159" start="54827" end="54839" title="LeBron James" label="LeBron James"/>
<link wikidata="Q183542" start="54841" end="54856" title="Martin Lawrence" label="Martin Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="54858" end="54867" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q155079" start="54869" end="54882" title="Missy Elliott" label="Missy Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="54884" end="54894" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="54896" end="54902" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="54904" end="54912" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060" start="54914" end="54921" title="50 Cent" label="50 Cent"/>
<link wikidata="Q483325" start="54923" end="54938" title="Ellen DeGeneres" label="Ellen DeGeneres"/>
<link wikidata="Q203223" start="54940" end="54945" title="Ciara" label="Ciara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149781" start="54959" end="54973" title="Russell Wilson" label="Russell Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q214227" start="54975" end="54979" title="T.I." label="T.I."/>
<link wikidata="Q193645" start="54981" end="54993" title="Quincy Jones" label="Quincy Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="55464" end="55470" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q337377" start="55614" end="55630" title="Los Angeles Rams" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q121783" start="55651" end="55669" title="Los Angeles Lakers" label="Los Angeles Lakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249879" start="55939" end="55949" title="Dee Barnes" label="Dee Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="55957" end="55960" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043121" start="56313" end="56330" title="community service" label="community service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196567" start="56369" end="56396" title="public service announcement" label="public service announcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931208" start="56887" end="56901" title="Michel&amp;#x27;le" label="Michel&amp;#x27;le"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="56978" end="56995" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="" start="57136" end="57185" title="Surviving Compton: Dre, Suge &amp;amp; Michel&amp;#x27;le" label="Surviving Compton: Dre, Suge &amp;amp; Michel&amp;#x27;le"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="57226" end="57234" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q822314" start="57236" end="57249" title="Sony Pictures" label="Sony Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q31726" start="57303" end="57326" title="cease and desist letter" label="cease and desist letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="57630" end="57647" title="restraining order" label="restraining order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3514059" start="57679" end="57688" title="Tairrie B" label="Tairrie B"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="57730" end="57736" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="58639" end="58657" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q51088800" start="59321" end="59337" title="The Defiant Ones (TV series)" label="The Defiant Ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="61202" end="61218" title="Restraining order" label="protective order"/>
<link wikidata="Q209330" start="61277" end="61286" title="Instagram" label="Instagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q242446" start="62528" end="62542" title="Lucasfilm Ltd." label="Lucasfilm Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="62572" end="62596" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars film franchise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044630" start="62627" end="62630" title="THX" label="THX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149927" start="62649" end="62658" title="Deep Note" label="Deep Note"/>
<link wikidata="Q561320" start="62935" end="62951" title="Jacques Loussier" label="Jacques Loussier"/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="63154" end="63161" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="63198" end="63203" title="Heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="63209" end="63218" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q122575" start="63403" end="63414" title="Sa Re Ga Ma" label="Sa Re Ga Ma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="63450" end="63465" title="Calcutta, India" label="Calcutta, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q156347" start="63529" end="63544" title="Lata Mangeshkar" label="Lata Mangeshkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q274096" start="63648" end="63659" title="Truth Hurts (singer)" label="Truth Hurts"/>
<link wikidata="Q629088" start="63953" end="63962" title="Calabasas, California" label="Calabasas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="64270" end="64281" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="64611" end="64624" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q266786" start="65046" end="65050" title="Vibe (magazine)" label="Vibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q311244" start="65240" end="65250" title="Young Buck" label="Young Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="65469" end="65472" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107990" start="65486" end="65504" title="The Late Late Show (CBS TV series)" label="The Late Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748625" start="65751" end="65763" title="Jerry Heller" label="Jerry Heller"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="65866" end="65884" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="65889" end="65912" title="defamation of character" label="defamation of character"/>
<link wikidata="Q208649" start="66064" end="66077" title="Paul Giamatti" label="Paul Giamatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630118" start="66695" end="66698" title="TMZ" label="TMZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q3259709" start="66789" end="66826" title="Los Angeles Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Los Angeles Sheriff&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="67213" end="67225" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221899" start="67226" end="67238" title="gynecologist" label="gynecologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q21462723" start="67858" end="67866" title="UberEats" label="UberEats"/>
<link wikidata="Q20714323" start="67871" end="67879" title="DoorDash" label="DoorDash"/>
<link wikidata="Q749154" start="68175" end="68186" title="The Chronic" label="The Chronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182280" start="68208" end="68212" title="2001 (Dr. Dre album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q20750718" start="68234" end="68241" title="Compton (album)" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="" start="68268" end="68292" title="GTA Online: The Contract" label="GTA Online: The Contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035524" start="68336" end="68347" title="World Class" label="World Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294320" start="68369" end="68386" title="Rapped in Romance" label="Rapped in Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q644326" start="68408" end="68430" title="Straight Outta Compton" label="Straight Outta Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q508644" start="68452" end="68463" title="Niggaz4Life" label="Niggaz4Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q122662640" start="68485" end="68495" title="Missionary (album)" label="Missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="68583" end="68605" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="68614" end="68633" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q207601" start="68639" end="68660" title="American Music Awards" label="American Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877005" start="68668" end="68686" title="BET Hip Hop Awards" label="BET Hip Hop Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148553" start="68692" end="68696" title="2014 BET Hip Hop Awards" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q22031929" start="68780" end="68784" title="2015 BET Hip Hop Awards" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q28004383" start="68813" end="68817" title="2016 BET Hip Hop Awards" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q20750718" start="68852" end="68859" title="Compton (album)" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28004406" start="68868" end="68885" title="BET Hip Hop Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="68932" end="68944" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435518" start="69003" end="69007" title="33rd Annual Grammy Awards" label="1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q7977082" start="69015" end="69046" title="We&amp;#x27;re All in the Same Gang" label="We&amp;#x27;re All in the Same Gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809486" start="69077" end="69115" title="Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group" label="Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542298" start="69179" end="69183" title="Grammy Awards of 1994" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933481" start="69191" end="69229" title="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang" label="Nuthin&amp;#x27; but a &amp;#x27;G&amp;#x27; Thang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530738" start="69247" end="69258" title="Let Me Ride" label="Let Me Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709112" start="69288" end="69313" title="Best Rap Solo Performance" label="Best Rap Solo Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542306" start="69331" end="69335" title="Grammy Awards of 1996" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123552" start="69343" end="69372" title="Keep Their Heads Ringin&amp;#x27;" label="Keep Their Heads Ringin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542308" start="69396" end="69400" title="Grammy Awards of 1997" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990281" start="69408" end="69423" title="California Love" label="California Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542315" start="69513" end="69517" title="Grammy Awards of 1998" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044110" start="69526" end="69536" title="No Diggity" label="No Diggity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459443" start="69545" end="69562" title="Best R&amp;amp;B Song" label="Best R&amp;amp;B Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542319" start="69627" end="69631" title="Grammy Awards of 2000" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q370983" start="69639" end="69651" title="Still D.R.E." label="Still D.R.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1507857" start="69731" end="69748" title="Guilty Conscience (song)" label="Guilty Conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q777063" start="69820" end="69824" title="Grammy Awards of 2001" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384402" start="69832" end="69848" title="Forgot About Dre" label="Forgot About Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q978310" start="69866" end="69882" title="The Next Episode" label="The Next Episode"/>
<link wikidata="Q153607" start="69922" end="69945" title="The Marshall Mathers LP" label="The Marshall Mathers LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q904528" start="69954" end="69971" title="Grammy Award for Album of the Year" label="Album of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367988" start="69998" end="70012" title="Best Rap Album" label="Best Rap Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q182280" start="70024" end="70028" title="2001 (Dr. Dre album)" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q15692068" start="70092" end="70127" title="Producer of the Year, Non-Classical" label="Producer of the Year, Non-Classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q637650" start="70145" end="70149" title="Grammy Awards of 2002" label="2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542326" start="70213" end="70217" title="Grammy Awards of 2003" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744874" start="70228" end="70232" title="The Knoc" label="Knoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976730" start="70241" end="70269" title="Best Music Video, Short Form" label="Best Music Video, Short Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q155339" start="70280" end="70295" title="The Eminem Show" label="The Eminem Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542330" start="70363" end="70367" title="46th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q673947" start="70375" end="70385" title="In da Club" label="In da Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123766" start="70394" end="70407" title="Best Rap Song" label="Best Rap Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542334" start="70471" end="70475" title="Grammy Awards of 2006" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q750087" start="70483" end="70508" title="Love. Angel. Music. Baby." label="Love. Angel. Music. Baby."/>
<link wikidata="Q2707833" start="70545" end="70551" title="Encore (Eminem song)" label="Encore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349100" start="70684" end="70688" title="Grammy Awards of 2010" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q21095" start="70696" end="70710" title="Crack a Bottle" label="Crack a Bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q245353" start="70728" end="70735" title="Relapse (Eminem album)" label="Relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334315" start="70800" end="70804" title="53rd Annual Grammy Awards" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q274533" start="70812" end="70820" title="Recovery (Eminem album)" label="Recovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337556" start="70910" end="70914" title="Grammy Awards of 2012" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576279" start="70944" end="70959" title="I Need a Doctor" label="I Need a Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542172" start="70968" end="70995" title="Best Rap/Sung Collaboration" label="Best Rap/Sung Collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q15285041" start="71056" end="71060" title="56th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2014"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930676" start="71068" end="71090" title="good kid, m.A.A.d city" label="good kid, m.A.A.d city"/>
<link wikidata="Q20891849" start="71159" end="71163" title="58th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2016"/>
<link wikidata="Q20750718" start="71171" end="71178" title="Compton (album)" label="Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25060439" start="71243" end="71247" title="59th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="" start="71255" end="71277" title="Straight Outta Compton: Music from the Motion Picture" label="Straight Outta Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593771" start="71286" end="71330" title="Grammy Award for Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media" label="Best Compilation Soundtrack for Visual Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q20891849" start="71373" end="71377" title="58th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q63110722" start="71386" end="71393" title="Ventura (Anderson Paak album)" label="Ventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q119580062" start="71463" end="71467" title="66th Annual Grammy Awards" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q935843" start="71480" end="71513" title="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award" label="Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="71519" end="71540" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="71548" end="71569" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q111982304" start="71575" end="71579" title="74th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards" label="2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q108784928" start="71588" end="71626" title="Super Bowl LVI halftime show" label="The Pepsi Super Bowl LVI Halftime Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q28445711" start="71635" end="71669" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Variety Special (Live)" label="Outstanding Variety Special (Live)"/>
<link wikidata="Q528272" start="71730" end="71746" title="Up in Smoke Tour" label="Up in Smoke Tour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8085" wikidata="Q2300616" url="?curid=8085" title="Delicate Arch">
<text>Delicate Arch is a freestanding natural arch located in Arches National Park, near Moab in Grand County, Utah, United States. The arch is the most widely recognized landmark in Arches National Park and is depicted on Utah license plates and a postage stamp commemorating Utah&#x27;s centennial anniversary of admission to the Union in 1896. The Olympic torch relay for the 2002 Winter Olympics passed through the arch.

==History==

Because of its distinctive shape, the arch was known as &quot;the Chaps&quot; and &quot;the Schoolmarm&#x27;s Bloomers&quot; by local cowboys. Many other names have been applied to this arch including &quot;Bloomers Arch&quot;, &quot;Marys Bloomers&quot;, &quot;Old Maids Bloomers&quot;, &quot;Pants Crotch&quot;, &quot;Salt Wash Arch&quot;, and &quot;School Marms Pants&quot;. The arch was given its current name by Frank Beckwith, leader of the Arches National Monument Scientific Expedition, who explored the area in the winter of 1933–1934. Although there is a rumor that the names of Delicate Arch and Landscape Arch were inadvertently exchanged due to a signage mixup by the National Park Service (NPS), this is false.

This arch played no part in the original designation of the area as a national monument (Arches National Monument) in 1929 and was not included within the original boundaries; it was added when the monument was enlarged in 1938.

In the 1950s, the NPS investigated the possibility of applying a clear plastic coating to the arch to protect it from further erosion and eventual destruction. The idea was ultimately abandoned as impractical and contrary to NPS principles.

Nature photographer Michael Fatali started a fire under the arch in September 2000 to demonstrate nighttime photography techniques to a group of amateur photographers. The fire discolored portions of the sandstone near the arch. Fatali was placed on probation and fined $10,900 in restitution to the NPS for the cost of cleanup efforts.

In 2017, the United Utah Party was founded, and chose Delicate Arch as its official party logo.

==Geology==
Delicate Arch is formed of Entrada Sandstone. The original sandstone fin was gradually worn away by weathering and erosion, leaving the arch. Other arches in the park were formed the same way but, due to placement and less dramatic shape, are not as famous.

==Ecology==
During the summer, white-throated swifts (&quot;Aeronautes saxatalis&quot;) nest in the top of the arch.

==Climbing==

In May 2006, climber Dean Potter performed as many as six free solo ascents of the arch. Climbing Delicate Arch was not explicitly forbidden under the rules in force at the time, which only stated that routes &quot;may be closed&quot; on any named arch; however, most climbers accepted that the named arch formations should not be climbed. The NPS has since closed the loophole by disallowing climbs on any named arch within the park year-round. Slacklining and the placement of new fixed anchors on new climbs are also prohibited.

Controversy ensued when photographs taken after Potter&#x27;s climb appeared to show damage caused by a climbing technique called top roping. Potter stated on several occasions that he never damaged the arch, and no photos exist of Potter using a top rope setup on the arch. Previous climbers may have top-roped the arch, leaving the existing rope scars. Potter did admit to using a counterweighted rope over the top of the arch, within a natural groove, as well as four cams in a horizontal crack of harder rock at the summit. He used the rope and cams for protection while rehearsing his free solo route and to rappel back down after the free solos. Two fellow climbers also ascended via fixed ropes, one of whom recorded video of Potter from the top.

==Tourism==
Delicate Arch is one of the main tourist draws in Arches National Park. The parking lot at the Delicate Arch Trailhead, although large, fills up quickly on most days. The trail to Delicate Arch is 3 miles (4.8 kilometer) round trip with an elevation change of 480 feet (146 meters). The trail is well defined for the first 1/2 mile, then does a steep incline over open rock. There is a narrow ledge for the last 200 yards (183 meter) before reaching the arch.

==See also==
==References==
==External links==

* Arches National Park Delicate Arch page
* Arches National Park Trails Page
* Panorama Under Arch (archived 9 June 2009)
* Beautiful Places episode of Delicate Arch (archived 28 June 2010)
* Panoramic View of Delicate Arch at Sunset </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2300616" start="0" end="13" title="Delicate Arch" label="Delicate Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q954501" start="32" end="44" title="natural arch" label="natural arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q223969" start="56" end="76" title="Arches National Park" label="Arches National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q130134" start="83" end="87" title="Moab, Utah" label="Moab"/>
<link wikidata="Q27041" start="91" end="103" title="Grand County, Utah" label="Grand County"/>
<link wikidata="Q829" start="105" end="109" title="Utah" label="Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895393" start="165" end="173" title="landmark" label="landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918580" start="217" end="236" title="Vehicle registration plates of Utah" label="Utah license plates"/>
<link wikidata="Q37930" start="243" end="256" title="postage stamp" label="postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995876" start="283" end="293" title="centennial" label="centennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350273" start="309" end="331" title="admission to the Union" label="admission to the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4600642" start="345" end="364" title="2002 Winter Olympics torch relay" label="Olympic torch relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9668" start="373" end="393" title="2002 Winter Olympics" label="2002 Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062810" start="499" end="504" title="Chaps" label="Chaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q885342" start="543" end="551" title="Bloomers (clothing)" label="Bloomers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256910" start="1040" end="1054" title="Landscape Arch" label="Landscape Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="1114" end="1135" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q893775" start="1229" end="1246" title="National monument (United States)" label="national monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="1460" end="1467" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="1515" end="1522" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q39329619" start="1982" end="1999" title="United Utah Party" label="United Utah Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380652" start="2105" end="2122" title="Entrada Sandstone" label="Entrada Sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q606956" start="2368" end="2388" title="white-throated swift" label="white-throated swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q345788" start="2490" end="2501" title="Dean Potter" label="Dean Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453425" start="2527" end="2544" title="Free solo climbing" label="free solo ascents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354480" start="2915" end="2926" title="Slacklining" label="Slacklining"/>
<link wikidata="Q305125" start="3132" end="3142" title="Top rope climbing" label="top roping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716315" start="3473" end="3477" title="Spring-loaded camming device" label="cams"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8086" wikidata="Q1182303" url="?curid=8086" title="Deed poll">
<text>A deed poll (plural: deeds poll) is a legal document binding on a single person or several persons acting jointly to express an intention or create an obligation. It is a deed, and not a contract, because it binds only one party.

==Etymology==

The term &quot;deed&quot;, also known in this context as a &quot;specialty&quot;, is common to signed written undertakings not supported by consideration: the seal (even if not a literal wax seal but only a notional one referred to by the execution formula, &quot;signed, sealed and delivered&quot;, or even merely &quot;executed as a deed&quot;) is deemed to be the consideration necessary to support the obligation. &quot;Poll&quot; is an archaic legal term referring to documents with straight edges; these distinguished a deed binding only one person from one affecting more than a single person (an &quot;indenture&quot;, so named during the time when such agreements would be written out repeatedly on a single sheet, then the copies separated by being irregularly torn or cut, i.e. &quot;indented&quot;, so that each party had a document with corresponding tears, to discourage forgery).

==Use for changing name==

The most common use is a name change through a deed of change of name (often referred to simply as a &quot;deed poll&quot;). Deeds poll are used for this purpose in countries and regions including in the United Kingdom (except in Scotland), Ireland, Hong Kong, and Singapore. In the UK, a deed poll can also be used to change a child&#x27;s name, as long as everyone with parental responsibility for the child consents to it and the child does not object to it. The child&#x27;s parents execute the deed poll on the child&#x27;s behalf. In some other jurisdictions, a person may simply start using a new name without any formal legal process. The usual requirements are that the new name must be used exclusively and that the change must not be made with the intent to defraud. In English law, a person must notify every creditor of a change of name by deed poll.

In Australia, prior to 1 November 2000, name change was accomplished by deed poll but now is done by completing a Change of Name form.

==Other uses==

Another common use is to partition land. This form of deed poll is commonly used in Hong Kong.

A deed poll may also be used (in England and Wales) for clergy of the Church of England to relinquish their holy orders.

Bonds and powers of attorney are examples of deeds poll. A will is not a deed poll, not being made under seal, and being subject to separate statutory requirements.

==References ==
==External links==
* Change your name by deed poll - UK Government advice
* Enrolment of Deeds and other Documents at the UK Ministry of Justice website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1182303" start="2" end="11" title="Deed poll" label="deed poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182303" start="21" end="31" title="Deed poll" label="deeds poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q705914" start="171" end="175" title="deed" label="deed"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="187" end="195" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686000" start="223" end="228" title="party (law)" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q17366057" start="856" end="865" title="indenture" label="indenture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343619" start="1194" end="1205" title="name change" label="name change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375005" start="1541" end="1564" title="Parental responsibility (access and custody)" label="parental responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="1938" end="1945" title="fraud" label="defraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="2037" end="2046" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595403" start="2211" end="2220" title="Partition (law)" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="2352" end="2369" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="2390" end="2401" title="holy orders" label="holy orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q159733" start="2414" end="2432" title="power of attorney" label="powers of attorney"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8088" wikidata="Q93204" url="?curid=8088" title="Documentary film">
<text>A documentary film (often described simply as a documentary) is a non-fictional motion picture intended to &quot;document reality, primarily for instruction, education or maintaining a historical record&quot;. The American author and media analyst Bill Nichols has characterized the documentary in terms of &quot;a filmmaking practice, a cinematic tradition, and mode of audience reception [that remains] a practice without clear boundaries&quot;.

Research into information gathering, as a behavior, and the sharing of knowledge, as a concept, has noted how documentary movies were preceded by the notable practice of documentary photography. This has involved the use of singular photographs to detail the complex attributes of historical events and continues to a certain degree to this day, with an example being the conflict-related photography achieved by popular figures such as Mathew Brady during the American Civil War. Documentary movies evolved from the creation of singular images in order to convey particular types of information in depth, using film as a medium.

Early documentary films, originally called &quot;actuality films&quot;, briefly lasted for one minute or less in most cases. While faithfully depicting true events, these releases possessed no narrative structure per se and were of limited interest. Over time, documentaries have evolved to become longer in length and to include more categories of information. Some examples are explicitly educational, while others serve as observational works; docufiction movies notably include aspects of dramatic storytelling that are clearly fictional. Documentaries are informative at times, and certain types are often used within schools as a resource to teach various principles. Documentary filmmakers have a responsibility to be truthful to their vision of the world without intentionally misrepresenting a topic.

Social media organizations such as Dailymotion and YouTube, with many of these platforms receiving popular interest, have provided an avenue for the growth of documentaries as a particular film genre. Such platforms have increased the distribution area and ease-of-accessibility given the ability of online video sharing to spread to multiple audiences at once as well as to work past certain socio-political hurdles such as censorship.

== Definition ==

Polish writer and filmmaker Bolesław Matuszewski was among those who identified the mode of documentary film. He wrote two of the earliest texts on cinema, &quot;Une nouvelle source de l&#x27;histoire&quot; (&quot;A New Source of History&quot;) and &quot;La photographie animée&quot; (&quot;Animated photography&quot;). Both were published in 1898 in French and were among the earliest written works to consider the historical and documentary value of the film. Matuszewski is also among the first filmmakers to propose the creation of a Film Archive to collect and keep safe visual materials.

The word &quot;documentary&quot; was coined by Scottish documentary filmmaker John Grierson in his review of Robert Flaherty&#x27;s film &quot;Moana&quot; (1926), published in the &quot;New York Sun&quot; on 8 February 1926, written by &quot;The Moviegoer&quot; (a pen name for Grierson).

Grierson&#x27;s principles of documentary were that cinema&#x27;s potential for observing life could be exploited in a new art form; that the &quot;original&quot; actor and &quot;original&quot; scene are better guides than their fiction counterparts for interpreting the modern world; and that materials &quot;thus taken from the raw&quot; can be more real than the acted article. In this regard, Grierson&#x27;s definition of documentary as &quot;creative treatment of actuality&quot; has gained some acceptance; however, this position is at variance with Soviet film-maker Dziga Vertov&#x27;s credos of provocation to present &quot;life as it is&quot; (that is, life filmed surreptitiously), and &quot;life caught unawares&quot; (life provoked or surprised by the camera).

The American film critic Pare Lorentz defines a documentary film as &quot;a factual film which is dramatic.&quot; Others further state that a documentary stands out from the other types of non-fiction films for providing an opinion, and a specific message, along with the facts it presents. Scholar Betsy McLane asserted that documentaries are for filmmakers to convey their views about historical events, people, and places which they find significant. Therefore, the advantage of documentaries lies in introducing new perspectives which may not be prevalent in traditional media such as written publications and school curricula.

Documentary practice is the complex process of creating documentary projects. It refers to what people do with media devices, content, form, and production strategies to address the creative, ethical, and conceptual problems and choices that arise as they make documentaries.

Documentary filmmaking can be used as a form of journalism, advocacy, or personal expression.

== History ==

=== Pre-1900 ===
Early film (pre-1900) was dominated by the novelty of showing an event. Single-shot moments were captured on film, such as a train entering a station, a boat docking, or factory workers leaving work. These short films were called &quot;actuality&quot; films; the term &quot;documentary&quot; was not coined until 1926. Many of the first films, such as those made by Auguste and Louis Lumière, were a minute or less in length, due to technological limitations. Examples can be viewed on YouTube.

Films showing many people (for example, leaving a factory) were often made for commercial reasons: the people being filmed were eager to see, for payment, the film showing them. One notable film clocked in at over an hour and a half, &quot;The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight&quot;. Using pioneering film-looping technology, Enoch J. Rector presented the entirety of a famous 1897 prize-fight on cinema screens across the United States.

In May 1896, Bolesław Matuszewski recorded on film a few surgical operations in Warsaw and Saint Petersburg hospitals. In 1898, French surgeon Eugène-Louis Doyen invited Matuszewski and Clément Maurice to record his surgical operations. They started in Paris a series of surgical films sometime before July 1898. Until 1906, the year of his last film, Doyen recorded more than 60 operations. Doyen said that his first films taught him how to correct professional errors he had been unaware of. For scientific purposes, after 1906, Doyen combined 15 of his films into three compilations, two of which survive, the six-film series &quot;Extirpation des tumeurs encapsulées&quot; (1906), and the four-film &quot;Les Opérations sur la cavité crânienne&quot; (1911). These and five other of Doyen&#x27;s films survive.
Between July 1898 and 1901, the Romanian professor Gheorghe Marinescu made several science films in his neurology clinic in Bucharest: &quot;Walking Troubles of Organic Hemiplegy&quot; (1898), &quot;The Walking Troubles of Organic Paraplegies&quot; (1899), &quot;A Case of Hysteric Hemiplegy Healed Through Hypnosis&quot; (1899), &quot;The Walking Troubles of Progressive Locomotion Ataxy&quot; (1900), and &quot;Illnesses of the Muscles&quot; (1901). All these short films have been preserved. The professor called his works &quot;studies with the help of the cinematograph,&quot; and published the results, along with several consecutive frames, in issues of &quot;La Semaine Médicale&quot; magazine from Paris, between 1899 and 1902. In 1924, Auguste Lumière recognized the merits of Marinescu&#x27;s science films: &quot;I&#x27;ve seen your scientific reports about the usage of the cinematograph in studies of nervous illnesses, when I was still receiving &quot;La Semaine Médicale&quot;, but back then I had other concerns, which left me no spare time to begin biological studies. I must say I forgot those works and I am thankful to you that you reminded them to me. Unfortunately, not many scientists have followed your way.&quot;

=== 1900–1920 ===

Travelogue films were very popular in the early part of the 20th century. They were often referred to by distributors as &quot;scenics&quot;. Scenics were among the most popular sort of films at the time. An important early film which moved beyond the concept of the scenic was &quot;In the Land of the Head Hunters&quot; (1914), which embraced primitivism and exoticism in a staged story presented as truthful re-enactments of the life of Native Americans.

Contemplation is a separate area. Pathé was the best-known global manufacturer of such films in the early 20th century. A vivid example is &quot;Moscow Clad in Snow&quot; (1909).

Biographical documentaries appeared during this time, such as the feature &quot;Eminescu-Veronica-Creangă&quot; (1914) on the relationship between the writers Mihai Eminescu, Veronica Micle and Ion Creangă (all deceased at the time of the production), released by the Bucharest chapter of Pathé.

Early color motion picture processes such as Kinemacolor (known for the feature &quot;With Our King and Queen Through India&quot; (1912)) and Prizma Color (known for &quot;Everywhere With Prizma&quot; (1919) and the five-reel feature &quot;Bali the Unknown&quot; (1921)) used travelogues to promote the new color processes. In contrast, Technicolor concentrated primarily on getting their process adopted by Hollywood studios for fiction feature films.

Also during this period, Frank Hurley&#x27;s feature documentary film, &quot;South&quot; (1919) about the Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition was released. The film documented the failed Antarctic expedition led by Ernest Shackleton in 1914.

=== 1920s ===

==== Romanticism ====

With Robert J. Flaherty&#x27;s &quot;Nanook of the North&quot; in 1922, documentary film embraced romanticism. Flaherty filmed a number of heavily staged romantic documentary films during this time period, often showing how his subjects would have lived 100 years earlier and not how they lived right then. For instance, in &quot;Nanook of the North&quot;, Flaherty did not allow his subjects to shoot a walrus with a nearby shotgun, but had them use a harpoon instead. Some of Flaherty&#x27;s staging, such as building a roofless igloo for interior shots, was done to accommodate the filming technology of the time.

Paramount Pictures tried to repeat the success of Flaherty&#x27;s &quot;Nanook&quot; and &quot;Moana&quot; with two romanticized documentaries, &quot;Grass&quot; (1925) and &quot;Chang&quot; (1927), both directed by Merian C. Cooper and Ernest Schoedsack.

==== City symphony ====
The &quot;city symphony&quot; sub film genre consisted of avant-garde films during the 1920s and 1930s. These films were particularly influenced by modern art, namely Cubism, Constructivism, and Impressionism. According to art historian and author Scott MacDonald, city symphony films can be described as, &quot;An intersection between documentary and avant-garde film: an &quot;avant-doc&quot;&quot;; however, A.L. Rees suggests regarding them as avant-garde films.

Early titles produced within this genre include: &quot;Manhatta&quot; (New York; dir. Paul Strand, 1921); &quot;Rien que les heures/Nothing But The Hours&quot; (France; dir. Alberto Cavalcanti, 1926); &quot;Twenty Four Dollar Island&quot; (dir. Robert J. Flaherty, 1927); &quot;Moscow&quot; (dir. Mikhail Kaufman, 1927); &quot;Études sur Paris&quot; (dir. André Sauvage, 1928); &quot;The Bridge&quot; (1928) and &quot;Rain&quot; (1929), both by Joris Ivens; &quot;São Paulo, Sinfonia da Metrópole&quot; (dir. Adalberto Kemeny, 1929), &quot;&quot; (dir. Walter Ruttmann, 1927); &quot;Man with a Movie Camera&quot; (dir. Dziga Vertov, 1929); &quot;Douro, Faina Fluvial&quot; (dir. Manoel de Oliveira, 1931); and &quot;Rhapsody in Two Languages&quot; (dir. Gordon Sparling, 1934).

A city symphony film, as the name suggests, is most often based around a major metropolitan city area and seeks to capture the life, events and activities of the city. It can use abstract cinematography (Walter Ruttman&#x27;s &quot;Berlin&quot;) or may use Soviet montage theory (Dziga Vertov&#x27;s, &quot;Man with a Movie Camera&quot;). Most importantly, a city symphony film is a form of cinepoetry, shot and edited in the style of a &quot;symphony&quot;.

The European continental tradition (&quot;See:&quot; Realism) focused on humans within human-made environments, and included the so-called city symphony films such as Walter Ruttmann&#x27;s, &quot;Berlin: Symphony of a Metropolis&quot; (of which Grierson noted in an article that &quot;Berlin,&quot; represented what a documentary should not be); Alberto Cavalcanti&#x27;s, &quot;Rien que les heures;&quot; and Dziga Vertov&#x27;s &quot;Man with a Movie Camera&quot;. These films tend to feature people as products of their environment, and lean towards the avant-garde.

==== &quot;Kino-Pravda&quot; ====
Dziga Vertov was central to the Soviet &quot;Kino-Pravda&quot; (literally, &quot;cinematic truth&quot;) newsreel series of the 1920s. Vertov believed the camerawith its varied lenses, shot-counter shot editing, time-lapse, ability to slow motion, stop motion and fast-motioncould render reality more accurately than the human eye, and created a film philosophy from it.

==== Newsreel tradition ====
The newsreel tradition is important in documentary film. Newsreels at this time were sometimes staged but were usually re-enactments of events that had already happened, not attempts to steer events as they were in the process of happening. For instance, much of the battle footage from the early 20th century was staged; the cameramen would usually arrive on site after a major battle and re-enact scenes to film them.

=== 1930s–1940s ===
The propagandist tradition consists of films made with the explicit purpose of persuading an audience of a point. One of the most celebrated and controversial propaganda films is Leni Riefenstahl&#x27;s film &quot;Triumph of the Will&quot; (1935), which chronicled the 1934 Nazi Party Congress and was commissioned by Adolf Hitler. Leftist filmmakers Joris Ivens and Henri Storck directed &quot;Borinage&quot; (1931) about the Belgian coal mining region. Luis Buñuel directed a &quot;surrealist&quot; documentary &quot;Las Hurdes&quot; (1933).

Pare Lorentz&#x27;s &quot;The Plow That Broke the Plains&quot; (1936) and &quot;The River&quot; (1938) and Willard Van Dyke&#x27;s &quot;The City&quot; (1939) are notable New Deal productions, each presenting complex combinations of social and ecological awareness, government propaganda, and leftist viewpoints. Frank Capra&#x27;s &quot;Why We Fight&quot; (1942–1944) series was a newsreel series in the United States, commissioned by the government to convince the U.S. public that it was time to go to war. Constance Bennett and her husband Henri de la Falaise produced two feature-length documentaries, &quot;&quot; (1935) filmed in Bali, and &quot;Kilou the Killer Tiger&quot; (1936) filmed in Indochina.

In Canada, the Film Board, set up by John Grierson, was set up for the same propaganda reasons. It also created newsreels that were seen by their national governments as legitimate counter-propaganda to the psychological warfare of Nazi Germany orchestrated by Joseph Goebbels.
In Britain, a number of different filmmakers came together under John Grierson. They became known as the Documentary Film Movement. Grierson, Alberto Cavalcanti, Harry Watt, Basil Wright, and Humphrey Jennings amongst others succeeded in blending propaganda, information, and education with a more poetic aesthetic approach to documentary. Examples of their work include &quot;Drifters&quot; (John Grierson), &quot;Song of Ceylon&quot; (Basil Wright), &quot;Fires Were Started&quot;, and &quot;A Diary for Timothy&quot; (Humphrey Jennings). Their work involved poets such as W. H. Auden, composers such as Benjamin Britten, and writers such as J. B. Priestley. Among the best known films of the movement are &quot;Night Mail&quot; and &quot;Coal Face&quot;.

&quot;Calling Mr. Smith&quot; (1943) is an anti-Nazi color film created by Stefan Themerson which is both a documentary and an avant-garde film against war. It was one of the first anti-Nazi films in history.

=== 1950s–1970s ===
==== Cinéma-vérité ====
Cinéma vérité (or the closely related direct cinema) was dependent on some technical advances to exist: light, quiet and reliable cameras, and portable sync sound.

Cinéma vérité and similar documentary traditions can thus be seen, in a broader perspective, as a reaction against studio-based film production constraints. Shooting on location, with smaller crews, would also happen in the French New Wave, the filmmakers taking advantage of advances in technology allowing smaller, handheld cameras and synchronized sound to film events on location as they unfolded.

Although the terms are sometimes used interchangeably, there are important differences between cinéma vérité (Jean Rouch) and the North American &quot;direct cinema&quot; (or more accurately &quot;cinéma direct&quot;), pioneered by, among others, Canadians Michel Brault, Pierre Perrault and Allan King, and Americans Robert Drew, Richard Leacock, Frederick Wiseman and Albert and David Maysles.

The directors of the movement take different viewpoints on their degree of involvement with their subjects. Kopple and Pennebaker, for instance, choose non-involvement (or at least no overt involvement), and Perrault, Rouch, Koenig, and Kroitor favor direct involvement or even provocation when they deem it necessary.

The films &quot;Chronicle of a Summer&quot; (Jean Rouch), &quot;Dont Look Back&quot; (D. A. Pennebaker), &quot;Grey Gardens&quot; (Albert and David Maysles), &quot;Titicut Follies&quot; (Frederick Wiseman), &quot;Primary&quot; and &quot;&quot; (both produced by Robert Drew), &quot;Harlan County, USA&quot; (directed by Barbara Kopple), &quot;Lonely Boy&quot; (Wolf Koenig and Roman Kroitor) are all frequently deemed cinéma vérité films.

The fundamentals of the style include following a person during a crisis with a moving, often handheld, camera to capture more personal reactions. There are no sit-down interviews, and the shooting ratio (the amount of film shot to the finished product) is very high, often reaching 80 to one. From there, editors find and sculpt the work into a film. The editors of the movementsuch as Werner Nold, Charlotte Zwerin, Muffie Meyer, Susan Froemke, and Ellen Hovdeare often overlooked, but their input to the films was so vital that they were often given co-director credits.

Famous cinéma vérité/direct cinema films include &quot;Les Raquetteurs&quot;, &quot;Showman&quot;, &quot;Salesman&quot;, &quot;Near Death&quot;, and &quot;The Children Were Watching&quot;.

==== Political weapons ====
In the 1960s and 1970s, documentary film was often regarded as a political weapon against neocolonialism and capitalism in general, especially in Latin America, but also in a changing society. (&quot;The Hour of the Furnaces&quot;, from 1968), directed by Octavio Getino and Fernando Solanas, influenced a whole generation of filmmakers. Among the many political documentaries produced in the early 1970s was &quot;Chile: A Special Report&quot;, public television&#x27;s first in-depth expository look at the September 1973 overthrow of the Salvador Allende government in Chile by military leaders under Augusto Pinochet, produced by documentarians Ari Martinez and José Garcia.

A June 2020 article in &quot;The New York Times&quot; reviewed the political documentary &quot;And She Could Be Next&quot;, directed by Grace Lee and Marjan Safinia. The &quot;Times&quot; described the documentary not only as focusing on women in politics, but more specifically on women of color, their communities, and the significant changes they have wrought upon America.

=== Modern documentaries ===
Box office analysts have noted that the documentary film genre has become increasingly successful in theatrical release with films such as &quot;Fahrenheit 9/11&quot;, &quot;Super Size Me&quot;, &quot;Food, Inc.&quot;, &quot;Earth&quot;, &quot;March of the Penguins&quot;, and &quot;An Inconvenient Truth&quot; among the most prominent examples. Compared to dramatic narrative films, documentaries typically have far lower budgets which makes them attractive to film companies because even a limited theatrical release can be highly profitable.

The nature of documentary films has expanded in the past 30 years from the cinéma vérité style introduced in the 1960s in which the use of portable camera and sound equipment allowed an intimate relationship between filmmaker and subject. The line blurs between documentary and narrative and some works are very personal, such as Marlon Riggs&#x27;s &quot;Tongues Untied&quot; (1989) and &quot;Black Is...Black Ain&#x27;t&quot; (1995), which mix expressive, poetic, and rhetorical elements and stresses subjectivities rather than historical materials.

Historical documentaries, such as the landmark 14-hour &quot;Eyes on the Prize: America&#x27;s Civil Rights Years&quot; (1986Part 1 and 1989Part 2) by Henry Hampton, &quot;4 Little Girls&quot; (1997) by Spike Lee, &quot;The Civil War&quot; by Ken Burns, and UNESCO-awarded independent film on slavery &quot;500 Years Later&quot;, express not only a distinctive voice but also a perspective and point of views. Some films such as &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot; by Errol Morris incorporate stylized re-enactments, and Michael Moore&#x27;s &quot;Roger &amp; Me&quot; place far more interpretive control with the director. The commercial success of these documentaries may derive from this narrative shift in the documentary form, leading some critics to question whether such films can truly be called documentaries; critics sometimes refer to these works as &quot;mondo films&quot; or &quot;docu-ganda.&quot; However, directorial manipulation of documentary subjects has been noted since the work of Flaherty, and may be endemic to the form due to problematic ontological foundations.

Documentary filmmakers are increasingly using social impact campaigns with their films. Social impact campaigns seek to leverage media projects by converting public awareness of social issues and causes into engagement and action, largely by offering the audience a way to get involved. Examples of such documentaries include &quot;Kony 2012&quot;, &quot;Salam Neighbor, Gasland&quot;, &quot;Living on One Dollar&quot;, and &quot;Girl Rising&quot;.

Although documentaries are financially more viable with the increasing popularity of the genre and the advent of the DVD, funding for documentary film production remains elusive. Within the past decade, the largest exhibition opportunities have emerged from within the broadcast market, making filmmakers beholden to the tastes and influences of the broadcasters who have become their largest funding source.

Modern documentaries have some overlap with television forms, with the development of &quot;reality television&quot; that occasionally verges on the documentary but more often veers to the fictional or staged. The &quot;making-of&quot; documentary shows how a movie or a computer game was produced. Usually made for promotional purposes, it is closer to an advertisement than a classic documentary.

Modern lightweight digital video cameras and computer-based editing have greatly aided documentary makers, as has the dramatic drop in equipment prices. The first film to take full advantage of this change was Martin Kunert and Eric Manes&#x27; &quot;Voices of Iraq&quot;, where 150 DV cameras were sent to Iraq during the war and passed out to Iraqis to record themselves.

==== Documentaries without words ====
Films in the documentary form without words have been made. &quot;Listen to Britain&quot;, directed by Humphrey Jennings and Stuart McAllister in 1942, is a wordless meditation on wartime Britain. From 1982, the Qatsi trilogy and the similar &quot;Baraka&quot; could be described as visual tone poems, with music related to the images, but no spoken content. &quot;Koyaanisqatsi&quot; (part of the Qatsi trilogy) consists primarily of slow motion and time-lapse photography of cities and many natural landscapes across the United States. &quot;Baraka&quot; tries to capture the great pulse of humanity as it flocks and swarms in daily activity and religious ceremonies.

&quot;Bodysong&quot; was made in 2003 and won a British Independent Film Award for &quot;Best British Documentary.&quot;

The 2004 film &quot;Genesis&quot; shows animal and plant life in states of expansion, decay, sex, and death, with some, but little, narration.

==== Narration styles ====
; Voice-over narrator
The traditional style for narration is to have a dedicated narrator read a script which is dubbed onto the audio track. The narrator never appears on camera and may not necessarily have knowledge of the subject matter or involvement in the writing of the script.
; Silent narration
This style of narration uses title screens to visually narrate the documentary. The screens are held for about 5–10 seconds to allow adequate time for the viewer to read them. They are similar to the ones shown at the end of movies based on true stories, but they are shown throughout, typically between scenes.
; Hosted narrator
In this style, there is a host who appears on camera, conducts interviews, and who also does voice-overs.

== Other forms ==

=== Hybrid documentary ===
The release of &quot;The Thin Blue Line&quot; (1988) directed by Errol Morris introduced possibilities for emerging forms of the hybrid documentary. Indeed, it was disqualified for an Academy Award because of the stylized recreations. Traditional documentary filmmaking typically removes signs of fictionalization to distinguish itself from fictional film genres. Audiences have recently become more distrustful of the media&#x27;s traditional fact production, making them more receptive to experimental ways of telling facts. The hybrid documentary implements truth games to challenge traditional fact production. Although it is fact-based, the hybrid documentary is not explicit about what should be understood, creating an open dialogue between subject and audience. Clio Barnard&#x27;s &quot;The Arbor&quot; (2010), Joshua Oppenheimer&#x27;s &quot;The Act of Killing&quot; (2012), Mads Brügger&#x27;s &quot;The Ambassador&quot;, and Alma Har&#x27;el&#x27;s &quot;Bombay Beach&quot; (2011) are a few notable examples.

=== Docufiction ===
Docufiction is a genre from two basic ones, fiction film and documentary, practiced since the first documentary films were made.

=== Fake-fiction ===

Fake-fiction is a genre which deliberately presents real, unscripted events in the form of a fiction film, making them appear as staged. The concept was introduced by Pierre Bismuth to describe his 2016 film &quot;Where is Rocky II?&quot;

=== DVD documentary ===
A DVD documentary is a documentary film of indeterminate length that has been produced with the sole intent of releasing it for direct sale to the public on DVD, which is different from a documentary being made and released first on television or on a cinema screen (a.k.a. theatrical release) and subsequently on DVD for public consumption.

This form of documentary release is becoming more popular and accepted as costs and difficulty with finding TV or theatrical release slots increases. It is also commonly used for more &quot;specialist&quot; documentaries, which might not have general interest to a wider TV audience. Examples are military, cultural arts, transport, sports, animals, etc.

=== Compilation films ===
Compilation films were pioneered in 1927 by Esfir Schub with &quot;The Fall of the Romanov Dynasty&quot;. More recent examples include &quot;Point of Order!&quot; (1964), directed by Emile de Antonio about the McCarthy hearings. Similarly, &quot;The Last Cigarette&quot; combines the testimony of various tobacco company executives before the U.S. Congress with archival propaganda extolling the virtues of smoking.

Poetic documentaries, which first appeared in the 1920s, were a sort of reaction against both the content and the rapidly crystallizing grammar of the early fiction film. The poetic mode moved away from continuity editing and instead organized images of the material world by means of associations and patterns, both in terms of time and space. Well-rounded characters&quot;lifelike people&quot;were absent; instead, people appeared in these films as entities, just like any other, that are found in the material world. The films were fragmentary, impressionistic, lyrical. Their disruption of the coherence of time and spacea coherence favored by the fiction films of the daycan also be seen as an element of the modernist counter-model of cinematic narrative. The &quot;real world&quot;Nichols calls it the &quot;historical world&quot;was broken up into fragments and aesthetically reconstituted using film form. Examples of this style include Joris Ivens&#x27; &quot;Rain&quot; (1928), which records a passing summer shower over Amsterdam; László Moholy-Nagy&#x27;s &quot;Play of Light: Black, White, Grey (1930)&quot;, in which he films one of his own kinetic sculptures, emphasizing not the sculpture itself but the play of light around it; Oskar Fischinger&#x27;s abstract animated films; Francis Thompson&#x27;s &quot;N.Y., N.Y.&quot; (1957), a city symphony film; and Chris Marker&#x27;s &quot;Sans Soleil&quot; (1982).

Expository documentaries speak directly to the viewer, often in the form of an authoritative commentary employing voiceover or titles, proposing a strong argument and point of view. These films are rhetorical, and try to persuade the viewer. (They may use a rich and sonorous male voice.) The (voice-of-God) commentary often sounds &quot;objective&quot; and omniscient. Images are often not paramount; they exist to advance the argument. The rhetoric insistently presses upon us to read the images in a certain fashion. Historical documentaries in this mode deliver an unproblematic and &quot;objective&quot; account and interpretation of past events.

Examples: TV shows and films like &quot;Biography&quot;, &quot;America&#x27;s Most Wanted&quot;, many science and nature documentaries, Ken Burns&#x27; &quot;The Civil War&quot; (1990), Robert Hughes&#x27; &quot;The Shock of the New&quot; (1980), John Berger&#x27;s &quot;Ways of Seeing&quot; (1972), Frank Capra&#x27;s wartime &quot;Why We Fight&quot; series, and Pare Lorentz&#x27;s &quot;The Plow That Broke the Plains&quot; (1936).

=== Observational ===

Observational documentaries attempt to spontaneously observe their subjects with minimal intervention. Filmmakers who worked in this subgenre often saw the poetic mode as too abstract and the expository mode as too didactic. The first observational docs date back to the 1960s; the technological developments which made them possible include mobile lightweight cameras and portable sound recording equipment for synchronized sound. Often, this mode of film eschewed voice-over commentary, post-synchronized dialogue and music, or re-enactments. The films aimed for immediacy, intimacy, and revelation of individual human character in ordinary life situations.

=== Types ===

Participatory documentaries believe that it is impossible for the act of filmmaking to not influence or alter the events being filmed. What these films do is emulate the approach of the anthropologist: participant-observation. Not only is the filmmaker part of the film, we also get a sense of how situations in the film are affected or altered by their presence. Nichols: &quot;The filmmaker steps out from behind the cloak of voice-over commentary, steps away from poetic meditation, steps down from a fly-on-the-wall perch, and becomes a social actor (almost) like any other. (Almost like any other because the filmmaker retains the camera, and with it, a certain degree of potential power and control over events.)&quot; The encounter between filmmaker and subject becomes a critical element of the film. Rouch and Morin named the approach cinéma vérité, translating Dziga Vertov&#x27;s kinopravda into French; the &quot;truth&quot; refers to the truth of the encounter rather than some absolute truth.

Reflexive documentaries do not see themselves as a transparent window on the world; instead, they draw attention to their own constructedness, and the fact that they are representations. How does the world get represented by documentary films? This question is central to this subgenre of films. They prompt us to &quot;question the authenticity of documentary in general.&quot; It is the most self-conscious of all the modes, and is highly skeptical of &quot;realism&quot;. It may use Brechtian alienation strategies to jar us, in order to &quot;defamiliarize&quot; what we are seeing and how we are seeing it.

Performative documentaries stress subjective experience and emotional response to the world. They are strongly personal, unconventional, perhaps poetic and/or experimental, and might include hypothetical enactments of events designed to make us experience what it might be like for us to possess a certain specific perspective on the world that is not our own, e.g. that of black, gay men in Marlon Riggs&#x27;s &quot;Tongues Untied&quot; (1989) or Jenny Livingston&#x27;s &quot;Paris Is Burning&quot; (1991). This subgenre might also lend itself to certain groups (e.g. women, ethnic minorities, gays and lesbians, etc.) to &quot;speak about themselves&quot;. Often, a battery of techniques, many borrowed from fiction or avant-garde films, are used. Performative docs often link up personal accounts or experiences with larger political or historical realities.

=== Educational films ===
Documentaries are shown in schools around the world in order to educate students. Used to introduce various topics to children, they are often used with a school lesson or shown many times to reinforce an idea.

== Translation ==

There are several challenges associated with translation of documentaries. The main two are working conditions and problems with terminology.

=== Working conditions ===

Documentary translators very often have to meet tight deadlines. Normally, the translator has between five and seven days to hand over the translation of a 90-minute programme. Dubbing studios typically give translators a week to translate a documentary, but in order to earn a good salary, translators have to deliver their translations in a much shorter period, usually when the studio decides to deliver the final programme to the client sooner or when the broadcasting channel sets a tight deadline, e.g. on documentaries discussing the latest news.

Another problem is the lack of postproduction script or the poor quality of the transcription. A correct transcription is essential for a translator to do their work properly, however many times the script is not even given to the translator, which is a major impediment since documentaries are characterised by &quot;the abundance of terminological units and very specific proper names&quot;. When the script is given to the translator, it is usually poorly transcribed or outright incorrect making the translation unnecessarily difficult and demanding because all of the proper names and specific terminology have to be correct in a documentary programme in order for it to be a reliable source of information, hence the translator has to check every term on their own. Such mistakes in proper names are for instance: &quot;Jungle Reinhard instead of Django Reinhart, Jorn Asten instead of Jane Austen, and Magnus Axle instead of Aldous Huxley&quot;.

=== Terminology ===

The process of translation of a documentary programme requires working with very specific, often scientific terminology. Documentary translators are not usually specialists in a given field. Therefore, they are compelled to undertake extensive research whenever asked to make a translation of a specific documentary programme in order to understand it correctly and deliver the final product free of mistakes and inaccuracies. Generally, documentaries contain a large number of specific terms, with which translators have to familiarise themselves on their own, for example:
The documentary &quot;Beetles, Record Breakers&quot; makes use of 15 different terms to refer to beetles in less than 30 minutes (longhorn beetle, cellar beetle, stag beetle, burying beetle or gravediggers, sexton beetle, tiger beetle, bloody nose beetle, tortoise beetle, diving beetle, devil&#x27;s coach horse, weevil, click beetle, malachite beetle, oil beetle, cockchafer), apart from mentioning other animals such as horseshoe bats or meadow brown butterflies.
This poses a real challenge for the translators because they have to render the meaning, i.e. find an equivalent, of a very specific, scientific term in the target language and frequently the narrator uses a more general name instead of a specific term and the translator has to rely on the image presented in the programme to understand which term is being discussed in order to transpose it in the target language accordingly. Additionally, translators of minorised languages often have to face another problem: some terms may not even exist in the target language. In such cases, they have to create new terminology or consult specialists to find proper solutions. Also, sometimes the official nomenclature differs from the terminology used by actual specialists, which leaves the translator to decide between using the official vocabulary that can be found in the dictionary, or rather opting for spontaneous expressions used by real experts in real life situations.

== See also ==
* Actuality film
* Citizen media
* Concert film
* Dance film
* Docudrama
* Ethnofiction
* Ethnographic film
* List of documentary films
* List of documentary film festivals
* List of documentary television channels
* List of directors and producers of documentaries
* Mockumentary
* Mondo film
* Nature documentary
* Outline of film
* Participatory video
* Political cinema
* Public-access television
* Reality film
* Sponsored film
* Visual anthropology
* Women&#x27;s cinema
=== Some documentary film awards ===
* Grierson Awards
* Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature
* Joris Ivens Award, International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam (IDFA), (named after Joris Ivens)
* Cinéma du Réel prizes, including the Grand Prix and Prix du premier film Loridan-Ivens / First Film Loridan-Ivens Award (formerly Joris Ivens Award), among others
* Filmmaker Award, Margaret Mead Film Festival
* Grand Prize, Visions du Réel

== References ==
== Sources and bibliography ==

* Aitken, Ian (ed.). &quot;Encyclopedia of the Documentary Film&quot;. New York: Routledge, 2005. .
* Barnouw, Erik. &quot;Documentary: A History of the Non-Fiction Film&quot;, 2nd rev. ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 1993. . Still a useful introduction.
* Ron Burnett. &quot;Reflections on the Documentary Cinema&quot; 
* Burton, Julianne (ed.). &quot;The Social Documentary in Latin America&quot;. Pittsburgh, Penn.: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1990. .
* Dawson, Jonathan. &quot;Dziga Vertov&quot;.
* Ellis, Jack C., and Betsy A. McLane. &quot;A New History of Documentary Film.&quot; New York: Continuum International, 2005. , .
* Godmilow, Jill: &quot;Kill the Documentary. A Letter to Filmmakers, Students and Scholars&quot;, Foreword by Bill Nichols, Columbia UP, New York 2022
* Goldsmith, David A. &quot;The Documentary Makers: Interviews with 15 of the Best in the Business&quot;. Hove, East Sussex: RotoVision, 2003. .
* Klotman, Phyllis R. and Culter, Janet K.(eds.). &quot;Struggles for Representation: African American Documentary Film and Video&quot; Bloomington and Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press, 1999. .
* Leach, Jim, and Jeannette Sloniowski (eds.). &quot;Candid Eyes: Essays on Canadian Documentaries&quot;. Toronto; Buffalo: University of Toronto Press, 2003. , .
* Nichols, Bill. &quot;Introduction to Documentary&quot;, Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 2001. , .
* Nichols, Bill. &quot;Representing Reality: Issues and Concepts in Documentary&quot;. Bloomington, Ind.: Indiana University Press, 1991. , .
* Nornes, Markus. &quot;Forest of Pressure: Ogawa Shinsuke and Postwar Japanese Documentary&quot;. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007. , .
* Nornes, Markus. &quot;Japanese Documentary Film: The Meiji Era through Hiroshima&quot;. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2003. , .
* Rotha, Paul, &quot;Documentary diary; An Informal History of the British Documentary Film, 1928–1939&quot;. New York: Hill and Wang, 1973. .
* Saunders, Dave. &quot;Direct Cinema: Observational Documentary and the Politics of the Sixties&quot;. London: Wallflower Press, 2007. , .
* Saunders, Dave. &quot;Documentary: The Routledge Film Guidebook&quot;. London: Routledge, 2010.
* Tobias, Michael. &quot;The Search for Reality: The Art of Documentary Filmmaking&quot;. Studio City, CA: Michael Wiese Productions 1997. 
* Walker, Janet, and Diane Waldeman (eds.). &quot;Feminism and Documentary&quot;. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999. , .
* Wyver, John. &quot;The Moving Image: An International History of Film, Television &amp; Radio&quot;. Oxford: Basil Blackwell Ltd. in association with the British Film Institute, 1989. .
* Murdoch.edu , Documentaryreading list
=== Ethnographic film ===

* Emilie de Brigard, &quot;The History of Ethnographic Film,&quot; in &quot;Principles of Visual Anthropology&quot;, ed. Paul Hockings. Berlin and New York City : Mouton de Gruyter, 1995, pp. 13–43.
* Leslie Devereaux, &quot;Cultures, Disciplines, Cinemas,&quot; in &quot;Fields of Vision. Essays in Film Studies, Visual Anthropology and Photography&quot;, ed. Leslie Devereaux &amp; Roger Hillman. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995, pp. 329–339.
* Faye Ginsburg, Lila Abu-Lughod and Brian Larkin (eds.), &quot;Media Worlds: Anthropology on New Terrain&quot;. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002. .
* Anna Grimshaw, &quot;The Ethnographer&#x27;s Eye: Ways of Seeing in Modern Anthropology&quot;. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2001. .
* Karl G. Heider, &quot;Ethnographic Film&quot;. Austin: University of Texas Press, 1994.
* Luc de Heusch, &quot;Cinéma et Sciences Sociales&quot;, Paris: UNESCO, 1962. Published in English as &quot;The Cinema and Social Science. A Survey of Ethnographic and Sociological Films&quot;. UNESCO, 1962.
* Fredric Jameson, &quot;Signatures of the Visible&quot;. New York &amp; London: Routledge, 1990.
* Pierre-L. Jordan, &quot;Premier Contact-Premier Regard&quot;, Marseille: Musées de Marseille. Images en Manoeuvres Editions, 1992.
* André Leroi-Gourhan, &quot;Cinéma et Sciences Humaines. Le Film Ethnologique Existe-t-il?,&quot; &quot;Revue de Géographie Humaine et d&#x27;Ethnologie&quot; 3 (1948), pp. 42–50.
* David MacDougall, &quot;Transcultural Cinema&quot;. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998. .
* David MacDougall, &quot;Whose Story Is It?,&quot; in &quot;Ethnographic Film Aesthetics and Narrative Traditions&quot;, ed. Peter I. Crawford and Jan K. Simonsen. Aarhus, Intervention Press, 1992, pp. 25–42.
* Fatimah Tobing Rony, &quot;The Third Eye: Race, Cinema and Ethnographic Spectacle&quot;. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1996. .
* Georges Sadoul, &quot;Histoire Générale du Cinéma&quot;. Vol. 1, &quot;L&#x27;Invention du Cinéma 1832–1897&quot;. Paris: Denöel, 1977, pp. 73–110.
* Pierre Sorlin, &quot;Sociologie du Cinéma&quot;, Paris: Aubier Montaigne, 1977, pp. 7–74.
* Charles Warren, &quot;Introduction, with a Brief History of Nonfiction Film,&quot; in &quot;Beyond Document. Essays on Nonfiction Film&quot;, ed. Charles Warren. Hanover and London: Wesleyan University Press, 1996, pp. 1–22.
* Ismail Xavier, &quot;Cinema: Revelação e Engano&quot;, in &quot;O Olhar&quot; , ed. Adauto Novaes. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1993, pp. 367–384.
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="2" end="18" title="Documentary film" label="documentary film"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="48" end="59" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="80" end="94" title="Film" label="motion picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="185" end="202" title="Recorded history" label="historical record"/>
<link wikidata="Q482980" start="223" end="229" title="author" label="author"/>
<link wikidata="Q165650" start="234" end="247" title="Media studies" label="media analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860358" start="248" end="260" title="Bill Nichols (film critic)" label="Bill Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="315" end="325" title="filmmaking" label="filmmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="491" end="499" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q9081" start="520" end="529" title="knowledge" label="knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="536" end="543" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q615498" start="619" end="642" title="documentary photography" label="documentary photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q125191" start="682" end="693" title="Photograph" label="photographs"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="730" end="747" title="History" label="historical events"/>
<link wikidata="Q605789" start="821" end="849" title="War photography" label="conflict-related photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q187850" start="886" end="898" title="Mathew Brady" label="Mathew Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="910" end="928" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677832" start="1129" end="1143" title="actuality film" label="actuality film"/>
<link wikidata="Q596138" start="1471" end="1482" title="Educational film" label="educational"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="1506" end="1517" title="observation" label="observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q472637" start="1527" end="1538" title="docufiction" label="docufiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6031274" start="1641" end="1652" title="Informational listening" label="informative"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="1742" end="1751" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="1891" end="1903" title="Social media" label="Social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q769222" start="1926" end="1937" title="Dailymotion" label="Dailymotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="1942" end="1949" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="1970" end="1979" title="Social media platform" label="platforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="2080" end="2090" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q559856" start="2191" end="2211" title="online video sharing" label="online video sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="2316" end="2326" title="censorship" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454468" start="2375" end="2395" title="Bolesław Matuszewski" label="Bolesław Matuszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700285" start="3020" end="3033" title="John Grierson" label="John Grierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q263148" start="3051" end="3066" title="Robert Flaherty" label="Robert Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941360" start="3085" end="3090" title="Moana (1926 film)" label="Moana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983260" start="3128" end="3140" title="New York Sun (historical)" label="New York Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q55193" start="3807" end="3819" title="Dziga Vertov" label="Dziga Vertov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052126" start="4033" end="4045" title="Pare Lorentz" label="Pare Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="5411" end="5436" title="Auguste and Louis Lumière" label="Auguste and Louis Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784136" start="5781" end="5810" title="The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight" label="The Corbett-Fitzsimmons Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783488" start="5860" end="5875" title="Enoch J. Rector" label="Enoch J. Rector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454468" start="5986" end="6006" title="Bolesław Matuszewski" label="Bolesław Matuszewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="6053" end="6059" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="6064" end="6080" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059836" start="6116" end="6134" title="Eugène-Louis Doyen" label="Eugène-Louis Doyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980648" start="6159" end="6174" title="Clément Maurice" label="Clément Maurice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521586" start="6838" end="6856" title="Gheorghe Marinescu" label="Gheorghe Marinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83042" start="6891" end="6900" title="neurology" label="neurology"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="6911" end="6920" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962481" start="6928" end="6965" title="Walking Troubles of Organic Hemiplegy" label="Walking Troubles of Organic Hemiplegy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670855" start="8046" end="8062" title="Travelogue (films)" label="Travelogue films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2515304" start="8330" end="8361" title="In the Land of the Head Hunters" label="In the Land of the Head Hunters"/>
<link wikidata="Q848365" start="8391" end="8402" title="primitivism" label="primitivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q368949" start="8407" end="8416" title="exoticism" label="exoticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q392316" start="8486" end="8502" title="First Nations in Canada" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="8539" end="8544" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324719" start="8650" end="8669" title="Moscow Clad in Snow" label="Moscow Clad in Snow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8765" end="8790" title="Eminescu-Veronica-Creangă" label="Eminescu-Veronica-Creangă"/>
<link wikidata="Q184935" start="8844" end="8858" title="Mihai Eminescu" label="Mihai Eminescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4010195" start="8860" end="8874" title="Veronica Micle" label="Veronica Micle"/>
<link wikidata="Q204810" start="8879" end="8890" title="Ion Creangă" label="Ion Creangă"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="8953" end="8962" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544011" start="8974" end="8979" title="Pathé" label="Pathé"/>
<link wikidata="Q630548" start="9027" end="9038" title="Kinemacolor" label="Kinemacolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020559" start="9068" end="9105" title="With Our King and Queen Through India" label="With Our King and Queen Through India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246553" start="9124" end="9130" title="Prizma" label="Prizma"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="9319" end="9330" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q958587" start="9461" end="9473" title="Frank Hurley" label="Frank Hurley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162294" start="9542" end="9577" title="Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition" label="Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q957543" start="9651" end="9668" title="Ernest Shackleton" label="Ernest Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q263148" start="9722" end="9740" title="Robert J. Flaherty" label="Robert J. Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q918401" start="9754" end="9773" title="Nanook of the North" label="Nanook of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="9815" end="9826" title="romanticism" label="romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q101805" start="10248" end="10253" title="igloo" label="igloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="10335" end="10353" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543504" start="10485" end="10490" title="Grass (1925 film)" label="Grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061895" start="10514" end="10519" title="Chang (film)" label="Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q446427" start="10551" end="10567" title="Merian C. Cooper" label="Merian C. Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117163" start="10572" end="10589" title="Ernest Schoedsack" label="Ernest Schoedsack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096046" start="10626" end="10639" title="city symphony" label="city symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="10650" end="10660" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="10674" end="10691" title="avant-garde films" label="avant-garde films"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="10764" end="10774" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="10783" end="10789" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207103" start="10791" end="10805" title="Constructivism (art)" label="Constructivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="10811" end="10824" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="10839" end="10852" title="art historian" label="art historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q112381405" start="10864" end="10879" title="Scott MacDonald (media scholar)" label="Scott MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098642" start="11139" end="11147" title="Manhatta" label="Manhatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q453839" start="11170" end="11181" title="Paul Strand" label="Paul Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232920" start="11196" end="11215" title="Rien que les heures" label="Rien que les heures"/>
<link wikidata="Q393063" start="11245" end="11251" title="French films" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q728396" start="11258" end="11276" title="Alberto Cavalcanti" label="Alberto Cavalcanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q263148" start="11329" end="11347" title="Robert J. Flaherty" label="Robert J. Flaherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655706" start="11381" end="11396" title="Mikhail Kaufman" label="Mikhail Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11411" end="11427" title="Études sur Paris" label="Études sur Paris"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11440" end="11453" title="André Sauvage" label="André Sauvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795184" start="11468" end="11478" title="De brug" label="The Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057777" start="11502" end="11506" title="Rain (1929 film)" label="Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q238616" start="11529" end="11540" title="Joris Ivens" label="Joris Ivens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11548" end="11580" title="São Paulo, Sinfonia da Metrópole" label="São Paulo, Sinfonia da Metrópole"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11593" end="11609" title="Adalberto Kemeny" label="Adalberto Kemeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q77365" start="11637" end="11652" title="Walter Ruttmann" label="Walter Ruttmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q829250" start="11667" end="11690" title="Man with a Movie Camera" label="Man with a Movie Camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q55193" start="11703" end="11715" title="Dziga Vertov" label="Dziga Vertov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284859" start="11730" end="11750" title="Douro, Faina Fluvial" label="Douro, Faina Fluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q43264" start="11763" end="11781" title="Manoel de Oliveira" label="Manoel de Oliveira"/>
<link wikidata="Q119706172" start="11800" end="11825" title="Rhapsody in Two Languages" label="Rhapsody in Two Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110929" start="11838" end="11853" title="Gordon Sparling" label="Gordon Sparling"/>
<link wikidata="Q200250" start="11942" end="11959" title="metropolis" label="metropolitan city"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="12042" end="12050" title="Abstract expressionism" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q3321104" start="12120" end="12141" title="Soviet montage theory" label="Soviet montage theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21090266" start="12254" end="12264" title="cinepoetry" label="cinepoetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="12306" end="12314" title="symphony" label="symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9485200" start="12376" end="12383" title="Realism (theatre)" label="Realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700285" start="12569" end="12577" title="John Grierson" label="Grierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q55193" start="12929" end="12941" title="Dziga Vertov" label="Dziga Vertov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197182" start="12974" end="12985" title="Kino-Pravda" label="Kino-Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q735478" start="13333" end="13341" title="newsreel" label="newsreel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935609" start="13929" end="13944" title="propaganda film" label="propaganda film"/>
<link wikidata="Q55415" start="13949" end="13965" title="Leni Riefenstahl" label="Leni Riefenstahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q156497" start="13984" end="14003" title="Triumph of the Will" label="Triumph of the Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q160225" start="14044" end="14063" title="Nuremberg Rally" label="Nazi Party Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="14088" end="14100" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q238616" start="14121" end="14132" title="Joris Ivens" label="Joris Ivens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033012" start="14137" end="14149" title="Henri Storck" label="Henri Storck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317033" start="14165" end="14173" title="Misère au Borinage" label="Borinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q51545" start="14225" end="14236" title="Luis Buñuel" label="Luis Buñuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="14254" end="14264" title="surrealism" label="surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606896" start="14289" end="14299" title="Land Without Bread" label="Las Hurdes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052126" start="14315" end="14327" title="Pare Lorentz" label="Pare Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480639" start="14341" end="14371" title="The Plow That Broke the Plains" label="The Plow That Broke the Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067313" start="14395" end="14404" title="The River (1938 film)" label="The River"/>
<link wikidata="Q709447" start="14422" end="14438" title="Willard Van Dyke" label="Willard Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2777377" start="14452" end="14460" title="The City (1939 film)" label="The City"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="14486" end="14494" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="14628" end="14639" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771928" start="14653" end="14665" title="Why We Fight" label="Why We Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q265358" start="14825" end="14842" title="Constance Bennett" label="Constance Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133197" start="14859" end="14878" title="Henri de la Falaise" label="Henri de la Falaise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125978" start="14952" end="14956" title="Bali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="15014" end="15023" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530721" start="15041" end="15051" title="National Film Board of Canada" label="Film Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="15258" end="15262" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="15287" end="15302" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287661" start="15409" end="15434" title="Documentary Film Movement" label="Documentary Film Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q728396" start="15446" end="15464" title="Alberto Cavalcanti" label="Alberto Cavalcanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637771" start="15466" end="15476" title="Harry Watt (director)" label="Harry Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q810048" start="15478" end="15490" title="Basil Wright" label="Basil Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q352565" start="15496" end="15513" title="Humphrey Jennings" label="Humphrey Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414330" start="15719" end="15733" title="Song of Ceylon" label="Song of Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418983" start="15762" end="15780" title="Fires Were Started" label="Fires Were Started"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656424" start="15798" end="15817" title="A Diary for Timothy" label="A Diary for Timothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="15879" end="15890" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="15910" end="15926" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q443528" start="15948" end="15963" title="J. B. Priestley" label="J. B. Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q943563" start="16018" end="16028" title="Night Mail" label="Night Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q21646703" start="16045" end="16054" title="Coal Face" label="Coal Face"/>
<link wikidata="Q433483" start="16138" end="16154" title="Stefan Themerson" label="Stefan Themerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092621" start="16317" end="16330" title="Cinéma vérité" label="Cinéma vérité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323308" start="16355" end="16368" title="Direct Cinema" label="direct cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q193541" start="16706" end="16721" title="French New Wave" label="French New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q166405" start="16995" end="17005" title="Jean Rouch" label="Jean Rouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323308" start="17036" end="17049" title="Direct Cinema" label="direct cinema"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17082" end="17095" title=":fr:Cinéma direct" label="cinéma direct"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17142" end="17155" title=":fr:Michel Brault" label="Michel Brault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3386563" start="17157" end="17172" title="Pierre Perrault" label="Pierre Perrault"/>
<link wikidata="Q202240" start="17177" end="17187" title="Allan King" label="Allan King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057633" start="17203" end="17214" title="Robert Drew" label="Robert Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364819" start="17216" end="17231" title="Richard Leacock" label="Richard Leacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361201" start="17233" end="17250" title="Frederick Wiseman" label="Frederick Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831691" start="17255" end="17279" title="Albert and David Maysles" label="Albert and David Maysles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966752" start="17618" end="17639" title="Chronicle of a Summer" label="Chronicle of a Summer"/>
<link wikidata="Q166405" start="17647" end="17657" title="Jean Rouch" label="Jean Rouch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242182" start="17666" end="17680" title="Dont Look Back" label="Dont Look Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q225852" start="17688" end="17704" title="D. A. Pennebaker" label="D. A. Pennebaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104352" start="17713" end="17725" title="Grey Gardens" label="Grey Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831691" start="17733" end="17757" title="Albert and David Maysles" label="Albert and David Maysles"/>
<link wikidata="Q144521" start="17766" end="17781" title="Titicut Follies" label="Titicut Follies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361201" start="17789" end="17806" title="Frederick Wiseman" label="Frederick Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299721" start="17815" end="17822" title="Primary (film)" label="Primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057633" start="17864" end="17875" title="Robert Drew" label="Robert Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752675" start="17884" end="17902" title="Harlan County, USA" label="Harlan County, USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q449349" start="17922" end="17936" title="Barbara Kopple" label="Barbara Kopple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671582" start="17945" end="17955" title="Lonely Boy (film)" label="Lonely Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588726" start="17963" end="17974" title="Wolf Koenig" label="Wolf Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440872" start="17979" end="17992" title="Roman Kroitor" label="Roman Kroitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092621" start="18020" end="18033" title="cinéma vérité" label="cinéma vérité"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501049" start="18231" end="18245" title="shooting ratio" label="shooting ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567330" start="18429" end="18440" title="Werner Nold" label="Werner Nold"/>
<link wikidata="Q536537" start="18442" end="18458" title="Charlotte Zwerin" label="Charlotte Zwerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732531" start="18460" end="18472" title="Muffie Meyer" label="Muffie Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647846" start="18474" end="18487" title="Susan Froemke" label="Susan Froemke"/>
<link wikidata="Q82777591" start="18493" end="18504" title="Ellen Hovde" label="Ellen Hovde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235080" start="18672" end="18687" title="Les Raquetteurs" label="Les Raquetteurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586674" start="18722" end="18730" title="Salesman (1969 film)" label="Salesman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190586" start="18925" end="18939" title="neocolonialism" label="neocolonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="18944" end="18954" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3950846" start="19035" end="19059" title="The Hour of the Furnaces" label="The Hour of the Furnaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080882" start="19091" end="19105" title="Octavio Getino" label="Octavio Getino"/>
<link wikidata="Q508497" start="19110" end="19126" title="Fernando Solanas" label="Fernando Solanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q440" start="19376" end="19392" title="Salvador Allende" label="Salvador Allende"/>
<link wikidata="Q368" start="19439" end="19455" title="Augusto Pinochet" label="Augusto Pinochet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="19544" end="19562" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q221852" start="20067" end="20082" title="Fahrenheit 9/11" label="Fahrenheit 9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q738662" start="20096" end="20109" title="Super Size Me" label="Super Size Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300148" start="20123" end="20133" title="Food, Inc." label="Food, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q819105" start="20147" end="20152" title="Earth (2009 film)" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q330113" start="20166" end="20187" title="March of the Penguins" label="March of the Penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q204670" start="20205" end="20226" title="An Inconvenient Truth" label="An Inconvenient Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q955077" start="20798" end="20810" title="Marlon Riggs" label="Marlon Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385782" start="21082" end="21099" title="Eyes on the Prize" label="Eyes on the Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148304" start="21193" end="21207" title="4 Little Girls" label="4 Little Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q51566" start="21224" end="21233" title="Spike Lee" label="Spike Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q672443" start="21241" end="21254" title="The Civil War (TV series)" label="The Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="21264" end="21273" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639741" start="21328" end="21343" title="500 Years Later" label="500 Years Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q162997" start="21456" end="21474" title="The Thin Blue Line (1988 film)" label="The Thin Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q977546" start="21484" end="21496" title="Errol Morris" label="Errol Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q174908" start="21537" end="21550" title="Michael Moore" label="Michael Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569662" start="21564" end="21578" title="Roger &amp;amp; Me" label="Roger &amp;amp; Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474387" start="21883" end="21894" title="mondo films" label="mondo films"/>
<link wikidata="Q31681" start="22437" end="22446" title="Kony 2012" label="Kony 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q25112327" start="22460" end="22474" title="Salam Neighbor" label="Salam Neighbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1495207" start="22476" end="22483" title="Gasland" label="Gasland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17113034" start="22497" end="22517" title="Living on One Dollar" label="Living on One Dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995098" start="22535" end="22546" title="Girl Rising" label="Girl Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="23236" end="23249" title="video game" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775934" start="23575" end="23588" title="Martin Kunert" label="Martin Kunert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387034" start="23593" end="23603" title="Eric Manes" label="Eric Manes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939718" start="23616" end="23630" title="Voices of Iraq" label="Voices of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646384" start="23844" end="23861" title="Listen to Britain" label="Listen to Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377429" start="23990" end="24003" title="Qatsi trilogy" label="Qatsi trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q514170" start="24026" end="24032" title="Baraka (film)" label="Baraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127828" start="24143" end="24156" title="Koyaanisqatsi" label="Koyaanisqatsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377429" start="24176" end="24189" title="Qatsi trilogy" label="Qatsi trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899749" start="24213" end="24224" title="slow motion" label="slow motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q186563" start="24229" end="24251" title="time-lapse photography" label="time-lapse photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355552" start="24455" end="24463" title="Bodysong" label="Bodysong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502069" start="24591" end="24598" title="Genesis (2004 film)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146822" start="24790" end="24799" title="Voice-over" label="narration"/>
<link wikidata="Q245069" start="25075" end="25088" title="intertitle" label="title screens"/>
<link wikidata="Q162997" start="25550" end="25568" title="The Thin Blue Line (1988 film)" label="The Thin Blue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q977546" start="25594" end="25606" title="Errol Morris" label="Errol Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631781" start="26299" end="26311" title="Clio Barnard" label="Clio Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290103" start="26349" end="26367" title="Joshua Oppenheimer" label="Joshua Oppenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712287" start="26381" end="26399" title="The Act of Killing" label="The Act of Killing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747857" start="26414" end="26426" title="Mads Brügger" label="Mads Brügger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331220" start="26434" end="26460" title="The Ambassador (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Ambassador&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733549" start="26466" end="26482" title="Alma Har&amp;#x27;el" label="Alma Har&amp;#x27;el"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940535" start="26490" end="26514" title="Bombay Beach (film)" label="&amp;quot;Bombay Beach&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q472637" start="26571" end="26582" title="Docufiction" label="Docufiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12912091" start="26615" end="26627" title="fictional film" label="fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858445" start="26890" end="26904" title="Pierre Bismuth" label="Pierre Bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q25339118" start="27261" end="27279" title="Film release" label="theatrical release"/>
<link wikidata="Q463767" start="27756" end="27767" title="Esfir Shub" label="Esfir Schub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025036" start="27853" end="27868" title="Point of Order (film)" label="Point of Order!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337229" start="27895" end="27911" title="Emile de Antonio" label="Emile de Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27958" end="27976" title="The Last Cigarette" label="The Last Cigarette"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="28055" end="28068" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q160448" start="29172" end="29190" title="László Moholy-Nagy" label="László Moholy-Nagy"/>
<link wikidata="Q66245" start="29375" end="29391" title="Oskar Fischinger" label="Oskar Fischinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6951584" start="29454" end="29464" title="N.Y., N.Y. (film)" label="N.Y., N.Y."/>
<link wikidata="Q2096046" start="29481" end="29494" title="city symphony" label="city symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q170256" start="29505" end="29517" title="Chris Marker" label="Chris Marker"/>
<link wikidata="Q290796" start="29531" end="29542" title="Sans Soleil" label="Sans Soleil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914885" start="30251" end="30260" title="Biography (TV series)" label="Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q467565" start="30274" end="30300" title="America&amp;#x27;s Most Wanted" label="America&amp;#x27;s Most Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q616886" start="30347" end="30356" title="Ken Burns" label="Ken Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q672443" start="30369" end="30382" title="The Civil War (miniseries)" label="The Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811222" start="30397" end="30410" title="Robert Hughes (critic)" label="Robert Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763882" start="30423" end="30443" title="The Shock of the New" label="The Shock of the New"/>
<link wikidata="Q382604" start="30458" end="30469" title="John Berger" label="John Berger"/>
<link wikidata="Q14479917" start="30483" end="30497" title="Ways of Seeing" label="Ways of Seeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="30512" end="30523" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771928" start="30545" end="30557" title="Why We Fight" label="Why We Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052126" start="30576" end="30588" title="Pare Lorentz" label="Pare Lorentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2480639" start="30602" end="30632" title="The Plow That Broke the Plains" label="The Plow That Broke the Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4677832" start="37822" end="37836" title="Actuality film" label="Actuality film"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384758" start="37839" end="37852" title="Citizen media" label="Citizen media"/>
<link wikidata="Q430525" start="37855" end="37867" title="Concert film" label="Concert film"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072043" start="37870" end="37880" title="Dance film" label="Dance film"/>
<link wikidata="Q622370" start="37883" end="37892" title="Docudrama" label="Docudrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059309" start="37895" end="37907" title="Ethnofiction" label="Ethnofiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371394" start="37910" end="37927" title="Ethnographic film" label="Ethnographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617125" start="37930" end="37955" title="List of documentary films" label="List of documentary films"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287670" start="37958" end="37992" title="List of documentary film festivals" label="List of documentary film festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6617139" start="37995" end="38034" title="List of documentary television channels" label="List of documentary television channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243654" start="38037" end="38085" title="List of directors and producers of documentaries" label="List of directors and producers of documentaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="38088" end="38100" title="Mockumentary" label="Mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474387" start="38103" end="38113" title="Mondo film" label="Mondo film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760864" start="38116" end="38134" title="Nature documentary" label="Nature documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112632" start="38137" end="38152" title="Outline of film" label="Outline of film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140466" start="38155" end="38174" title="Participatory video" label="Participatory video"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973201" start="38177" end="38193" title="Political cinema" label="Political cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q119400" start="38196" end="38220" title="Public-access television" label="Public-access television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301269" start="38223" end="38235" title="Reality film" label="Reality film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579035" start="38238" end="38252" title="Sponsored film" label="Sponsored film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746658" start="38255" end="38274" title="Visual anthropology" label="Visual anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451709" start="38277" end="38296" title="Women&amp;#x27;s cinema" label="Women&amp;#x27;s cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608702" start="38336" end="38351" title="Grierson Awards" label="Grierson Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q111332" start="38354" end="38396" title="Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature" label="Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666506" start="38399" end="38416" title="Joris Ivens Award" label="Joris Ivens Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666506" start="38418" end="38467" title="International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam" label="International Documentary Film Festival Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q238616" start="38489" end="38500" title="Joris Ivens" label="Joris Ivens"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38504" end="38518" title="Cinéma_du_Réel#Prizes" label="Cinéma du Réel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759717" start="38686" end="38713" title="Margaret Mead Film Festival" label="Margaret Mead Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q677336" start="38729" end="38744" title="Visions du Réel" label="Visions du Réel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="38876" end="38885" title="Routledge" label="Routledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353824" start="38897" end="38910" title="Erik Barnouw" label="Barnouw, Erik"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="38995" end="39018" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201501" start="39059" end="39070" title="Ron Burnett" label="Ron Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896130" start="39221" end="39251" title="University of Pittsburgh Press" label="University of Pittsburgh Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q15821019" start="39440" end="39454" title="Jill Godmilow" label="Godmilow, Jill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39592" end="39611" title="David A. Goldsmith" label="Goldsmith, David A."/>
<link wikidata="Q7896496" start="40063" end="40090" title="University of Toronto Press" label="University of Toronto Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860358" start="40104" end="40117" title="Bill Nichols (film critic)" label="Nichols, Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130954" start="40179" end="40203" title="Indiana University Press" label="Indiana University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895804" start="40469" end="40498" title="University of Minnesota Press" label="University of Minnesota Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861005" start="40656" end="40667" title="Paul Rotha" label="Rotha, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867117" start="41422" end="41437" title="Basil Blackwell" label="Basil Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q260528" start="41467" end="41489" title="British Film Institute" label="British Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="42153" end="42183" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="42305" end="42331" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371827" start="42343" end="42357" title="Karl G. Heider" label="Karl G. Heider"/>
<link wikidata="Q4005866" start="42398" end="42423" title="University of Texas Press" label="University of Texas Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099565" start="42433" end="42446" title="Luc de Heusch" label="Luc de Heusch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="42496" end="42502" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q347362" start="42642" end="42657" title="Fredric Jameson" label="Fredric Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q381678" start="42873" end="42892" title="André Leroi-Gourhan" label="André Leroi-Gourhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93532910" start="43054" end="43070" title="David MacDougall" label="David MacDougall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="43121" end="43147" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton University Press"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43369" end="43388" title="Fatimah Tobing Rony" label="Fatimah Tobing Rony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041095" start="43470" end="43491" title="Duke University Press" label="Duke University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q935301" start="43503" end="43517" title="Georges Sadoul" label="Georges Sadoul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43653" end="43666" title="Pierre Sorlin" label="Pierre Sorlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984073" start="43927" end="43952" title="Wesleyan University Press" label="Wesleyan University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8090" wikidata="Q845645" url="?curid=8090" title="Day of the Tentacle">
<text>Day of the Tentacle, also known as Maniac Mansion II: Day of the Tentacle, is a 1993 graphic adventure game developed and published by LucasArts. It is the sequel to the 1987 game &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;. The plot follows Bernard Bernoulli and his friends Hoagie and Laverne as they attempt to stop the evil Purple Tentacle - a sentient, disembodied tentacle - from taking over the world. The player takes control of the trio and solves puzzles while using time travel to explore different periods of history.

Dave Grossman and Tim Schafer co-led the game&#x27;s development, their first time in such a role. The pair carried over a limited number of elements from &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot; and forwent the character selection aspect to simplify development. Inspirations included Chuck Jones cartoons and the history of the United States. &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was the eighth LucasArts game to use the SCUMM engine.

The game was released simultaneously on floppy disk and CD-ROM to critical acclaim and commercial success. Critics focused on its cartoon-style visuals and comedic elements. &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; has featured regularly in lists of &quot;top&quot; games published more than two decades after its release, and has been referenced in popular culture. A remastered version of &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was developed by Schafer&#x27;s current studio, Double Fine Productions, and released in March 2016, for OS X, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, and Windows, with an iOS and Linux port released in July the same year, and then later for Xbox One in October 2020.

== Gameplay ==
&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; follows the point-and-click two-dimensional adventure game formula, first established by the original &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;. Players direct the controllable characters around the game world by clicking with the computer mouse. To interact with the game world, players choose from a set of nine commands arrayed on the screen (such as &quot;pick up&quot;, &quot;use&quot;, or &quot;talk to&quot;) and then on an object in the world. This was the last SCUMM game to use the original interface of having the bottom of the screen being taken up by a verb selection and inventory; starting with the next game to use the SCUMM engine, &quot;Sam &amp; Max Hit the Road&quot;, the engine was modified to scroll through a more concise list of verbs with the right mouse button and having the inventory on a separate screen.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; uses time travel extensively; early in the game, the three main protagonists are separated across time by the effects of a faulty time machine. The player, after completing certain puzzles, can then freely switch between these characters, interacting with the game&#x27;s world in separate time periods. Certain small inventory items can be shared by placing the item into the &quot;Chron-o-Johns&quot;, modified portable toilets that instantly transport objects to one of the other time periods, while other items are shared by simply leaving the item in a past time period to be picked up by a character in a future period. Changes made to a past time period will affect a future one, and many of the game&#x27;s puzzles are based on the effect of time travel, the aging of certain items, and alterations of the time stream. For example, one puzzle requires the player, while in the future era where Purple Tentacle has succeeded, to send a medical chart of a Tentacle back to the past, having it used as the design of the American flag, then collecting one such flag in the future to be used as a Tentacle disguise to allow that character to roam freely.

The whole original &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot; game can be played on a computer resembling a Commodore 64 inside the &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; game; this practice has since been repeated by other game developers, but at the time of &quot;Day of the Tentacle&#x27;s&quot; release, it was unprecedented.

== Plot ==
Five years after the events of &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;, Purple Tentacle—a mutant monster and lab assistant created by mad scientist Dr. Fred Edison—drinks toxic sludge from a river behind Dr. Fred&#x27;s laboratory. The sludge causes him to grow a pair of flipper-like arms, develop vastly increased intelligence, and have a thirst for global domination. Dr. Fred plans to resolve the issue by killing Purple Tentacle and his harmless, friendly brother Green Tentacle, but Green Tentacle sends a plea of help to his old friend, the nerd Bernard Bernoulli. Bernard travels to the Edison family motel with his two housemates, deranged medical student Laverne and roadie Hoagie, and frees the tentacles. Purple Tentacle escapes to resume his quest to take over the world.

Since Purple Tentacle&#x27;s plans are flawless and unstoppable, Dr. Fred decides to use his Chron-o-John time machines to send Bernard, Laverne, and Hoagie to the day before to turn off his Sludge-o-Matic machine, thereby preventing Purple Tentacle&#x27;s exposure to the sludge. However, because Dr. Fred used an imitation diamond rather than a real diamond as a power source for the time machine, the Chron-o-Johns break down in operation. Laverne is sent 200 years in the future, where humanity has been enslaved and Purple Tentacle rules the world from the Edison mansion, while Hoagie is dropped 200 years in the past, where the motel is being used by the Founding Fathers as a retreat to write the United States Constitution. Bernard is returned to the present. To salvage Dr. Fred&#x27;s plan, Bernard must acquire a replacement diamond for the time machine, while both Hoagie and Laverne must restore power to their respective Chron-o-John pods by plugging them in. To overcome the lack of electricity in the past, Hoagie recruits the help of Benjamin Franklin and Dr. Fred&#x27;s ancestor, Red Edison, to build a superbattery to power his pod, while Laverne evades capture by the tentacles long enough to run an extension cord to her unit. The three send small objects back and forth in time through the Chron-o-Johns and make changes to history to help the others complete their tasks.

Eventually, Bernard uses Dr. Fred&#x27;s family fortune of royalties from the use of their likeness in &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot; to purchase a real diamond, while his friends manage to power their Chron-o-Johns. Soon, the three are reunited in the present. Purple Tentacle arrives, hijacks a Chron-o-John, and takes it to the previous day to prevent them from turning off the sludge machine; he is pursued by Green Tentacle in another pod. With only one Chron-o-John pod left, Bernard, Hoagie, and Laverne use it to pursue the tentacles to the previous day, while Dr. Fred uselessly tries to warn them of using the pod together, referencing the film &quot;The Fly&quot;. Upon arriving, the trio exit the pod only to discover that they have been turned into a three-headed monster, their bodies merging into one during the transfer. Meanwhile, Purple Tentacle has used the time machine to bring countless versions of himself from different moments in time to the same day to prevent the Sludge-o-Matic from being deactivated. Bernard and his friends defeat the Purple Tentacles guarding the Sludge-o-Matic, turn off the machine, and prevent the whole series of events from ever happening. Returning to the present, Dr. Fred discovers that the three have not been turned into a monster at all but have just gotten stuck in the same set of clothes; they are then ordered by Dr. Fred to get out of his house. The game ends with the credits rolling over a tentacle-shaped American flag, one of the more significant results of their tampering in history.

== Development ==

Following a string of successful adventure games, LucasArts assigned Dave Grossman and Tim Schafer to lead development of a new game. The two had previously assisted Ron Gilbert with the creation of &quot;The Secret of Monkey Island&quot; and &quot;Monkey Island 2: LeChuck&#x27;s Revenge&quot;, and the studio felt that Grossman and Schafer were ready to manage a project. The company believed that the pair&#x27;s humor matched well with that of &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot; and suggested working on a sequel. The two developers agreed and commenced production. Gilbert and Gary Winnick, the creators of &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;, collaborated with Grossman and Schafer on the initial planning and writing. The total budget for the game was about $600,000, according to Schafer.

=== Creative design ===
In planning the plot, the four designers considered a number of concepts, eventually choosing an idea of Gilbert&#x27;s about time travel that they believed was the most interesting. The four discussed what time periods to focus on, settling on the Revolutionary War and the future. The Revolutionary War offered opportunities to craft many puzzles around that period, such as changing the Constitution to affect the future. Grossman noted the appeal of the need to make wide-sweeping changes such as the Constitution just to achieve a small personal goal, believing this captured the essence of adventure games. The future period allowed them to explore the nature of cause and effect without any historical bounds. Grossman and Schafer decided to carry over previous characters that they felt were the most entertaining. The two considered the Edison family &quot;essential&quot; and chose Bernard because of his &quot;unqualified nerdiness&quot;. Bernard was considered &quot;everyone&#x27;s favorite character&quot; from &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;, and was the clear first choice for the protagonists. The game&#x27;s other protagonists, Laverne and Hoagie, were based on a Mexican ex-girlfriend of Grossman&#x27;s and a Megadeth roadie named Tony that Schafer had met, respectively. Schafer and Grossman planned to use a character selection system similar to the first game but felt that it would have complicated the design process and increased production costs. Believing that it added little to the gameplay, they removed it early in the process and reduced the number of player characters from six to three. The dropped characters included Razor, a female musician from the previous game; Moonglow, a short character in baggy clothes; and Chester, a black beat poet. Ideas for Chester, however, morphed into new twin characters in the Edison family. The smaller number of characters reduced the strain on the game&#x27;s engine in terms of scripting and animation.

The staff collaboratively designed the characters. They first discussed the character personalities, which Larry Ahern used to create concept art. Ahern wanted to make sure that the art style was consistent and the character designs were established early, in contrast to what had happened with &quot;Monkey Island 2&quot;, in which various artists came in later to help fill in art assets as necessary, creating a disjointed style. Looney Tunes animation shorts, particularly the Chuck Jones-directed &quot;Rabbit of Seville&quot;, &quot;What&#x27;s Opera, Doc?&quot;, and &quot;Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century&quot; inspired the artistic design. The cartoonish style also lent itself to providing larger visible faces to enable more expressive characters. Peter Chan designed backgrounds, spending around two days to progress from concept sketch to final art for each background. Chan too used Looney Tunes as influence for the backgrounds, trying to emulate the style of Jones and Maurice Noble. Ahern and Chan went back and forth with character and background art to make sure both styles worked together without too much distraction. They further had Jones visit their studio during development to provide input into their developing art. The choice of art style inspired further ideas from the designers. Grossman cited cartoons featuring Pepé Le Pew, and commented that the gag involving a painted white stripe on Penelope Pussycat inspired a puzzle in the game. The artists spent a year creating the in-game animations.

The script was written in the evening when fewer people were in the office. Grossman considered it the easiest aspect of production, but encountered difficulties when writing with others around.

Grossman and Schafer brainstormed regularly to devise the time travel puzzles and collaborated with members of the development team as well as other LucasArts employees. They would identify puzzle problems and work towards a solution similar to how the game plays. Most issues were addressed prior to programming, but some details were left unfinished to work on later. The staff conceived puzzles involving the U.S.&#x27;s early history based on their memory of their compulsory education, and using the more legendary aspects of history, such as George Washington cutting down a cherry tree to appeal to international audiences. To complete the elements, Grossman researched the period to maintain historical accuracy, visiting libraries and contacting reference librarians. The studio, however, took creative license towards facts to fit them into the game&#x27;s design.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; features a four-minute-long animated opening credit sequence, the first LucasArts game to have such. Ahern noted that their previous games would run the credits over primarily still shots which would only last for a few minutes, but with &quot;Tentacle&quot;, the team had grown so large that they worried this approach would be boring to players. They assigned Kyle Balda, an intern at CalArts, to create the animated sequence, with Chan helping to create minimalist backgrounds to aid in the animation. Originally this sequence was around seven minutes long, and included the three characters arriving at the mansion and releasing Purple Tentacle. Another LucasArts designer, Hal Barwood, suggested they cut it in half, leading to the shortened version as in the released game, and having the player take over when they arrive at the mansion.

=== Technology and audio ===
&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; uses the SCUMM engine developed for &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;. LucasArts had gradually modified the engine since its creation. For example, the number of input verbs was reduced and items in the character&#x27;s inventory are represented by icons rather than text. While implementing an animation, the designers encountered a problem later discovered to be a limitation of the engine. Upon learning of the limitation, Gilbert reminisced about the file size of the first game. The staff then resolved to include it in the sequel.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was the first LucasArts adventure game to feature voice work on release. The game was not originally planned to include voice work, as at the time, the install base for CD-ROM was too low. As they neared the end of 1992, CD-ROM sales grew significantly. The general manager of LucasArts, Kelly Flock, recognizing that the game would not be done in time by the end of the year to make the holiday release, suggested that the team include voice work for the game, giving them more time.

Voice director Tamlynn Barra managed that aspect of the game. Schafer and Grossman described how they imagined the characters&#x27; voices and Barra sought audition tapes of voice actors to meet the criteria. She presented the best auditions to the pair. Schafer&#x27;s sister Ginny was among the auditions, and she was chosen for Nurse Edna. Schafer opted out of the decision for her selection to avoid nepotism. Grossman and Schafer encountered difficulty selecting a voice for Bernard. To aid the process, Grossman commented that the character should sound like Les Nessman from the television show &quot;WKRP in Cincinnati&quot;. Barra responded that she knew the agent of the character&#x27;s actor, Richard Sanders, and brought Sanders on the project. Denny Delk and Nick Jameson were among those hired, and provided voice work for around five characters each. Recording for the 4,500 lines of dialog occurred at Studio 222 in Hollywood. Barra directed the voice actors separately from a sound production booth. She provided context for each line and described aspects of the game to aid the actors. The voice work in Day of the Tentacle was widely praised for its quality and professionalism in comparison to Sierra&#x27;s talkie games of the period which suffered from poor audio quality and limited voice acting (some of which consisted of Sierra employees rather than professional talent).

The game&#x27;s music was composed by Peter McConnell, Michael Land, and Clint Bajakian. The three had worked together to share the duties equally of composing the music for &quot;Monkey Island 2&quot; and &quot;Fate of Atlantis&quot;, and continued this approach for &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot;. According to McConnell, he had composed most of the music taking place in the game&#x27;s present, Land for the future, and Bajakian for the past, outside of Dr. Fred&#x27;s theme for the past which McConnell had done. The music was composed around the cartoonish nature of the gameplay, further drawing on Looney Tunes&#x27; use of parodying classical works of music, and playing on set themes for all of the major characters in the game. Many of these themes had to be composed to take into account different processing speeds of computers at the time, managed by the iMUSE music interface; such themes would include shorter repeating patterns that would play while the game&#x27;s screen scrolled across, and then once the screen was at the proper place, the music would continue on to a more dramatic phrase.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was one of the first games concurrently released on CD-ROM and floppy disk. A floppy disk version was created to accommodate consumers that had yet to purchase CD-ROM drives. The CD-ROM format afforded the addition of audible dialog. The capacity difference between the two formats necessitated alterations to the floppy disk version. Grossman spent several weeks reducing files sizes and removing files such as the audio dialog to fit the game onto six diskettes.

== Reception ==
&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was a moderate commercial success; according to &quot;Edge&quot;, it sold roughly 80,000 copies by 2009. Tim Schafer saw this as an improvement over his earlier projects, the &quot;Monkey Island&quot; games, which had been commercial flops. The game was critically acclaimed. Charles Ardai of &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot; wrote in September 1993: &quot;Calling &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; a sequel to &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot; ... is a little like calling the space shuttle a sequel to the slingshot&quot;. He enjoyed the game&#x27;s humor and interface, and praised the designers for removing &quot;dead end&quot; scenarios and player character death. Ardai lauded the voice acting, writing that it &quot;would have done the late Mel Blanc proud&quot;, and compared the game&#x27;s humor, animation, and camera angles to &quot;Looney Toons gems from the 40s and 50s&quot;. He concluded: &quot;I expect that this game will keep entertaining people for quite some time to come&quot;. In April 1994 the magazine said of the CD version that Sanders&#x27;s Bernard was among &quot;many other inspired performances&quot;, concluding that &quot;Chuck Jones would be proud&quot;. In May 1994 the magazine said of one multimedia kit bundling the CD version that &quot;it packs more value into the kit than the entire software packages of some of its competitors&quot;. Sandy Petersen of &quot;Dragon&quot; stated that its graphics &quot;are in a stupendous cartoony style&quot;, while praising its humor and describing its sound and music as &quot;excellent&quot;. Although the reviewer considered it &quot;one of the best&quot; graphic adventure games, he noted that, like LucasArts&#x27; earlier &quot;Loom&quot;, it was extremely short; he wrote that he &quot;felt cheated somehow when I finished the game&quot;. He ended the review, &quot;Go, Lucasfilm! Do this again, but do make the next game longer!&quot;.

Phil LaRose of &quot;The Advocate&quot; called it &quot;light-years ahead of the original&quot;, and believed that its &quot;improved controls, sound and graphics are an evolutionary leap to a more enjoyable gaming experience&quot;. He praised the interface, and summarized the game as &quot;another of the excellent LucasArts programs that place a higher premium on the quality of entertainment and less on the technical knowledge needed to make it run&quot;. The &quot;Boston Herald&quot;″s Geoff Smith noted that &quot;the animation of the cartoonlike characters is of TV quality&quot;, and praised the removal of dead ends and character death. He ended: &quot;It&#x27;s full of lunacy, but for anyone who likes light-hearted adventure games, it&#x27;s well worth trying&quot;. Vox Day of &quot;The Blade&quot; called its visuals &quot;well done&quot; and compared them to those of &quot;The Ren &amp; Stimpy Show&quot;. The writer praised the game&#x27;s humor, and said that &quot;both the music and sound effects are hilarious&quot;; he cited the voice performance of Richard Sanders as a high point. He summarized the game as &quot;both a good adventure and a funny cartoon&quot;.

Lim Choon Wee of the &quot;New Straits Times&quot; highly praised the game&#x27;s humor, which he called &quot;brilliantly funny&quot;. The writer commented that the game&#x27;s puzzles relied on &quot;trial and error&quot; with &quot;no underlying logic&quot;, but opined that the game &quot;remains fun&quot; despite this issue, and concluded that &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was &quot;definitely the comedy game of the year&quot;. Daniel Baum of &quot;The Jerusalem Post&quot; called it &quot;one of the funniest, most entertaining and best-programmed computer games I have ever seen&quot;, and lauded its animation. He wrote that the game provided &quot;a more polished impression&quot; than either &quot;The Secret of Monkey Island&quot; or &quot;Monkey Island 2: LeChuck&#x27;s Revenge&quot;. The writer claimed that its high system requirements were its only drawback, and believed that a Sound Blaster card was required to fully appreciate the game. In a retrospective review, Adventure Gamers&#x27; Chris Remo wrote: &quot;If someone were to ask for a few examples of games that exemplify the best of the graphic adventure genre, &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; would certainly be near the top&quot;.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; has been featured regularly in lists of &quot;top&quot; games. In 1994, &quot;PC Gamer US&quot; named &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; the 46th best computer game ever. In June 1994 it and &quot;Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers&quot; won &quot;Computer Gaming World&quot;″s Adventure Game of the Year award. The editors wrote that &quot;&quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot;″s fluid animation sequences underscore a strong script and solid game play ... story won out over technological innovation in this genre&quot;. In 1996, the magazine ranked it as the 34th best game of all time, writing: &quot;&quot;DOTT&quot; completely blew away its ancestor, &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;, with its smooth animated sequences, nifty plot and great voiceovers&quot;. Adventure Gamers included the game as the top entry on its 20 Greatest Adventure Games of All Time List in 2004, and placed it sixth on its Top 100 All-Time Adventure Games in 2011. The game has appeared on several IGN lists. The website rated it number 60 and 84 on its top 100 games list in 2005 and 2007, respectively. IGN named &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; as part of their top 10 LucasArts adventure games in 2009, and ranked the Purple Tentacle 82nd in a list of top 100 videogame villains in 2010. ComputerAndVideoGames.com ranked it at number 30 in 2008, and GameSpot also listed &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; as one of the greatest games of all time.

== Legacy ==
Fans of &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; created a webcomic, &quot;The Day After the Day of the Tentacle&quot;, using the game&#x27;s graphics. The 1993 LucasArts game &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; features a stage dedicated to &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot;. The artists for &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; shared office space with the &quot;Zombies Ate My Neighbors&quot; development team. The team included the homage after frequently seeing artwork for &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; during the two games&#x27; productions. In describing what he considered &quot;the most rewarding moment&quot; of his career, Grossman stated that the game&#x27;s writing and use of spoken and subtitled dialog assisted a learning-disabled child in learning how to read. Telltale Games CEO Dan Connors commented in 2009 that an episodic game based on &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was &quot;feasible&quot;, but depended on the sales of the &quot;Monkey Island&quot; games released that year.

In 2018, a fan-made sequel, &quot;Return of the Tentacle&quot;, was released free by a team from Germany. The game imitates the art style of the &quot;Remastered&quot; edition and features full voice acting.

== Remasters ==
=== &quot;Special Edition&quot; ===
According to Kotaku, a remastered version of &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was in the works at LucasArts Singapore before the sale of LucasArts to Disney in 2012. Though never officially approved, the game used a pseudo-3D art style and was nearly 80% complete, according to one person close to the project, but was shelved in the days before the closure of LucasArts.

=== &quot;Remastered&quot; ===

A remastered version of &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; was developed by Schafer and his studio, Double Fine Productions. The remaster was released on March 22, 2016, for OS X, PlayStation 4, PlayStation Vita, and Windows, with a Linux version released at July 11 together with a mobile port for iOS. The PlayStation 4 and PlayStation Vita versions are cross-buy and also feature cross-save. An Xbox One port came in October 2020. The remastered game was released as a free PlayStation Plus title for the month of January 2017.

Schafer credited both LucasArts and Disney for help in creating the remaster, which follows from a similar remastering of &quot;Grim Fandango&quot;, as well by Double Fine, in January 2015. Schafer said when they originally were about to secure the rights to &quot;Grim Fandango&quot; from LucasArts to make the remaster, they did not originally have plans to redo the other LucasArts adventure games, but with the passionate response they got on the news of the &quot;Grim Fandango&quot; remaster, they decided to continue these efforts. Schafer described getting the rights to &quot;Day of the Tentacle&quot; a &quot;miracle&quot; though aided by the fact that many of the executives in the legal rights chain had fond memories of playing these games and helped to secure the rights. 2 Player Productions, which has worked before with Double Fine to document their game development process, also created a mini-documentary for &quot;Day of the Tentacle Remastered&quot;, which included a visit to the Skywalker Ranch, where LucasArts games were originally developed, where much of the original concept art and digital files for the game and other LucasArts adventure games were archived.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle Remastered&quot; retains its two-dimensional cartoon-style art, redrawn at a higher resolution for modern computers. The high resolution character art was updated by a team led by Yujin Keim with the consultation of Ahern and Chan. Keim&#x27;s team used many of the original sketches of characters and assets from the two and emulated their style with improvements for modern graphics systems. Matt Hansen worked on recreating the background assets in high resolution. As with the &quot;Grim Fandango&quot; remaster, the player can switch back and forth between the original graphics and the high-resolution version. The game includes a more streamlined interaction menu, a command wheel akin to the approach used in &quot;Broken Age&quot;, but the player can opt to switch back to the original interface. The game&#x27;s soundtrack has been redone within MIDI adapted to work with the iMUSE system. There is an option to listen to commentary from the original creators, including Schafer, Grossman, Chan, McConnell, Ahern, and Bajakian. The remaster contains the fully playable version of the original &quot;Maniac Mansion&quot;, though no enhancements have been made to that game-within-a-game.

&quot;Day of the Tentacle Remastered&quot; has received positive reviews, with the PC version having an aggregate review score of 87/100 tallied by &quot;Metacritic&quot;. Reviewers generally praised the game as having not lost its charm since its initial release, but found some aspects of the remastering to be lackluster. Richard Corbett for &quot;Eurogamer&quot; found the game &quot;every bit as well crafted now as it was in 1993&quot;, but found the processes used to provide high-definition graphics from the original 16-bit graphics to making some of the required shortcuts taken in 1993 for graphics, such as background dithering and low animation framerates, more obvious on modern hardware. &quot;IGN&quot;″s Jared Petty also found the remastered to still be enjoyable, and found the improvement on the graphics to be &quot;glorious&quot;, but worried that the lack of a hint system, as was added in &quot;The Secret of Monkey Island&quot; remastered version, would put off new players to the game. Bob Mackey for &quot;USgamer&quot; found that while past remastered adventure games have highlighted how much has changed in gamers&#x27; expectations since the heyday of adventure games in the 1990s, &quot;Day of the Tentacle Remastered&quot; &quot;rises above these issues to become absolutely timeless&quot;.

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="85" end="107" title="graphic adventure game" label="graphic adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="135" end="144" title="LucasArts" label="LucasArts"/>
<link wikidata="Q240143" start="186" end="200" title="Maniac Mansion" label="Maniac Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q902541" start="514" end="527" title="Dave Grossman (game developer)" label="Dave Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q523191" start="532" end="543" title="Tim Schafer" label="Tim Schafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q312657" start="786" end="797" title="Chuck Jones" label="Chuck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q131110" start="815" end="843" title="history of the United States" label="history of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q836102" start="918" end="923" title="SCUMM" label="SCUMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="973" end="984" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982" start="989" end="995" title="CD-ROM" label="CD-ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042483" start="1174" end="1195" title="List of video games considered the best" label="&amp;quot;top&amp;quot; games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393107" start="1293" end="1311" title="Video game remake" label="remastered version"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251435" start="1395" end="1418" title="Double Fine Productions" label="Double Fine Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="1452" end="1456" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="1458" end="1471" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q188808" start="1473" end="1489" title="PlayStation Vita" label="PlayStation Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1495" end="1502" title="Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="1512" end="1515" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1520" end="1525" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="1582" end="1590" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048387" start="1668" end="1683" title="point-and-click" label="point-and-click"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="1700" end="1714" title="adventure game" label="adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q240143" start="1764" end="1778" title="Maniac Mansion" label="Maniac Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987" start="1872" end="1886" title="computer mouse" label="computer mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q836102" start="2111" end="2116" title="SCUMM" label="SCUMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q836102" start="2276" end="2281" title="SCUMM" label="SCUMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430706" start="2296" end="2322" title="Sam &amp;amp; Max Hit the Road" label="Sam &amp;amp; Max Hit the Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q629067" start="2922" end="2937" title="portable toilet" label="portable toilet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324077" start="3452" end="3465" title="medical chart" label="medical chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q42537" start="3534" end="3547" title="Flag of the United States" label="American flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="3760" end="3772" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="4108" end="4121" title="mad scientist" label="mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q650031" start="4522" end="4526" title="nerd" label="nerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="4623" end="4638" title="medical student" label="medical student"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430248" start="4651" end="4657" title="roadie" label="roadie"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="5422" end="5438" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="5465" end="5491" title="United States Constitution" label="United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="5812" end="5829" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q267298" start="5883" end="5895" title="Battery (electricity)" label="superbattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894990" start="5982" end="5996" title="extension cord" label="extension cord"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="6217" end="6226" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212494" start="6815" end="6822" title="The Fly (1958 film)" label="The Fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q902541" start="7797" end="7810" title="Dave Grossman (game developer)" label="Dave Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q523191" start="7815" end="7826" title="Tim Schafer" label="Tim Schafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q365052" start="7894" end="7905" title="Ron Gilbert" label="Ron Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q179247" start="7933" end="7960" title="The Secret of Monkey Island" label="The Secret of Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7977" end="8016" title="Monkey Island 2: LeChuck&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Monkey Island 2: LeChuck&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526180" start="8302" end="8314" title="Gary Winnick (game developer)" label="Gary Winnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209676" start="9711" end="9718" title="Mexican people" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="9758" end="9766" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213457" start="10299" end="10303" title="Beat Generation" label="beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q187432" start="10483" end="10492" title="Scripting language" label="scripting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401416" start="10497" end="10506" title="Computer animation" label="animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="10942" end="10954" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q312657" start="10990" end="11001" title="Chuck Jones" label="Chuck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598221" start="11017" end="11034" title="Rabbit of Seville" label="Rabbit of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635222" start="11048" end="11071" title="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc?" label="What&amp;#x27;s Opera, Doc?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575434" start="11089" end="11122" title="Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century" label="Duck Dodgers in the 24½th Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984738" start="11269" end="11279" title="Peter Chan (artist)" label="Peter Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="11407" end="11419" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Tunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084424" start="11495" end="11508" title="Maurice Noble" label="Maurice Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q614094" start="11856" end="11867" title="Pepé Le Pew" label="Pepé Le Pew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162581" start="11932" end="11949" title="Penelope Pussycat" label="Penelope Pussycat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269370" start="12648" end="12673" title="History of the United States (1776–1789)" label="U.S.&amp;#x27;s early history"/>
<link wikidata="Q922131" start="13039" end="13055" title="Artistic license" label="creative license"/>
<link wikidata="Q20666333" start="13506" end="13516" title="Kyle Balda" label="Kyle Balda"/>
<link wikidata="Q836102" start="14060" end="14065" title="SCUMM" label="SCUMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529782" start="15665" end="15676" title="Les Nessman" label="Les Nessman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056641" start="15708" end="15726" title="WKRP in Cincinnati" label="WKRP in Cincinnati"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328879" start="15805" end="15820" title="Richard Sanders (actor)" label="Richard Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259168" start="15858" end="15868" title="Denny Delk" label="Denny Delk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870023" start="15873" end="15885" title="Nick Jameson" label="Nick Jameson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23916" start="16330" end="16336" title="Talkies (video games)" label="talkie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707671" start="16539" end="16554" title="Peter McConnell" label="Peter McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q992923" start="16556" end="16568" title="Michael Land" label="Michael Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101568" start="16574" end="16588" title="Clint Bajakian" label="Clint Bajakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q285624" start="17372" end="17377" title="iMUSE" label="iMUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q793975" start="18216" end="18220" title="Edge (magazine)" label="Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075181" start="18438" end="18451" title="Charles Ardai" label="Charles Ardai"/>
<link wikidata="Q707182" start="18461" end="18482" title="Computer Gaming World" label="Computer Gaming World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375237" start="18772" end="18780" title="unwinnable" label="dead end"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062345" start="18801" end="18817" title="player character" label="player character"/>
<link wikidata="Q349690" start="18903" end="18912" title="Mel Blanc" label="Mel Blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q622435" start="19000" end="19012" title="Looney Tunes" label="Looney Toons"/>
<link wikidata="Q312657" start="19311" end="19322" title="Chuck Jones" label="Chuck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020767" start="19397" end="19405" title="bundled software" label="bundling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703640" start="19533" end="19547" title="Sandy Petersen" label="Sandy Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2405201" start="19557" end="19563" title="Dragon (magazine)" label="Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q672380" start="19868" end="19872" title="Loom (video game)" label="Loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712726" start="20100" end="20112" title="The Advocate (Louisiana)" label="The Advocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="20550" end="20563" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958933" start="20860" end="20867" title="Theodore Beale" label="Vox Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q442288" start="20877" end="20886" title="The Blade (Toledo)" label="The Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361124" start="20970" end="20995" title="The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show" label="The Ren &amp;amp; Stimpy Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953092" start="21295" end="21312" title="New Straits Times" label="New Straits Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q35438" start="21727" end="21745" title="The Jerusalem Post" label="The Jerusalem Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q179247" start="21981" end="22008" title="The Secret of Monkey Island" label="The Secret of Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22024" end="22063" title="Monkey Island 2: LeChuck&amp;#x27;s Revenge" label="Monkey Island 2: LeChuck&amp;#x27;s Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275513" start="22104" end="22123" title="system requirements" label="system requirements"/>
<link wikidata="Q726912" start="22168" end="22181" title="Sound Blaster" label="Sound Blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q506391" start="22257" end="22273" title="Adventure Gamers" label="Adventure Gamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="22593" end="22604" title="PC Gamer US" label="PC Gamer US"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22709" end="22744" title="Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers" label="Gabriel Knight: Sins of the Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q506391" start="23267" end="23283" title="Adventure Gamers" label="Adventure Gamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="23482" end="23485" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q277666" start="23775" end="23800" title="ComputerAndVideoGames.com" label="ComputerAndVideoGames.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="23996" end="24004" title="webcomic" label="webcomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q219804" start="24119" end="24143" title="Zombies Ate My Neighbors" label="Zombies Ate My Neighbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383563" start="24712" end="24726" title="Telltale Games" label="Telltale Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383567" start="24769" end="24782" title="Episodic video game" label="episodic game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083295" start="25210" end="25216" title="Kotaku" label="Kotaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251435" start="25698" end="25721" title="Double Fine Productions" label="Double Fine Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="25772" end="25776" title="OS X" label="OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014725" start="25778" end="25791" title="PlayStation 4" label="PlayStation 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q188808" start="25793" end="25809" title="PlayStation Vita" label="PlayStation Vita"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="25831" end="25836" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="25897" end="25900" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375691" start="25954" end="25963" title="cross-buy" label="cross-buy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361286" start="25996" end="26004" title="Xbox One" label="Xbox One"/>
<link wikidata="Q719629" start="26075" end="26091" title="PlayStation Plus" label="PlayStation Plus"/>
<link wikidata="Q592507" start="26258" end="26271" title="Grim Fandango" label="Grim Fandango"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633365" start="26916" end="26936" title="2 Player Productions" label="2 Player Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q991250" start="27133" end="27148" title="Skywalker Ranch" label="Skywalker Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q996649" start="28070" end="28080" title="Broken Age" label="Broken Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="28203" end="28207" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="28699" end="28709" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q281243" start="28896" end="28905" title="Eurogamer" label="Eurogamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="29254" end="29257" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q179247" start="29463" end="29490" title="The Secret of Monkey Island" label="The Secret of Monkey Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="29577" end="29584" title="USgamer" label="USgamer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8091" wikidata="Q42" url="?curid=8091" title="Douglas Adams">
<text>Douglas Noel Adams (11 March 1952 – 11 May 2001) was an English author, humourist, and screenwriter, best known as the creator of &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; (&quot;HHGTTG&quot;). Originally a 1978 BBC radio comedy, &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; developed into a &quot;trilogy&quot; of six (or five, according to the author) books which sold more than 15 million copies in his lifetime. It was further developed into a television series, several stage plays, comics, a video game, and a 2005 feature film. Adams&#x27;s contribution to UK radio is commemorated in The Radio Academy&#x27;s Hall of Fame.

Adams also wrote &quot;Dirk Gently&#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency&quot; (1987) and &quot;The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul&quot; (1988), and co-wrote &quot;The Meaning of Liff&quot; (1983), &quot;The Deeper Meaning of Liff&quot; (1990) and &quot;Last Chance to See&quot; (1990). He wrote two stories for the television series &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, including the unaired serial &quot;Shada&quot;, co-wrote &quot;City of Death&quot; (1979), and served as script editor for its 17th season. He co-wrote the sketch &quot;Patient Abuse&quot; for the final episode of &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot;. A posthumous collection of his selected works, including the first publication of his final (unfinished) novel, was published as &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; in 2002.

Adams was a self-proclaimed &quot;radical atheist&quot;, an advocate for environmentalism and conservation, and a lover of fast cars, technological innovation, and the Apple Macintosh.

==Early life==
Adams was born in Cambridge, England, on 11 March 1952 to Christopher Douglas Adams (1927–1985), a management consultant and computer salesman, former probation officer and lecturer on probationary group therapy techniques, and nurse Janet (1927–2016), née Donovan. The family moved a few months after his birth to the East End of London, where his sister, Susan, was born three years later. His parents divorced in 1957; Douglas, Susan and their mother moved then to an RSPCA animal shelter in Brentwood, Essex, run by his maternal grandparents. Each parent remarried, giving Adams four half-siblings. A great-grandfather was the playwright Benjamin Franklin Wedekind.

===Education===
Adams attended Primrose Hill Primary School in Brentwood. At the age of nine, he passed the entrance exam for Brentwood School. He attended the prep school from 1959 to 1964, then the main school until December 1970. Adams was tall by the age of 12, and stopped growing at . His form master, Frank Halford, said that Adams&#x27;s height had made him stand out and that he had been self-conscious about it. His ability to write stories made him well known in the school. Adams became the only student ever to be awarded a ten out of ten by Halford for creative writing – something he remembered for the rest of his life, particularly when facing writer&#x27;s block.

Some of his earliest writing was published at the school, such as a report on its photography club in &quot;The Brentwoodian&quot; in 1962, or spoof reviews in the school magazine &quot;Broadsheet&quot;, edited by Paul Neil Milne Johnstone, who later became a character in &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide&quot;. Adams also designed the cover of one issue of the &quot;Broadsheet&quot;, and had a letter and short story published in &quot;The Eagle&quot;, the boys&#x27; comic, in 1965. A poem entitled &quot;A Dissertation on the task of writing a poem on a candle and an account of some of the difficulties thereto pertaining&quot; written by Adams in January 1970 at the age of 17, was discovered in a cupboard at the school in early 2014.

On the strength of an essay on religious poetry that discussed the Beatles and William Blake, Adams was awarded an Exhibition in English at St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge (where his father had likewise been a student), going up in 1971. He wanted to join the Footlights, an invitation-only student comedy club that has acted as a hothouse for comic talent. He was not elected immediately as he had hoped, and started to write and perform in revues with Will Adams (no relation) and Martin Smith; they formed a group called &quot;Adams-Smith-Adams&quot;. He became a member of the Footlights by 1973. Despite doing very little work – he recalled having completed three essays in three years – he graduated in 1974 with a 2:2 in English literature.

==Career==

===Writing===
After leaving university, Adams moved back to London, determined to break into TV and radio as a writer. An edited version of the &quot;Footlights Revue&quot; appeared on BBC2 television in 1974. A version of the Revue performed live in London&#x27;s West End led to Adams being discovered by Monty Python&#x27;s Graham Chapman. The two formed a brief writing partnership, earning Adams a writing credit in episode 45 of &quot;Monty Python&quot; for a sketch called &quot;Patient Abuse&quot;. The pair also co-wrote the &quot;Marilyn Monroe&quot; sketch that appeared on the soundtrack album of &quot;Monty Python and the Holy Grail&quot;. Adams is one of only two people other than the original Python members to get a writing credit (the other being Neil Innes).

Adams had two brief appearances in the fourth series of &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot;. At the beginning of episode 42, &quot;The Light Entertainment War&quot;, Adams is in a surgeon&#x27;s mask (as Dr. Emile Koning, according to on-screen captions), pulling on gloves, while Michael Palin narrates a sketch that introduces one person after another but never gets started. At the beginning of episode 44, &quot;Mr. Neutron&quot;, Adams is dressed in a pepper-pot outfit and loads a missile onto a cart driven by Terry Jones, who is calling for scrap metal (&quot;Any old iron...&quot;). The two episodes were broadcast in November 1974. Adams and Chapman also attempted non-Python projects, including &quot;Out of the Trees&quot;.

At this point, Adams&#x27;s career stalled; his writing style was unsuited to the then-current style of radio and TV comedy. To make ends meet, he took a series of odd jobs, including as a hospital porter, barn builder, and chicken shed cleaner. He was employed as a bodyguard by a Qatari family, who had made their fortune in oil.

During this time, Adams continued to write and submit sketches, though few were accepted. In 1976, his career had a brief improvement when he wrote and performed &quot;Unpleasantness at Brodie&#x27;s Close&quot; at the Edinburgh Fringe festival. By Christmas, work had dried up again, and a depressed Adams moved to live with his mother. The lack of writing work hit him hard, and low confidence became a feature of Adams&#x27;s life: &quot;I have terrible periods of lack of confidence [...] I briefly did therapy, but after a while I realised it was like a farmer complaining about the weather. You can&#x27;t fix the weather – you just have to get on with it.&quot;

Some of Adams&#x27;s early radio work included sketches for &quot;The Burkiss Way&quot; in 1977 and &quot;The News Huddlines&quot;. He also wrote, again with Chapman, the 20 February 1977 episode of &quot;Doctor on the Go&quot;, a sequel to the &quot;Doctor in the House&quot; television comedy series. After the first radio series of &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide&quot; became successful, Adams was made a BBC radio producer, working on &quot;Week Ending&quot; and a pantomime called &quot;Black Cinderella Two Goes East&quot;. He left after six months to become the script editor for &quot;Doctor Who&quot;.

In 1979, Adams and John Lloyd wrote scripts for two half-hour episodes of &quot;Doctor Snuggles&quot;: &quot;The Remarkable Fidgety River&quot; and &quot;The Great Disappearing Mystery&quot; (episodes eight and twelve). John Lloyd was also co-author of two episodes from the original &quot;Hitchhiker&quot; radio series (&quot;Fit the Fifth&quot; and &quot;Fit the Sixth&quot;, also known as &quot;Episode Five&quot; and &quot;Episode Six&quot;), as well as &quot;The Meaning of Liff&quot; and &quot;The Deeper Meaning of Liff&quot;.

====Work on &quot;Doctor Who&quot;====

Adams sent the script for the &quot;HHGG&quot; pilot radio programme to the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; production office in 1978, and was commissioned to write &quot;The Pirate Planet&quot;. He had also previously attempted to submit a potential film script, called &quot;Doctor Who and the Krikkitmen&quot;, which later became his novel &quot;Life, the Universe and Everything&quot; (which in turn became the third &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide&quot; radio series). Adams then went on to serve as script editor on the show for its 17th season in 1979. Altogether, he wrote three &quot;Doctor Who&quot; serials starring Tom Baker as the Fourth Doctor:

* &quot;The Pirate Planet&quot; (the second serial in &quot;the Key to Time&quot; arc, in &quot;season 16&quot;)
* &quot;City of Death&quot; (with producer Graham Williams, from an original storyline by writer David Fisher. It was transmitted under the pseudonym &quot;David Agnew&quot;)
* &quot;Shada&quot; (only partially filmed; not televised due to industry disputes, but was later completed using animation for the unfinished scenes and broadcast as &quot;Doctor Who: The Lost Episode&quot; on BBC America on 19 July 2018)

The episodes authored by Adams are some of the few that were not originally novelised, as Adams would not allow anyone else to write them and asked for a higher price than the publishers were willing to pay. &quot;Shada&quot; was adapted as a novel by Gareth Roberts in 2012 and &quot;City of Death&quot; and &quot;The Pirate Planet&quot; by James Goss in 2015 and 2017 respectively.

Elements of &quot;Shada&quot; and &quot;City of Death&quot; were reused in Adams&#x27;s later novel &quot;Dirk Gently&#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency&quot;, in particular, the character of Professor Chronotis. Big Finish Productions eventually remade &quot;Shada&quot; as an audio play starring Paul McGann as the Doctor. Accompanied by partially animated illustrations, it was webcast on the BBC website in 2003, and subsequently released as a two-CD set later that year. An omnibus edition of this version was broadcast on the digital radio station BBC7 on 10 December 2005.

In the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; 2012 Christmas episode &quot;The Snowmen&quot;, writer Steven Moffat was inspired by a storyline that Adams pitched called &quot;The Doctor Retires&quot;.

====&quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot;====

&quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; was a concept for a science-fiction comedy radio series pitched by Adams and radio producer Simon Brett to BBC Radio 4 in 1977. Adams came up with an outline for a pilot episode, as well as a few other stories (reprinted in Neil Gaiman&#x27;s book &quot;Don&#x27;t Panic: The Official Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Companion&quot;) that could be used in the series.
According to Adams, the idea for the title occurred to him while he lay drunk in a field in Innsbruck, Austria, gazing at the stars. He was carrying a copy of the &quot;Hitch-hiker&#x27;s Guide to Europe&quot;, and it occurred to him that &quot;somebody ought to write a &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot;&quot;.

Despite the original outline, Adams was said to make up the stories as he wrote. He turned to John Lloyd for help with the final two episodes of the first series. Lloyd contributed bits from an unpublished science fiction book of his own, called &quot;GiGax&quot;. Very little of Lloyd&#x27;s material survived in later adaptations of &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s&quot;, such as the novels and the TV series. The TV series was based on the first six radio episodes, and sections contributed by Lloyd were largely re-written.

BBC Radio 4 broadcast the first radio series weekly in the UK starting 8 March 1978, lasting until April. The series was distributed in the United States by National Public Radio. Following the success of the first series, another episode was recorded and broadcast, which was commonly known as the Christmas Episode. A second series of five episodes was broadcast one per night, during the week of 21–25 January 1980.

While working on the radio series (and with simultaneous projects such as &quot;The Pirate Planet&quot;) Adams developed problems keeping to writing deadlines that got worse as he published novels. Adams was never a prolific writer and usually had to be forced by others to do any writing. This included being locked in a hotel suite with his editor for three weeks to ensure that &quot;So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish&quot; was completed. He was quoted as saying, &quot;I love deadlines. I love the whooshing noise they make as they go by.&quot; Despite the difficulty with deadlines, Adams wrote five novels in the series, published in 1979, 1980, 1982, 1984, and 1992.

The books formed the basis for other adaptations, such as three-part comic book adaptations for each of the first three books, an interactive text-adventure computer game, and a photo-illustrated edition, published in 1994. This latter edition featured a 42 Puzzle designed by Adams, which was later incorporated into paperback covers of the first four &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s&quot; novels (the paperback for the fifth re-used the artwork from the hardback edition).

In 1980, Adams began attempts to turn the first &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s&quot; novel into a film, making several trips to Los Angeles, and working with Hollywood studios and potential producers. The next year, the radio series became the basis for a BBC television mini-series broadcast in six parts. When he died in 2001 in California, he had been trying again to get the film project started with Disney, which had bought the rights in 1998. The screenplay was rewritten by Karey Kirkpatrick and the &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; film was released in 2005.

Radio producer Dirk Maggs had consulted with Adams, first in 1993, and later in 1997 and 2000 about creating a third radio series, based on the third novel in the &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s&quot; series. They also discussed the possibilities of radio adaptations of the final two novels in the five-book &quot;trilogy&quot;. As with the film, this project was realised only after Adams&#x27;s death. The third series, &quot;The Tertiary Phase&quot;, was broadcast on BBC Radio 4 in September 2004 and was subsequently released on audio CD. With the aid of a recording of his reading of &quot;Life, the Universe and Everything&quot; and editing, Adams can be heard playing the part of Agrajag posthumously. &quot;So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish&quot; and &quot;Mostly Harmless&quot; made up the fourth and fifth radio series, respectively (on radio they were titled &quot;The Quandary Phase&quot; and &quot;The Quintessential Phase&quot;) and these were broadcast in May and June 2005, and also subsequently released on Audio CD. The last episode in the last series (with a new, &quot;more upbeat&quot; ending) concluded with, &quot;The very final episode of &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; by Douglas Adams is affectionately dedicated to its author.&quot;

====&quot;Dirk Gently&quot; series====

Between Adams&#x27;s first trip to Madagascar with Mark Carwardine in 1985, and their series of travels that formed the basis for the radio series and non-fiction book &quot;Last Chance to See&quot;, Adams wrote two other novels with a new cast of characters. &quot;Dirk Gently&#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency&quot; was published in 1987, and was described by its author as &quot;a kind of ghost-horror-detective-time-travel-romantic-comedy-epic, mainly concerned with mud, music and quantum mechanics&quot;.

A sequel, &quot;The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul&quot;, was published a year later. It was Adams&#x27;s first original work since &quot;So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish.&quot; After the book tour, Adams set off on his round-the-world excursion, which supplied him with the material for &quot;Last Chance to See&quot;. &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; was incomplete when published posthumously.

===Music===
Adams played the guitar left-handed and had a collection of 24 left-handed guitars when he died (having received his first guitar in 1964). He also studied piano in the 1960s. Pink Floyd and Procol Harum had important influence on Adams&#x27;s work. During his segment on music discussion programme &quot;Private Passions&quot;, Adams remarked that he &quot;would have loved to have been a rock musician&quot;.

====Pink Floyd====
Adams&#x27;s official biography shares its name with the song &quot;Wish You Were Here&quot; by Pink Floyd. The opening section of &quot;Shine On You Crazy Diamond&quot; was featured in a section of the third episode of the original 1978 &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; radio series (broadcast only, cut from commercial releases). Adams was friends with Pink Floyd guitarist David Gilmour and, on Adams&#x27;s 42nd birthday, he was invited to make a guest appearance at Pink Floyd&#x27;s concert of 28 October 1994 at Earls Court in London, playing guitar on the songs &quot;Brain Damage&quot; and &quot;Eclipse&quot;. Adams chose the name for Pink Floyd&#x27;s 1994 album, &quot;The Division Bell&quot;, by picking the words from the lyrics to one of its tracks, &quot;High Hopes&quot;. Pink Floyd and the song &quot;Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun&quot; in particular, inspired Adams to create the rock band Disaster Area who appear in &quot;The Restaurant at the End of the Universe&quot;, who planned to crash a space ship into a nearby star as a stunt during a concert. Gilmour also performed at Adams&#x27;s memorial service in 2001, and what would have been Adams&#x27;s 60th birthday party in 2012.

===Computer games and projects===
Adams created an interactive fiction version of &quot;HHGG&quot; with Steve Meretzky from Infocom in 1984. In 1986 he participated in a week-long brainstorming session with the Lucasfilm Games team for the game &quot;&quot;. Later he was also involved in creating &quot;Bureaucracy&quot; as a parody of events in his own life.

Adams was a founder-director and Chief Fantasist of The Digital Village, a digital media and Internet company with which he created &quot;Starship Titanic&quot;, a Codie award-winning and BAFTA-nominated adventure game, which was published in 1998 by Simon &amp; Schuster. Terry Jones wrote the accompanying book, entitled &quot;Douglas Adams&#x27; Starship Titanic&quot;, since Adams was too busy with the computer game to do both. In April 1999, Adams initiated the h2g2 collaborative writing project, an experimental attempt at making &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; a reality, and at harnessing the collective brainpower of the internet community. It was hosted by BBC Online from 2001 to 2011.

In 1990, Adams wrote and presented a television documentary programme &quot;Hyperland&quot; which featured Tom Baker as a &quot;software agent&quot; (similar to the assistant pictured in Apple&#x27;s Knowledge Navigator video of future concepts from 1987), and interviews with Ted Nelson, the co-inventor of hypertext and the person who coined the term. Adams was an early adopter and advocate of hypertext.

==Personal beliefs and activism==

===Atheism and views on religion===
Adams described himself as a &quot;radical atheist&quot;, adding &quot;radical&quot; for emphasis so he would not be asked if he meant agnostic. He told American Atheists that this conveyed the fact that he really meant it. He imagined a sentient puddle who wakes up one morning and thinks, &quot;This is an interesting world I find myself in – an interesting hole I find myself in – fits me rather neatly, doesn&#x27;t it? In fact it fits me staggeringly well, must have been made to have me in it!&quot; to express his disbelief in the fine-tuned universe argument for God.

He remained fascinated by religion because of its effect on human affairs. &quot;I love to keep poking and prodding at it. I&#x27;ve thought about it so much over the years that that fascination is bound to spill over into my writing.&quot;

The evolutionary biologist and atheist Richard Dawkins invited Adams to participate in his 1991 Royal Institution Christmas Lectures, where Dawkins calls Adams from the audience to read a passage from &quot;The Restaurant at the End of the Universe&quot; which satirises the absurdity of the thought that any one species would exist on Earth merely to serve as a meal to another species, such as humans. Dawkins also uses Adams&#x27;s influence to exemplify arguments for non-belief in his 2006 book &quot;The God Delusion&quot;. Dawkins dedicated the book to Adams, whom he jokingly called &quot;possibly [my] only convert&quot; to atheism and wrote on his death that &quot;Science has lost a friend, literature has lost a luminary, the mountain gorilla and the black rhino have lost a gallant defender.&quot;

===Environmental activism===
Adams was also an environmental activist who campaigned on behalf of endangered species. This activism included the production of the non-fiction radio series &quot;Last Chance to See&quot;, in which he and naturalist Mark Carwardine visited rare species such as the kākāpō and baiji, and the publication of a tie-in book of the same name. In 1992, this was made into a CD-ROM combination of audiobook, e-book and picture slide show. 

Adams and Mark Carwardine contributed the &#x27;Meeting a Gorilla&#x27; passage from &quot;Last Chance to See&quot; to the book &quot;The Great Ape Project&quot;. This book, edited by Paola Cavalieri and Peter Singer, launched a wider-scale project in 1993, which calls for the extension of moral equality to include all great apes, human and non-human.

In 1994, Adams participated in a climb of Mount Kilimanjaro while wearing a rhino suit for the British charity organisation Save the Rhino International. Puppeteer William Todd-Jones, who had originally worn the suit in the London Marathon to raise money and bring awareness to the group, also participated in the climb wearing a rhino suit; Adams wore the suit while travelling to the mountain before the climb began. About £100,000 was raised through that event, benefiting schools in Kenya and a black rhinoceros preservation programme in Tanzania. Adams was also an active supporter of the Dian Fossey Gorilla Fund.

Since 2003, Save the Rhino has held an annual Douglas Adams Memorial Lecture around the time of his birthday to raise money for environmental campaigns.

===Technology and innovation===
Adams bought his first word processor in 1982, having considered one as early as 1979. His first purchase was a Nexu. In 1983, when he and Jane Belson went to Los Angeles, he bought a DEC Rainbow. Upon their return to England, Adams bought an Apricot, then a BBC Micro and a Tandy 1000. In &quot;Last Chance to See&quot;, Adams mentions his Cambridge Z88, which he had taken to Zaire on a quest to find the northern white rhinoceros.

Adams&#x27;s posthumously published work, &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot;, features several articles by him on the subject of technology, including reprints of articles that originally ran in &quot;MacUser&quot;, and in &quot;The Independent on Sunday&quot;. In these, Adams claims that one of the first computers he ever saw was a Commodore PET, and that he had &quot;adored&quot; his Apple Macintosh (&quot;or rather my family of however many Macintoshes it is that I&#x27;ve recklessly accumulated over the years&quot;) since he first saw one at Infocom&#x27;s offices in Boston in 1984.

Adams was a Macintosh user from the time they first came out in 1984 until his death in 2001. He was the first person to buy a Mac in Europe, the second being Stephen Fry. Adams was also an &quot;Apple Master&quot;, celebrities whom Apple made into spokespeople for its products (others included John Cleese and Gregory Hines). Adams&#x27;s contributions included a rock video that he created using the first version of iMovie with footage featuring his daughter Polly. The video was available on Adams&#x27;s .Mac homepage. Adams installed and started using the first release of Mac OS X in the weeks leading up to his death. His last post to his own forum was in praise of Mac OS X and the possibilities of its Cocoa programming framework. He said it was &quot;awesome...&quot;, which was also the last word he wrote on his site.

Adams used email to correspond with Steve Meretzky in the early 1980s, during their collaboration on Infocom&#x27;s version of &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot;. While living in New Mexico in 1993 he set up another e-mail address and began posting to his own USENET newsgroup, alt.fan.douglas-adams, and occasionally, when his computer was acting up, to the comp.sys.mac hierarchy. Challenges to the authenticity of his messages later led Adams to set up a message forum on his own website to avoid the issue. In 1996, Adams was a keynote speaker at the Microsoft Professional Developers Conference (PDC) where he described the personal computer as being a modelling device. The video of his keynote speech is archived on Channel 9.
Adams was also a keynote speaker for the April 2001 Embedded Systems Conference in San Francisco, one of the major technical conferences on embedded system engineering.

==Personal life==
Adams moved to Upper Street, Islington in 1981 and to Duncan Terrace, a few minutes walk away, in the late 1980s.

In the early 1980s, Adams had a relationship with novelist Sally Emerson, who was separated from her husband at that time. Adams later dedicated his book &quot;Life, the Universe and Everything&quot; to Emerson. In 1981, Emerson returned to her husband, Peter Stothard, a contemporary of Adams at Brentwood School and later editor of &quot;The Times&quot;. Adams was soon introduced by friends to Jane Belson with whom he later became romantically involved. Belson was the &quot;lady barrister&quot; mentioned in the jacket-flap biography printed in his books during the mid-1980s (&quot;He [Adams] lives in Islington with a lady barrister and an Apple Macintosh&quot;). The two lived in Los Angeles together during 1983, while Adams worked on an early screenplay adaptation of &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s&quot;. When the deal fell through, they moved back to London and after several separations (&quot;He is currently not certain where he lives, or with whom&quot;) and a broken engagement, they married on 25 November 1991.

Adams and Belson had one daughter together, Polly Jane Rocket Adams, born on 22 June 1994 shortly after Adams turned 42. In 1999, the family moved from London to Santa Barbara, California, where they lived until his death. Following the funeral, Jane Belson and Polly Adams returned to London. Belson died on 7 September 2011 of cancer, aged 59.

== Death and legacy ==

Adams died of a heart attack due to undiagnosed coronary artery disease on 11 May 2001, aged 49, after resting from his regular workout at a private gym in Montecito, California. His funeral was held on 16 May in Santa Barbara. His ashes were placed in Highgate Cemetery in north London in June 2002. A memorial service was held on 17 September 2001 at St Martin-in-the-Fields church, Trafalgar Square, London. This became the first church service broadcast live on the web by the BBC.

Two days before Adams died, the Minor Planet Center announced the naming of asteroid 18610 Arthurdent, named after &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot; protagonist. In 2005, the asteroid 25924 Douglasadams was named in his memory.

In May 2002, &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; was published, containing many short stories, essays and letters as well as eulogies from Richard Dawkins, Stephen Fry (in the UK edition), Christopher Cerf (in the US edition), and Terry Jones (in the US paperback edition). It also includes eleven chapters of his unfinished novel, &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot;, which was originally intended to become a new Dirk Gently novel but might have later become the sixth &quot;Hitchhiker&quot; novel.

Other events after Adams&#x27;s death included a webcast production of &quot;Shada&quot;, allowing the complete story to be told, radio dramatisations of the final three books in the &quot;Hitchhiker&#x27;s&quot; series and the completion of the film adaptation of &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot;. The film, released in 2005, posthumously credits Adams as a producer and several design elements – including a head-shaped planet seen near the end of the film – incorporated Adams&#x27;s features.

A 12-part radio series based on the Dirk Gently novels was announced in 2007.

BBC Radio 4 also commissioned a third Dirk Gently radio series based on the incomplete chapters of &quot;The Salmon of Doubt&quot; and written by Kim Fuller; but this was dropped in favour of a BBC-TV series based on the two completed novels. A sixth &quot;Hitchhiker&quot; novel, &quot;And Another Thing...&quot;, by &quot;Artemis Fowl&quot; author Eoin Colfer, was released on 12 October 2009 (the 30th anniversary of the first book), published with the support of Adams&#x27;s estate. A BBC Radio 4 &quot;Book at Bedtime&quot; adaptation and an audio book soon followed.

On 25 May 2001, two weeks after Adams&#x27;s death, his fans organised a tribute known as Towel Day, which has been observed every year since then.

An Apple Macintosh SE/30 once owned by Adams can be seen on display at The Centre for Computing History in Cambridge.

In 2018, John Lloyd presented an hour-long episode of the BBC Radio Four documentary &quot;Archive on 4&quot; discussing Adams&#x27;s private papers, which are held at St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge. The episode is available online.

Travessa Douglas Adams, a street at in São José, Santa Catarina, Brazil is named in Adams&#x27;s honour.

In March 2021, Unbound announced a crowdfunder for &quot;42: the wildly improbable ideas of Douglas Adams&quot;, on the 20th anniversary of his death, a book based on Adams&#x27;s papers, edited by Kevin Jon Davies.

The annual Douglas Adams Memorial Lectures began in 2003.

==Awards and nominations==
==Bibliography==
===&quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&quot;===
===&quot;Dirk Gently&quot;===
===Short stories===
===Non-fiction===
===Other works===
==Filmography==
=== Film ===
=== Television ===
=== Radio ===
=== Video games ===
==See also==
* List of animal rights advocates

==References==
==Sources==
* Adams, Douglas (1998). Is there an Artificial God? , speech at &quot;Digital Biota 2&quot;, Cambridge, England, September 1998.
* Dawkins, Richard (2003). &quot;Eulogy for Douglas Adams&quot;, in &quot;A devil&#x27;s chaplain: reflections on hope, lies, science, and love&quot;. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
* Felch, Laura (2004). Don&#x27;t Panic: Douglas Adams and the Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy by Neil Gaiman , May 2004
* Ray, Mohit K (2007). &quot;Atlantic Companion to Literature in English&quot;, Atlantic Publishers and Distributors. 
* 
* Webb, Nick (2005a). &quot;Wish You Were Here: The Official Biography of Douglas Adams&quot;. Ballantine Books. 
* Webb, Nick (2005b). &quot;Adams, Douglas Noël (1952–2001)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, Oxford University Press, January 2005. Retrieved 25 October 2005.

==Further reading==
===Articles===

* Herbert, R. (1980). &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (Book Review)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 105(16), 1982.
* Adams, J., &amp; Brown, R. (1981). &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (Book Review)&quot;. &quot;School Library Journal&quot;, 27(5), 74.
* Nickerson, S. L. (1982). &quot;The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (Book)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 107(4), 476.
* Nickerson, S. L. (1982). &quot;Life, the Universe, and Everything (Book)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 107(18), 2007.
* Morner, C. (1982). &quot;The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (Book Review)&quot;. &quot;School Library Journal&quot;, 28(8), 87.
* Morner, C. (1983). &quot;Life, the Universe and Everything (Book Review)&quot;. &quot;School Library Journal&quot;, 29(6), 93.
* Shorb, B. (1985). &quot;So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish (Book)&quot;. &quot;School Library Journal&quot;, 31(6), 90.
* &quot;The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul (Book)&quot; (1989). &quot;Atlantic&quot; (02769077), 263(4), 99.
* Hoffert, B., &amp; Quinn, J. (1990). &quot;Last Chance To See (Book)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 115(16), 77.
* Reed, S. S., &amp; Cook, I. I. (1991). &quot;Dances with &quot;. &quot;People&quot;, 35(19), 79.
* &quot;Last Chance to See (Book)&quot; (1991). &quot;Science News&quot;, 139(8), 126.
* Field, M. M., &amp; Steinberg, S. S. (1991). &quot;Douglas Adams&quot;. &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;, 238(6), 62.
* Dieter, W. (1991). &quot;Last Chance to See (Book)&quot;. &quot;Smithsonian&quot;, 22(3), 140.
* Dykhuis, R. (1991). &quot;Last Chance To See (Book)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 116(1), 140.
* Beatty, J. (1991). &quot;Good Show (Book)&quot;. &quot;Atlantic&quot; (02769077), 267(3), 131.
* &quot;A guide to the future&quot; (1992). &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot;, 106(44), 51.
* Zinsser, J. (1993). &quot;Audio reviews: Fiction&quot;. &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;, 240(9), 24.
* Taylor, B., &amp; Annichiarico, M. (1993). Audio reviews. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 118(2), 132.
* Good reads (1995). &quot;NetGuide&quot;, 2(4), 109.
* Stone, B. (1998). The unsinkable starship. &quot;Newsweek&quot;, 131(15), 78.
* Gaslin, G. (2001). Galaxy Quest. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; (599), 79.
* &quot;So long, and thanks for all the fish&quot; (2001). &quot;The Economist&quot;, 359(8222), 79.
* Geier, T., &amp; Raftery, B. M. (2001). &quot;Legacy&quot;. &quot;Entertainment Weekly&quot; (597), 11.
* &quot;Passages&quot; (2001). &quot;Maclean&#x27;s&quot;, 114(21), 13.
* &quot;Don&#x27;t panic! Douglas Adams to keynote Embedded show&quot; (2001). &quot;Embedded Systems Programming&quot;, 14(3), 10.
* Ehrenman, G. (2001). &quot;World Wide Weird&quot;. &quot;InternetWeek&quot;, (862), 15.
* Zaleski, J. (2002). &quot;The Salmon of Doubt (Book)&quot;. &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;, 249(15), 43.
* Mort, J. (2002). &quot;The Salmon of Doubt (Book)&quot;. &quot;Booklist&quot;, 98(16), 1386.
* Lewis, D. L. (2002). &quot;Last Time Round The Galaxy&quot;. &quot;Quadrant Magazine&quot;, 46(9), 84.
* Burns, A. (2002). &quot;The Salmon of Doubt (Book)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 127(15), 111.
* Burns, A., &amp; Rhodes, B. (2002). &quot;The Restaurant at the End of the Universe (Book)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 127(19), 118.
* Kaveney, R. (2002). &quot;A cheerful whale&quot;. &quot;TLS&quot; (5173), 23.
* Pearl, N., &amp; Welch, R. (2003). &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide To The Galaxy (Book)&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 128(11), 124.
* &quot;Preying on composite materials&quot; (2003). &quot;R&amp;D Magazine&quot;, 45(6), 44.
* Webb, N. (2003). &quot;The Berkeley Hotel hostage&quot;. &quot;The Bookseller&quot; (5069), 25.
* &quot;The author who toured the universe&quot; (2003). &quot;The Bookseller&quot; (5060), 35.
* Osmond, A. (2005). &quot;Only human&quot;. &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot;, 15(5), 12–15.
* &quot;Culture vulture&quot; (2005). &quot;Times Educational Supplement&quot;, (4640), 19.
* Maughan, S. (2005). &quot;Audio Bestsellers/Fiction&quot;. &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;, 252(30), 17.
* &quot;Hitchhiker At The Science Museum&quot; (2005). &quot;In Britain&quot;, 14(10), 9.
* Rea, A. (2005). The Adams asteroids. &quot;New Scientist&quot;, 185(2488), 31.
* &quot;Most Improbable Adventure&quot; (2005). &quot;Popular Mechanics&quot;, 182(5), 32.
* &quot;The Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide To The Galaxy: The Tertiary Phase&quot; (2005). &quot;Publishers Weekly&quot;, 252(14), 21.
* Bartelt, K. R. (2005). &quot;Wish You Were Here: The Official Biography of Douglas Adams&quot;. &quot;Library Journal&quot;, 130(4), 86.
* Larsen, D. (2005). &quot;I was a teenage android&quot;. &quot;New Zealand Listener&quot;, 198(3390), 37–38.
* Tanner, J. C. (2005). &quot;Simplicity: it&#x27;s hard&quot;. &quot;Telecom Asia&quot;, 16(6), 6.
* Nielsen Bookscan Charts (2005). &quot;The Bookseller&quot;, (5175), 18–21.
* &quot;Buena Vista launches regional site to push Hitchhiker&#x27;s movie&quot; (2005). &quot;New Media Age&quot;, 9.
* &quot;Shynola bring Beckland to life&quot; (2005). &quot;Creative Review&quot;, 25(3), 24–26.
* Carwardine, M. (15 September 2007). &quot;The baiji: So long and thanks for all the fish&quot;. &quot;New Scientist&quot;. pp. 50–53.
* Czarniawska, B. (2008). &quot;Accounting and gender across times and places: An excursion into fiction&quot;. &quot;Accounting, Organizations &amp; Society&quot;, 33(1), 33–47.
* Pope, M. (2008). &quot;Life, the Universe, Religion and Science&quot;. &quot;Issues&quot; (82), 31–34.
* Bearne, S. (2008). &quot;BBC builds site to trail Last Chance To See TV series&quot;. &quot;New Media Age&quot;, 08.
* &quot;Arrow to reissue Adams&quot; (2008). &quot;The Bookseller&quot; (5352), 14.
* Page, B. (2008). &quot;Colfer is new Hitchhiker&quot;. &quot;The Bookseller&quot; (5350), 7.
* &quot;I&#x27;ve got a perfect puzzle for you&quot; (2009). &quot;The Bookseller&quot; (5404), 42.
* &quot;Mostly Harmless...&quot; (2009). &quot;The Bookseller&quot; (5374), 46.
* &quot;Penguin and PanMac hitch a ride together&quot; (2009). &quot;The Bookseller&quot; (5373), 6.
* &quot;Adams, Douglas&quot;. Britannica Biographies [serial online]. October 2010;:1
* &quot;Douglas (Noël) Adams (1952–2001)&quot;. Hutchinson&#x27;s Biography Database [serial online]. July 2011;:1
* &quot;My life in books&quot; (2011). &quot;Times Educational Supplement&quot; (4940), 27.
===Other===
* , established by him, and still operated by The Digital Village
* Douglas Adams speech at Digital Biota 2 (1998) (The audio of the speech) 
* Guardian Books &quot;Author Page&quot;, with profile and links to further articles.
* Douglas Adams &amp; his Computer article about his Mac IIfx
* BBC2 &quot;Omnibus&quot; tribute to Adams, presented by Kirsty Wark, 4 August 2001
* Mueller, Rick and Greengrass, Joel (2002). &quot;Life, The Universe and Douglas Adams&quot;, documentary.
* Simpson, M. J. (2001). &quot;The Pocket Essential Hitchhiker&#x27;s Guide&quot;. . Updated April 2005, 
* Special edition of BBC &quot;Bookclub&quot; featuring Douglas Adams, first broadcast 2 January 2000 on BBC Radio 4

==External links==

* 
* Interview with Douglas Adams, &quot;A DISCUSSION WITH National Authors on Tour&quot; TV Series, Episode No. 33 (1992)
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="0" end="18" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Noel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q12406482" start="72" end="81" title="humourist" label="humourist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25169" start="130" end="204" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="&amp;quot;The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;HHGTTG&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521267" start="224" end="240" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (radio series)" label="BBC radio comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q149010" start="319" end="326" title="trilogy" label="trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q847094" start="467" end="486" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (TV series)" label="a television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q756513" start="517" end="529" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (video game)" label="a video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="542" end="554" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="feature film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280642" start="613" end="630" title="Radio Academy" label="The Radio Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q902712" start="676" end="720" title="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency" label="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199348" start="744" end="778" title="The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul" label="The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q875382" start="812" end="831" title="The Meaning of Liff" label="The Meaning of Liff"/>
<link wikidata="Q875382" start="852" end="878" title="The Deeper Meaning of Liff" label="The Deeper Meaning of Liff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068999" start="902" end="920" title="Last Chance to See" label="Last Chance to See"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="988" end="998" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470527" start="1041" end="1046" title="Shada (Doctor Who)" label="Shada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123647" start="1069" end="1082" title="City of Death" label="City of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611269" start="1133" end="1144" title="Doctor Who season 17" label="17th season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819332" start="1175" end="1188" title="Patient Abuse" label="Patient Abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="1226" end="1259" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q468135" start="1402" end="1421" title="The Salmon of Doubt" label="The Salmon of Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="1511" end="1527" title="environmentalism" label="environmentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="1532" end="1544" title="Conservation movement" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="1606" end="1621" title="Macintosh" label="Apple Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="1657" end="1666" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="1958" end="1976" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q584819" start="2110" end="2115" title="RSPCA" label="RSPCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q909993" start="2134" end="2150" title="Brentwood, Essex" label="Brentwood, Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q57619" start="2281" end="2307" title="Frank Wedekind" label="Benjamin Franklin Wedekind"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961791" start="2436" end="2452" title="Brentwood School (Essex)" label="Brentwood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="2470" end="2481" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="prep school"/>
<link wikidata="Q178927" start="2971" end="2990" title="writer&amp;#x27;s block" label="writer&amp;#x27;s block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039078" start="3207" end="3232" title="Paul Neil Milne Johnstone" label="Paul Neil Milne Johnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046338" start="3433" end="3442" title="Eagle (comic)" label="The Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="3801" end="3812" title="the Beatles" label="the Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="3817" end="3830" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420210" start="3853" end="3863" title="Exhibition (scholarship)" label="Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="3878" end="3911" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q857679" start="4000" end="4010" title="Footlights" label="Footlights"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="4468" end="4486" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="4686" end="4690" title="BBC2" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q460735" start="4766" end="4774" title="West End of London" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="4808" end="4820" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q24962" start="4828" end="4842" title="Graham Chapman" label="Graham Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4922" end="4932" title="List of Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus episodes#6. Party Political Broadcast" label="episode 45"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819332" start="4987" end="5000" title="Patient Abuse" label="Patient Abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985623" start="5116" end="5147" title="The Album of the Soundtrack of the Trailer of the Film of Monty Python and the Holy Grail" label="Monty Python and the Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q918538" start="5267" end="5277" title="Neil Innes" label="Neil Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="5343" end="5376" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q223985" start="5572" end="5585" title="Michael Palin" label="Michael Palin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5748" end="5758" title="List of recurring Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus characters#Pepperpots" label="pepper-pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="5808" end="5819" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q17017112" start="6003" end="6019" title="Out of the Trees" label="Out of the Trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q846" start="6310" end="6316" title="Qatari" label="Qatari"/>
<link wikidata="Q368176" start="6580" end="6596" title="Edinburgh Fringe" label="Edinburgh Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720651" start="7097" end="7112" title="The Burkiss Way" label="The Burkiss Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998917" start="7137" end="7155" title="The News Huddlines" label="The News Huddlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287529" start="7236" end="7252" title="Doctor on the Go" label="Doctor on the Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714540" start="7282" end="7301" title="Doctor in the House (TV series)" label="Doctor in the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521267" start="7344" end="7405" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (radio series)" label="first radio series of &amp;quot;The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979392" start="7479" end="7490" title="Week Ending" label="Week Ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920531" start="7526" end="7556" title="Black Cinderella Two Goes East" label="Black Cinderella Two Goes East"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="7627" end="7637" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q366162" start="7665" end="7675" title="John Lloyd (producer)" label="John Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233879" start="7726" end="7741" title="Doctor Snuggles" label="Doctor Snuggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q875382" start="8110" end="8129" title="The Meaning of Liff" label="The Meaning of Liff"/>
<link wikidata="Q875382" start="8146" end="8172" title="The Deeper Meaning of Liff" label="The Deeper Meaning of Liff"/>
<link wikidata="Q513589" start="8383" end="8400" title="The Pirate Planet" label="The Pirate Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q721" start="8561" end="8594" title="Life, the Universe and Everything" label="Life, the Universe and Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q48140758" start="8797" end="8827" title="List of Doctor Who episodes (1963–1989)" label="&amp;quot;Doctor Who&amp;quot; serials"/>
<link wikidata="Q358421" start="8837" end="8846" title="Tom Baker" label="Tom Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662491" start="8854" end="8867" title="Fourth Doctor" label="Fourth Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611193" start="8930" end="8945" title="the Key to Time" label="the Key to Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611193" start="8966" end="8975" title="Doctor Who season 16" label="season 16"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123647" start="8991" end="9004" title="City of Death" label="City of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593357" start="9026" end="9041" title="Graham Williams (television producer)" label="Graham Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572048" start="9080" end="9092" title="David Fisher (writer)" label="David Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036149" start="9139" end="9150" title="David Agnew" label="David Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470527" start="9166" end="9171" title="Shada (Doctor Who)" label="Shada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876747" start="9369" end="9380" title="BBC America" label="BBC America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522961" start="9651" end="9665" title="Gareth Roberts (writer)" label="Gareth Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490906" start="9741" end="9751" title="James Goss (producer)" label="James Goss"/>
<link wikidata="Q902712" start="9890" end="9934" title="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency" label="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248139" start="9974" end="9993" title="Professor Chronotis" label="Professor Chronotis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="9995" end="10017" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q335863" start="10080" end="10091" title="Paul McGann" label="Paul McGann"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10163" end="10170" title="Doctor Who spin-offs#Webcasts" label="webcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q747860" start="10178" end="10189" title="BBC Online" label="BBC website"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="10336" end="10340" title="BBC7" label="BBC7"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10422" end="10433" title="The Snowmen#Production" label="The Snowmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q461003" start="10448" end="10461" title="Steven Moffat" label="Steven Moffat"/>
<link wikidata="Q350165" start="10758" end="10769" title="Simon Brett" label="Simon Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="10773" end="10784" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q210059" start="10890" end="10901" title="Neil Gaiman" label="Neil Gaiman"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10920" end="10998" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Panic: The Official Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Companion" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Panic: The Official Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="11132" end="11141" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871746" start="11209" end="11243" title="Hitch-hiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to Europe" label="Hitch-hiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q366162" start="11463" end="11473" title="John Lloyd (producer)" label="John Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11514" end="11530" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Primary and Secondary Phases#The Primary Phase" label="the first series"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="12047" end="12068" title="NPR" label="National Public Radio"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12208" end="12223" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Primary and Secondary Phases#The Secondary Phase" label="A second series"/>
<link wikidata="Q513589" start="12390" end="12407" title="The Pirate Planet" label="The Pirate Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042294" start="12697" end="12733" title="So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish" label="So Long, and Thanks for All the Fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q756513" start="13145" end="13158" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (computer game)" label="computer game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879872" start="13243" end="13252" title="42 Puzzle" label="42 Puzzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="13854" end="13860" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626388" start="13931" end="13948" title="Karey Kirkpatrick" label="Karey Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="13963" end="14000" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280844" start="14050" end="14060" title="Dirk Maggs" label="Dirk Maggs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14456" end="14474" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Tertiary to Quintessential Phases#The Tertiary Phase" label="The Tertiary Phase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14908" end="14926" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Tertiary to Quintessential Phases#The Quandary Phase" label="The Quandary Phase"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14943" end="14967" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy Tertiary to Quintessential Phases#The Quintessential Phase" label="The Quintessential Phase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="15391" end="15401" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q897408" start="15407" end="15422" title="Mark Carwardine" label="Mark Carwardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068999" start="15530" end="15548" title="Last Chance to See" label="Last Chance to See"/>
<link wikidata="Q902712" start="15622" end="15666" title="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency" label="Dirk Gently&amp;#x27;s Holistic Detective Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199348" start="15883" end="15917" title="The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul" label="The Long Dark Tea-Time of the Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q468135" start="16197" end="16216" title="The Salmon of Doubt" label="The Salmon of Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="16456" end="16466" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q214486" start="16471" end="16483" title="Procol Harum" label="Procol Harum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246132" start="16585" end="16601" title="Private Passions" label="Private Passions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130223" start="16773" end="16803" title="Wish You Were Here (Pink Floyd song)" label="&amp;quot;Wish You Were Here&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="16807" end="16817" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122893" start="16848" end="16874" title="Shine On You Crazy Diamond" label="Shine On You Crazy Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521267" start="16949" end="17011" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (radio series)" label="&amp;quot;Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy&amp;quot; radio series"/>
<link wikidata="Q178517" start="17104" end="17117" title="David Gilmour" label="David Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q897406" start="17298" end="17322" title="Brain Damage (Pink Floyd song)" label="&amp;quot;Brain Damage&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320733" start="17327" end="17346" title="Eclipse (Pink Floyd song)" label="&amp;quot;Eclipse&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q208521" start="17409" end="17426" title="The Division Bell" label="The Division Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761399" start="17499" end="17509" title="High Hopes (Pink Floyd song)" label="High Hopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064299" start="17547" end="17588" title="Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun" label="Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="17998" end="18017" title="interactive fiction" label="interactive fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q756513" start="18035" end="18039" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (computer game)" label="HHGG"/>
<link wikidata="Q365793" start="18051" end="18065" title="Steve Meretzky" label="Steve Meretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q742561" start="18071" end="18078" title="Infocom" label="Infocom"/>
<link wikidata="Q216611" start="18158" end="18173" title="Lucasfilm Games" label="Lucasfilm Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q304643" start="18251" end="18262" title="Bureaucracy (computer game)" label="Bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q285194" start="18361" end="18380" title="The Digital Village" label="The Digital Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065955" start="18447" end="18463" title="Starship Titanic" label="Starship Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18473" end="18484" title="Software and Information Industry Association#CODiE Awards" label="Codie award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18497" end="18527" title="BAFTA#Games Awards" label="BAFTA-nominated adventure game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756332" start="18560" end="18580" title="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster" label="Simon &amp;amp; Schuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="18582" end="18593" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065955" start="18638" end="18674" title="Starship Titanic" label="Douglas Adams&amp;#x27; Starship Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q285194" start="18777" end="18781" title="h2g2" label="h2g2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762292" start="18782" end="18803" title="collaborative writing" label="collaborative writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858529" start="19107" end="19116" title="Hyperland" label="Hyperland"/>
<link wikidata="Q358421" start="19138" end="19147" title="Tom Baker" label="Tom Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q380574" start="19231" end="19250" title="Knowledge Navigator" label="Knowledge Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q62852" start="19308" end="19318" title="Ted Nelson" label="Ted Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q93241" start="19339" end="19348" title="hypertext" label="hypertext"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="19554" end="19561" title="atheist" label="atheist"/>
<link wikidata="Q463426" start="19664" end="19681" title="American Atheists" label="American Atheists"/>
<link wikidata="Q240581" start="19749" end="19764" title="anthropic principle" label="sentient puddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401749" start="20049" end="20068" title="fine-tuned universe" label="fine-tuned universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="20369" end="20384" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q600467" start="20426" end="20462" title="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures" label="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q578895" start="20537" end="20578" title="The Restaurant at the End of the Universe" label="The Restaurant at the End of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q245265" start="20836" end="20852" title="The God Delusion" label="The God Delusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q737878" start="21068" end="21084" title="mountain gorilla" label="mountain gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q95036" start="21093" end="21104" title="black rhino" label="black rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8189417" start="21189" end="21211" title="environmental activist" label="environmental activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11394" start="21240" end="21258" title="endangered species" label="endangered species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068999" start="21336" end="21354" title="Last Chance to See" label="Last Chance to See"/>
<link wikidata="Q897408" start="21389" end="21404" title="Mark Carwardine" label="Mark Carwardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179959" start="21438" end="21444" title="kākāpō" label="kākāpō"/>
<link wikidata="Q188130" start="21449" end="21454" title="baiji" label="baiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q106833" start="21563" end="21572" title="audiobook" label="audiobook"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="21574" end="21580" title="e-book" label="e-book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329386" start="21741" end="21762" title="Great Ape Project" label="The Great Ape Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q439913" start="21791" end="21806" title="Paola Cavalieri" label="Paola Cavalieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q211539" start="21811" end="21823" title="Peter Singer" label="Peter Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296" start="22004" end="22021" title="Mount Kilimanjaro" label="Mount Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428122" start="22086" end="22114" title="Save the Rhino" label="Save the Rhino International"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019440" start="22126" end="22144" title="William Todd-Jones" label="William Todd-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="22504" end="22512" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q234224" start="22556" end="22567" title="Dian Fossey" label="Dian Fossey"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="22953" end="22956" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822750" start="22957" end="22964" title="Rainbow 100" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858969" start="23012" end="23019" title="Apricot Computers" label="Apricot"/>
<link wikidata="Q749976" start="23028" end="23037" title="BBC Micro" label="BBC Micro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299497" start="23044" end="23054" title="Tandy 1000" label="Tandy 1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q219609" start="23110" end="23123" title="Cambridge Z88" label="Cambridge Z88"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500954" start="23147" end="23152" title="Zaire" label="Zaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614957" start="23176" end="23201" title="northern white rhinoceros" label="northern white rhinoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q468135" start="23252" end="23271" title="The Salmon of Doubt" label="The Salmon of Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722147" start="23402" end="23409" title="MacUser" label="MacUser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23430" end="23455" title="The Independent#The Independent on Sunday" label="The Independent on Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q946661" start="23536" end="23549" title="Commodore PET" label="Commodore PET"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="23955" end="23966" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781108" start="23992" end="24004" title="AppleMasters" label="Apple Master"/>
<link wikidata="Q25014" start="24092" end="24103" title="John Cleese" label="John Cleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q367653" start="24108" end="24121" title="Gregory Hines" label="Gregory Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q9558" start="24216" end="24222" title="iMovie" label="iMovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q844446" start="24306" end="24310" title=".Mac" label=".Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="24376" end="24384" title="macOS" label="Mac OS X"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051988" start="24509" end="24514" title="Cocoa (API)" label="Cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q365793" start="24665" end="24679" title="Steve Meretzky" label="Steve Meretzky"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="24908" end="24914" title="USENET" label="USENET"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="25203" end="25212" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243559" start="25213" end="25247" title="Professional Developers Conference" label="Professional Developers Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072376" start="25371" end="25380" title="Channel 9 (discussion forum)" label="Channel 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020153" start="25434" end="25461" title="Academic conference" label="Embedded Systems Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="25522" end="25537" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785386" start="25585" end="25597" title="Upper Street" label="Upper Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="25599" end="25608" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3945648" start="25744" end="25757" title="Sally Emerson" label="Sally Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q721" start="25845" end="25878" title="Life, the Universe and Everything" label="Life, the Universe and Everything"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177139" start="25939" end="25953" title="Peter Stothard" label="Peter Stothard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961791" start="25982" end="25998" title="Brentwood School (England)" label="Brentwood School"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="26025" end="26034" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="26871" end="26896" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="27096" end="27108" title="heart attack" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q844935" start="27128" end="27151" title="coronary artery disease" label="coronary artery disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008912" start="27236" end="27257" title="Montecito, California" label="Montecito, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q533697" start="27333" end="27350" title="Highgate Cemetery" label="Highgate Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335201" start="27433" end="27456" title="St Martin-in-the-Fields" label="St Martin-in-the-Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q129143" start="27465" end="27481" title="Trafalgar Square" label="Trafalgar Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="27599" end="27618" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27652" end="27668" title="18610 Arthurdent" label="18610 Arthurdent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27771" end="27789" title="25924 Douglasadams" label="25924 Douglasadams"/>
<link wikidata="Q468135" start="27835" end="27854" title="The Salmon of Doubt" label="The Salmon of Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="27951" end="27966" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q192912" start="27968" end="27979" title="Stephen Fry" label="Stephen Fry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112078" start="28001" end="28017" title="Christopher Cerf (musician and television producer)" label="Christopher Cerf"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="28043" end="28054" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754997" start="28223" end="28234" title="Dirk Gently" label="Dirk Gently"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109638" start="28359" end="28366" title="webcast" label="webcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3470527" start="28387" end="28392" title="Shada (Doctor Who)" label="Shada"/>
<link wikidata="Q836821" start="28552" end="28571" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (film)" label="the film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3107329" start="28581" end="28622" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy (novel)" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754997" start="28865" end="28876" title="Dirk Gently" label="Dirk Gently"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408632" start="29054" end="29064" title="Kim Fuller" label="Kim Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q936532" start="29195" end="29215" title="And Another Thing... (novel)" label="And Another Thing..."/>
<link wikidata="Q325283" start="29232" end="29244" title="Artemis Fowl (series)" label="Artemis Fowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q211893" start="29258" end="29269" title="Eoin Colfer" label="Eoin Colfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4942963" start="29416" end="29431" title="Book at Bedtime" label="Book at Bedtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q241666" start="29573" end="29582" title="Towel Day" label="Towel Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721931" start="29703" end="29735" title="The Centre for Computing History" label="The Centre for Computing History"/>
<link wikidata="Q15642800" start="29842" end="29854" title="Archive on 4" label="Archive on 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="29919" end="29952" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q173849" start="30027" end="30035" title="São José, Santa Catarina" label="São José"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882404" start="30109" end="30116" title="Unbound (publisher)" label="Unbound"/>
<link wikidata="Q348303" start="30129" end="30140" title="crowdfunding" label="crowdfunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396115" start="30292" end="30308" title="Kevin Jon Davies" label="Kevin Jon Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q115804058" start="30322" end="30353" title="Douglas Adams Memorial Lectures" label="Douglas Adams Memorial Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q25169" start="30423" end="30464" title="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy" label="The Hitchhiker&amp;#x27;s Guide to the Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754997" start="30483" end="30494" title="Dirk Gently" label="Dirk Gently"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605860" start="30657" end="30688" title="List of animal rights advocates" label="List of animal rights advocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542511" start="31708" end="31723" title="Library Journal" label="Library Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143675" start="31858" end="31880" title="School Library Journal" label="School Library Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542536" start="32616" end="32624" title="Atlantic magazine" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="32848" end="32854" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096635" start="33041" end="33058" title="Publishers Weekly" label="Publishers Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="33144" end="33155" title="Smithsonian" label="Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="33768" end="33776" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q180089" start="33941" end="33954" title="The Economist" label="The Economist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184850" start="34120" end="34134" title="Maclean&amp;#x27;s" label="Maclean&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943246" start="34548" end="34556" title="Booklist" label="Booklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268323" start="34647" end="34664" title="Quadrant Magazine" label="Quadrant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="34987" end="34990" title="The Times Literary Supplement" label="TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719356" start="35310" end="35324" title="The Bookseller" label="The Bookseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="35490" end="35507" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806532" start="35573" end="35601" title="Times Educational Supplement" label="Times Educational Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q525592" start="35861" end="35874" title="New Scientist" label="New Scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q285194" start="38107" end="38126" title="The Digital Village" label="The Digital Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090356" start="38358" end="38377" title="Omnibus (British TV programme)" label="&amp;quot;Omnibus&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="8092" wikidata="Q188994" url="?curid=8092" title="Drum and bass">
<text>Drum and bass (commonly abbreviated as DnB, D&amp;B, or D&#x27;n&#x27;B) is a genre of electronic dance music characterised by fast breakbeats (typically 165–185 beats per minute) with heavy bass and sub-bass lines, samples, and synthesizers. The genre grew out of the UK&#x27;s jungle scene in the 1990s. 

The popularity of drum and bass at its commercial peak ran parallel to several other UK dance styles. A major influence was the original Jamaican dub and reggae sound that influenced jungle&#x27;s bass-heavy sound. Another feature of the style is the complex syncopation of the drum tracks&#x27; breakbeat. Drum and bass subgenres include breakcore, ragga jungle, hardstep, darkstep, techstep, neurofunk, ambient drum and bass, liquid funk (also known as liquid drum and bass), jump up, drumfunk, sambass, and drill &#x27;n&#x27; bass. Drum and bass has influenced other genres such as big beat, dubstep, trip hop and has been influenced by hip hop, house, ambient music, techno, jazz, rock and pop.

Drum and bass is dominated by a relatively small group of record labels. Major international music labels had shown very little interest in the drum and bass scene until BMG Rights Management acquired RAM in February 2016. Since then, the genre has seen a significant growth in exposure. Whilst the origin of drum and bass music is in the UK, the genre has evolved considerably with many other prominent fanbases located all over the world.
==History==

===20th century===
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, a growing nightclub and overnight outdoor event culture gave birth to new genres in the rave scene including breakbeat hardcore, darkcore, and hardcore jungle, which combined sampled syncopated beats, or breakbeats, and other samples from a wide range of different musical genres and, occasionally, samples of music, dialogue and effects from films and television programmes. From as early as 1991, tracks were beginning to strip away some of the heavier sampling and &quot;hardcore noises&quot; and create more bassline and breakbeat led tracks. Some tracks increasingly took their influence from reggae and this style would become known as hardcore jungle (later to become simply jungle), whilst darkcore (with producers such as Goldie, Doc Scott, 4hero, and 2 Bad Mice) were experimenting with sounds and creating a blueprint for drum and bass, especially noticeable by late 1993.

By 1994, jungle had begun to gain mainstream popularity, and fans of the music (often referred to as junglists) became a more recognisable part of youth subculture. The genre further developed, incorporating and fusing elements from a wide range of existing musical genres, including the raggamuffin sound, dancehall, MC chants, dub basslines, and increasingly complex, heavily edited breakbeat percussion. Despite the affiliation with the ecstasy-fuelled rave scene, jungle also inherited associations with violence and criminal activity, both from the gang culture that had affected the UK&#x27;s hip-hop scene and as a consequence of jungle&#x27;s often aggressive or menacing sound and themes of violence (usually reflected in the choice of samples). However, this developed in tandem with the often positive reputation of the music as part of the wider rave scene and dancehall-based Jamaican music culture prevalent in London. By 1995, whether as a reaction to, or independently of this cultural schism, some jungle producers began to move away from the ragga-influenced style and create what would become collectively labelled, for convenience, as drum and bass.

As the genre became generally more polished and sophisticated technically, it began to expand its reach from pirate radio to commercial stations and gain widespread acceptance (circa 1995–1997). It also began to split into recognisable subgenres such as hardstep, jump up, ragga, techstep, and what was known at the time as intelligent. As more melodic and often jazz-influenced subgenres of drum and bass called atmospheric or intelligent (Blame and Blu Mar Ten) and jazzstep (4Hero, Roni Size) gained mainstream appeal, additional subgenres emerged including techstep in 1996, drawing influence from techno.

===21st century===
The emergence of related styles such as liquid funk in the 2000s brought a wave of new artists (Carlito &amp; Addiction, Solid State/DJ Dextrous, Subject 13 and Fellowship being amongst the early pioneers to champion the sound) incorporating new ideas and techniques, supporting continual evolution of the genre.

As of 2014, drum and bass makes frequent appearances in mainstream media and popular culture including in television, as well as being a major reference point for subsequent genres such as grime and dubstep, and producing successful artists including Chase &amp; Status, Netsky, Metrik, and Pendulum.

In 2021, &quot;Pitchfork&quot; noted a &quot;rising zoomer affinity&quot; for the genre in the 2020s.

&quot;Purple Sneakers&quot; described a &quot;drum n&#x27; bass Renaissance&quot; occurring at the time of the publication of their articles in 2023.

==Musical features==
Drum and bass incorporates a number of scenes and styles, from the highly electronic, industrial sounds of techstep to the use of conventional, acoustic instrumentation that characterise the more jazz-influenced end of the spectrum. The sounds of drum and bass are extremely varied due to the range of influences behind the music. Drum and bass could at one time be defined as a strictly electronic musical genre, with the only &quot;live&quot; element being the DJ&#x27;s selection and mixing of records during a set. &quot;Live&quot; drum and bass using electric, electronic and acoustic instruments played by musicians on stage emerged over the ensuing years of the genre&#x27;s development.

===Influences===
A very obvious and strong influence on jungle and drum and bass, thanks to the British African-Caribbean sound system scene, is the original Jamaican dub and reggae sound, with pioneers like King Tubby, Peter Tosh, Sly &amp; Robbie, Bill Laswell, Lee Perry, Mad Professor, Roots Radics, Bob Marley and Buju Banton heavily influencing the music. This influence has lessened with time, but is still evident, with many tracks containing ragga vocals.

As a musical style built around funk or syncopated rock and roll breaks, James Brown, Al Green, Marvin Gaye, Ella Fitzgerald, Gladys Knight &amp; the Pips, Billie Holiday, Aretha Franklin, Otis Redding, the Supremes, the Commodores, Jerry Lee Lewis, and even Michael Jackson acted as funk influences on the music. Jazz pioneer Miles Davis has been named as a possible influence. Blues artists such as Lead Belly, Robert Johnson, Charlie Patton, Muddy Waters and B. B. King have also been cited by producers as inspirations. Even modern avant-garde composers such as Henryk Gorecki have received mention. One of the most influential tracks in drum and bass history was &quot;Amen Brother&quot; by The Winstons, which contains a drum solo that has since become known as the &quot;Amen break&quot;, which, after being extensively used in early hip hop music, went on to become the basis for the rhythms used in drum and bass.

Kevin Saunderson released a series of bass-heavy, minimal techno cuts as Reese/The Reese Project in the late &#x27;80s, which were hugely influential in drum and bass. One of his more famous basslines (Reese – &quot;Just Want Another Chance&quot;, Incognito Records, 1988) was indeed sampled on Renegade&#x27;s &quot;Terrorist&quot; and countless others since, being known simply as the &#x27;Reese&#x27; bassline. He followed these up with equally influential (and bassline-heavy) tracks in the UK hardcore style as Tronik House in 1991–1992. Another Detroit artist who was important to the scene was Carl Craig. The sampled-up jazz break on Craig&#x27;s &quot;Bug in the Bassbin&quot; was also influential on the newly emerging sound. DJs at the Heaven nightclub on &quot;Rage&quot; nights used to play it as fast as their Technics record decks would go, pitching it up in the process.

By the late 1980s and early 1990s, the tradition of breakbeat use in hip hop production had influenced the sound of breakbeat hardcore, which in turn led to the emergence of jungle, drum and bass, and other genres that shared the same use of broken beats. Drum and bass shares many musical characteristics with hip-hop, though it is nowadays mostly stripped of lyrics. Grandmaster Flash, Roger Troutman, Afrika Bambaata, Run DMC, Mac Dre, Public Enemy, Schooly D, N.W.A, Kid Frost, Wu-Tang Clan, Dr. Dre, Mos Def, Beastie Boys and the Pharcyde are very often directly sampled, regardless of their general influence.

Clearly, drum and bass has been influenced by other music genres, though influences from sources external to the electronic dance music scene perhaps lessened following the shifts from jungle to drum and bass, and through to so-called &quot;intelligent drum and bass&quot; and techstep. It still remains a fusion music style.

Some tracks are illegally remixed and released on white label records (technically bootleg), often to acclaim. For example, DJ Zinc&#x27;s remix of Fugees&#x27; &quot;Ready or Not&quot;, also known as &quot;Fugee Or Not&quot;, was eventually released with the Fugees&#x27; permission after talk of legal action, though ironically, the Fugees&#x27; version infringed Enya&#x27;s copyright to an earlier song. White labels, along with dubplates, played an important part in drum and bass musical culture.

===Drum elements===
====Sampling====
The Amen break was synonymous with early drum and bass productions but other samples have had a significant impact, including the Apache, Funky Drummer, &quot;Soul Pride&quot;, &quot;Scorpio&quot; and &quot;Think (About It)&quot; breaks. Early pioneers often used Akai samplers and sequencers on the Atari ST to create their tracks.

====Synthesis====
Of equal importance is the TR-808 kick drum, an artificially down-pitched or elongated bass drum sound sampled from Roland&#x27;s classic TR-808 drum machine, and a sound which has been subject to an enormous amount of experimentation over the years.

====Rhythm composition====
Many drum and bass tracks have featured more than one sampled breakbeat in them and a technique of switching between two breaks after each bar developed. A more recent commonly used break is the &quot;Tramen&quot;, which combines the Amen break, a James Brown funk breakbeat (&quot;Tighten Up&quot; or &quot;Samurai&quot; break) and an Alex Reece drum and bass breakbeat.

The relatively fast drum beat forms a canvas on which a producer can create tracks to appeal to almost any taste and often will form only a background to the other elements of the music. Syncopated breakbeats remain the most distinctive element as without these a high-tempo 4/4 dance track could be classified as techno or gabber.

The complex syncopation of the drum tracks&#x27; breakbeat is another facet of production on which producers can spend a very large amount of time. The Amen break is generally acknowledged to have been the most-used (and often considered the most powerful) break in drum and bass.

===Bass elements===
The genre places great importance on the bassline, in this case a deep sub-bass musical pattern which can be felt physically through powerful sound systems due to the low-range frequencies favoured. There has been considerable exploration of different timbres in the bass line region, particularly within techstep. The bass lines most notably originate from sampled sources or synthesizers. Bass lines performed with a bass instrument, whether it is electric, acoustic or a double bass, are less common.

===Atmospheric elements===
Atmospheric pads and samples may be added over the fundamental drum and bass to provide different feels. These have included &quot;light&quot; elements such as ambient pads as found in ambient electronica and samples of jazz and world musics, or &quot;dark&quot; elements such as dissonant pads and sci-fi samples to induce anxiety in the dancer.

===Vocal and melodic elements===
Old-school DnB usually included an MC providing vocals. Some styles (such as jazz-influenced DnB) also include melodic instruments soloing over the music.

===Tempo===
Drum and bass is usually between 160 and 180 BPM, in contrast to other breakbeat-based dance styles such as nu skool breaks, which maintain a slower pace at around 130–140 BPM. A general upward trend in tempo has been observed during the evolution of drum and bass. The earliest forms of drum and bass clocked in at around 130 bpm in 1990/1991, speeding up to around 155–165 BPM by 1993. Since around 1996, drum and bass tempos have predominantly stayed in the 170–180 range. Recently, some producers have started to once again produce tracks with slower tempos (that is, in the 150-170 bpm range), but the mid-170s tempo is still a hallmark of the drum and bass sound.

A track combining the same elements (broken beat, bass, production techniques) as a drum and bass track, but with a slower tempo (say 140 BPM), might not be drum and bass, but instead may qualify as a drum and bass-influenced breakbeat track.

===Drop===
Many mixing points begin or end with a &quot;drop&quot;. The drop is the point in a track where a switch of rhythm or bassline occurs and usually follows a recognisable build section and breakdown. Sometimes, the drop is used to switch between tracks, layering components of different tracks, as the two records may be simply ambient breakdowns at this point. Some DJs prefer to combine breakbeats, a more difficult exercise. Some drops are so popular that the DJ will &quot;rewind&quot; or &quot;reload&quot; or &quot;lift up&quot; the record by spinning it back and restarting it at the build. The drop is often a key point from the point of view of the dance floor, since the drum breaks often fade out to leave an ambient intro playing. When the beats re-commence they are often more complex and accompanied by a heavier bassline, encouraging the crowd to begin dancing.

==Live performance==
Drum and bass exhibits a full frequency response which can sometimes only be fully appreciated on sound systems which can handle very low frequencies, including sub-bass frequencies that are often felt more than heard. As befits its name, the bass element of the music is particularly pronounced, with the comparatively sparse arrangements of drum and bass tracks allowing room for basslines that are deeper than most other forms of dance music. Drum and bass tracks are meticulously designed to create a hard-hitting emotional impact, with the drums complementing the bass to deliver a pulsating, powerful experience. Consequently, drum and bass parties are often advertised as featuring uncommonly loud and bass-heavy sound systems.

However, there are many albums specifically designed for personal listening. The DJ mix is a particularly popular form of release, with a popular DJ or producer mixing live, or on a computer, a variety of tracks for personal listening. Additionally, there are many albums containing unmixed tracks, suited for home or car listening.

===DJ performance===
Although this practice has declined in popularity, DJs are often accompanied by one or more MCs, drawing on the genre&#x27;s roots in hip hop and reggae/ragga.

MCs do not generally receive the same level of recognition as producer/DJs, and some events are specifically marketed as being MC-free. There are relatively few well-known drum and bass MCs, mainly based in London and Bristol, including Stevie Hyper D (deceased), the Ragga Twins, Dynamite MC, MC Skibadee(deceased) and MC Tali.

===Live instrument performance===
Many musicians have adapted drum and bass to live performances, which feature instruments such as drums (acoustic or electronic), samplers, synthesizers, turntables, bass (either upright or electric) and guitars (acoustic or electric). Samplers have also been used live by assigning samples to a specific drum pad or key on drum pads or synthesizers. MCs are frequently featured in live performances.

==Subgenres==

Smaller scenes within the drum and bass community have developed and the scene as a whole has become much more fractured into specific subgenres, which have been grouped into &quot;light&quot; (influenced by ambient, jazz, and world music) and &quot;heavy&quot; (influenced by industrial music, sci-fi, and anxiety) styles, including:

===Mainstream drum and bass===
* Jump-up, appearing in the mid-1990s, employs heavy and energetic drum and bass, characterised by robotic and heavy bass sounds. It also is generally less serious and contains more humour than other subgenres.
* Drumstep or halftime is a combination of drum and bass and dubstep, where the beat structure is half time, while the remaining elements still adhere to the usual sub-bass and tempo of drum and bass.
*Drill &#x27;n&#x27; bass (also known as fungle and spunk jazz) consists of very complex and chopped up rhythms, rapid and irregularly syncopated basslines and often ambient elements similar to earlier subgenres of IDM (like ambient techno). The subgenre was developed by names like Squarepusher, Luke Vibert (known as Plug) and Aphex Twin.

=== Light drum and bass ===
* Intelligent drum &amp; bass or intelligent jungle is a smoother style, influenced by ambient music, chillout, jazz and soul music. It was pioneered by such artists as Omni Trio, Peshay, William Orbit, Seba, Blu Mar Ten, Deep Blue, Photek, LTJ Bukem and his label Good Looking Records, and the label Moving Shadow.
* Jazzstep, jazzy jungle, jazz &amp; bass or drum &amp; jazz demonstrates heavy influence by jazz and trip hop. It uses typical jazz scales, rhythms and instrumentation. It was pioneered by artists such as Alex Reece and LTJ Bukem, and was also utilized in DJ sets by early trip hop producers and DJs such as Kruder &amp; Dorfmeister, Nightmares on Wax, Kid Loco, Thievery Corporation, and Mr. Scruff.
* Liquid drum and bass (or simply &quot;liquid&quot;) draws heavily on harmonic and melodic grooves
* Sambass, a Brazilian drum and bass style, incorporates elements from samba, bossa nova and other Latin music styles. Pioneered by artists such as DJ Marky.

=== Heavy drum and bass ===
* Darkstep is characterised by fast drums and a general dark mood, drawing influences from dark ambient, industrial and hardcore music.
* Techstep is characterised by sci-fi soundscapes and samples from science fiction culture. Pioneered by artists such as Bad Company UK, Ed Rush, Optical, Dom &amp; Roland, and the label Moving Shadow.
* Neurofunk or neuro is the progression from techstep incorporating more elements from jazz and funk.
* Hardstep is a harder style which uses gritty basslines and heavy yet simple electronic melodies.
* Metal &amp; bass or bass metal is a style which specifically uses heavy metal guitar riffs. Pioneered by artists such as Concord Dawn, Counterstrike, Zardonic, Dirtyphonics, Pendulum and others.
* Crossbreed is the amalgamation of industrial hardcore and drum and bass often combined with influences of metal and breakcore. It emerged in the mid-2000s, pioneered by record labels such as Prspct Recordings, Yellow Stripe and Future Sickness Records. Notable artists include Switch Technique, Gancher &amp; Ruin, Cooh, Counterstrike, Katharsys, Sinister Souls and Lucy Furr.

=== Atmospheric drum and bass ===
* Modern atmospheric drum and bass is characterised by large, ambient pads and synths, and hard hitting drum breaks. It hit a peak in the early 2020s following the emergence of popular artist within the genre, Sewerslvt (now known as Cynthoni). It often utilizes pop culture art elements and samples.

===Genres influenced by drum and bass===
Born around the same time as jungle, breakcore and digital hardcore share many of the elements of drum and bass and to the uninitiated, tracks from the extreme end of drum and bass may sound identical to breakcore thanks to speed, complexity, impact and maximum sonic density combined with musical experimentation. German drum and bass DJ The Panacea is also one of the leading digital hardcore artists. Raggacore resembles a faster version of the ragga-influenced jungle music of the 1990s, similar to breakcore but with more friendly dancehall beats (dancehall itself being a very important influence on drum and bass). Darkcore, a direct influence on drum and bass, was combined with influences of drum and bass itself leading to the creation of darkstep. There is considerable crossover from the extreme edges of drum and bass, breakcore, darkcore, digital hardcore and raggacore with fluid boundaries.

Intelligent dance music (IDM) is a form of art music based on DnB and other electronic dance musics, exploring their boundaries using ideas from science, technology, contemporary classical music and progressive rock, often creating un-danceable, art gallery style music.

Ghettotech, a club music genre from Detroit, contains synth and basslines similar to drum and bass.
== Industry ==
===Record labels===
Drum and bass is dominated by a small group of record labels. These are mainly run by DJ-producers, such as London Elektricity&#x27;s Hospital Records, Andy C and Scott Bourne&#x27;s RAM, Goldie&#x27;s Metalheadz, Fabio and Sarah Sandy&#x27;s Creative Source Records, DJ Dextrous&#x27;s King of the Jungle Records, Subversive Recordings and State of the Art Recordings, Kasra&#x27;s Critical Music, DJ Friction&#x27;s Shogun Audio, DJ Fresh&#x27;s Breakbeat Kaos, Ed Rush &amp; Optical&#x27;s Virus Recordings, Futurebound&#x27;s Viper Recordings and DJ Hype, Pascal, NoCopyrightSounds and formerly DJ Zinc&#x27;s True Playaz (known as Real Playaz as of 2006).

Prior to 2016, the major international music labels such as Sony Music and Universal had shown very little interest in the drum and bass scene, with the exception of some notable signings, including Pendulum&#x27;s &quot;In Silico&quot; LP to Warner. Roni Size&#x27;s label played a big, if not the biggest, part in the creation of drum and bass with their dark, baseline sounds. V Recordings also played a large part of the development of drum and bass.

BMG Rights Management acquired Ram Records in February 2016, making a strategic investment to help RAM Records (a London-based drum and bass record company co-owned by Andy C and his business partner Scott Bourne). RAM Records has been pushing the boundaries of drum and bass further into the mainstream with artists such as Chase and Status and Sub Focus.

Now defunct labels include Rob Playford&#x27;s Moving Shadow, running from 1990 until 2007, which played a pivotal role in the 1990s drum and bass scene, releasing records by artists such as Omni Trio.

===Formats and distribution===
====Purchasing====
Originally drum and bass was mostly sold in 12-inch vinyl single format. With the emergence of drum and bass into mainstream music markets, more albums, compilations and DJ mixes started to be sold on CDs. As digital music became more popular, websites focused on electronic music, such as Beatport, began to sell drum and bass in digital format.

====Distributors (wholesale)====
The bulk of drum and bass vinyl records and CDs are distributed globally and regionally by a relatively small number of companies such as SRD (Southern Record Distributors), ST Holdings, &amp; Nu Urban Music Limited.

As of 11 September 2012, Nu Urban ceased trading and RSM Tenon were instructed to assist in convening statutory meetings of members and creditors to appoint a liquidator. This left many labels short on sales, as Nu Urban were one of the main distributors for the vinyl market in the drum and bass scene.

===Regional scenes===
====Anglosphere====
Despite its roots in the UK, which is still treated as the &quot;home&quot; of drum and bass, the style has firmly established itself around the world. There are strong scenes in other English-speaking countries including Australia, Canada, New Zealand, South Africa, and the United States.

===Media presence===
Today, drum and bass is widely promoted using different methods such as video sharing services like YouTube and Dailymotion, blogs, radio, and television, the latter being the most uncommon method. More recently, music networking websites such as SoundCloud and Mixcloud have become powerful tools for artist recognition, providing a vast platform that enables quick responses to new tracks. Record labels have adopted the use of podcasts. Prior to the rise of the internet, drum and bass was commonly broadcast over pirate radio.

====Radio====
The three highest-profile radio stations playing drum and bass shows are BBC Radio 1 with The Drum and Bass Show – formerly with Friction, who was replaced with René LaVice in 2017, simulcast in the US and Canada on Sirius XM, and DJ Hype on Kiss 100 in London. Fabio and Grooverider previously held a long-standing drum and bass show on Radio 1. Radio 1 also had the &quot;One in the Jungle&quot; show.

The BBC&#x27;s Black music station BBC Radio 1Xtra used to feature the genre heavily, with DJ Bailey (show axed as of 29 August 2012) and Crissy Criss (show axed as of August 2014) as its advocates. The network also organises a week-long tour of the UK each year called Xtra Bass. London pirate radio stations have been instrumental in the development of drum and bass, with stations such as Kool FM (which continues to broadcast today having done so since 1991), Origin FM, Don FM (the only drum and bass pirate to have gained a temporary legal licence), Renegade Radio 107.2FM, Rude FM, Wax FM and Eruption among the most influential.

As of 2015, despite higher profile stations such as 1Xtra scaling back their drum and bass specialist coverage, the genre has made its way into UK top 10 charts with drum and bass inspired tracks from artists such as Rudimental and Sigma. Earlier in August 2014, before Crissy Criss&#x27; show was axed, the BBC held a whole prime time evening event dedicated to showcasing drum and bass by allowing four major labels to participate.

As of November 2014, six drum &amp; bass songs had reached the no.1 spot on the UK&#x27;s top 40 chart, since the genre was first being played on the radio, around 1993. The first of these was in 2012. The fact that all six of these songs reached number 1 in only two years shows the increase in popularity and commercialisation of the genre in recent years. The artists who produced these songs are Sigma, Rudimental and DJ Fresh (all had two No.1 hits).

=====Internet radio=====
Internet radio stations, acting in the same light as pirate stations, have also been an instrumental part in promoting drum and bass music; the majority of them funded by listener and artist donations.

Drum and bass was supported by Ministry of Sound radio from the early 2000s until 2014 and later featuring Tuesday shows from labels such as Metalheadz, Fabio &amp; Grooverider, DJ Marky, Viper Recordings, Shogun Audio and Hospital Records. From September 2015, Ministry abruptly dropped all non-mainstream genres to focus on mainstream EDM, causing disappointment amongst the fans of the D&amp;B community.

=====North American radio=====
In Toronto since 1994, &quot;The Prophecy&quot; on 89.5 CIUT-FM with Marcus Visionary, DJ Prime and Mr. Brown, is North America&#x27;s longest running jungle radio show.

Album 88.5 (Atlanta) and C89.5fm (Seattle) have shows showcasing drum and bass.

Seattle also has a long-standing electronica show known as &quot;Expansions&quot; on 90.3 FM KEXP. The rotating DJs include Kid Hops, whose shows are made up mostly of drum and bass. In Columbus, Ohio WCBE 90.5 has a two-hour electronic only showcase, &quot;All Mixed Up&quot;, Saturday nights at 10 pm. At the same time, WUFM 88.7 plays its &quot;Electronic Playground&quot;.

Tulsa, Oklahoma&#x27;s rock station, 104.5 The Edge, has a two-hour show starting at 10 pm Saturday nights called &quot;Edge Essential Mix&quot;, mixed by DJ Demko, showcasing electronic and drum and bass style. While the aforementioned shows in Ohio rarely play drum and bass, the latter plays the genre with some frequency.

In Tucson, Arizona, 91.3 FM KXCI has a two-hour electronic show known as &quot;Digital Empire&quot;, Friday nights at 10 pm (MST). Resident DJ Trinidad showcases various styles of electronica, with the main focus being drum and bass, jungle and dubstep.

In Augusta, Georgia, Zarbizarre of the Cereal Killaz hosts a show called &quot;FreQuency&quot; on WHHD on Friday nights from 11 pm until 1 am, showcasing drum and bass during the second hour of the show.

====Magazines====
The best-known drum and bass publication was &quot;Kmag&quot; magazine (formerly called &quot;Knowledge Magazine&quot;) before it went completely online in August 2009. Although it is still live, after 20 years Kmag ceased updating their site at the end of 2016. Kmag has announced a book to celebrate their 25th anniversary to be published in December 2019. Kmag&#x27;s publishing arm, Vision, published Brian Belle-Fortune&#x27;s &quot;All Crews Journeys Through Jungle Drum &amp; Bass Culture&quot; in 2004.

Other publications include the longest-running drum and bass magazine worldwide, &quot;ATM Magazine&quot;, and Austrian-based &quot;Resident&quot;. London-based &quot;DJ&quot; magazine has also been running a widely respected drum and bass reviews page since 1994, written by Alex Constantinides, which many followers refer to when seeking out new releases to investigate. In 2012 he stopped writing the reviews, and they are now contributed by Whisky Kicks.

==Mainstream acceptance==
The earliest mainstream drum and bass releases include Goldie&#x27;s album &quot;Timeless&quot; from 1995. Other early examples include the Mercury Music Prize-winning album &quot;New Forms&quot; (1997) from Reprazent; 4hero&#x27;s Mercury-nominated &quot;Two Pages&quot; from 1998; and then, in the 2000s, Pendulum&#x27;s &quot;Hold Your Colour&quot; in 2005 (the best-selling drum and bass album).

In 2012, drum and bass achieved its first UK No. 1 single, &quot;Hot Right Now&quot;, by DJ Fresh, which was one of the fastest-selling singles of 2012 at the time of release, launching the career of Rita Ora in the process.

Numerous video games (such as Hudson Soft&#x27;s &quot;Bomberman Hero&quot;, Hi-Rez Studios&#x27; &quot;&quot;, Electronic Arts&#x27; &quot;Need for Speed: Undercover&quot;, Rockstar Games&#x27; &quot;Grand Theft Auto&quot; series, and Sony&#x27;s &quot;Wipeout&quot; series from &quot;Pure&quot; onward) have contained drum and bass tracks. Microsoft Studios&#x27; &quot;Forza Horizon 2, 3, 4 and 5&quot; feature a Hospital Records radio channel dedicated to the genre.

The genre has some popularity in film soundtracks. Hive&#x27;s &quot;Ultrasonic Sound&quot; appeared on &quot;The Matrix&quot;″s soundtrack, and the E-Z Rollers&#x27; song &quot;Walk This Land&quot; appeared in the film &quot;Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels&quot;. Ganja Kru&#x27;s &quot;Super Sharp Shooter&quot; can be heard in the 2006 film &quot;Johnny Was&quot;.

The Channel 4 show &quot;Skins&quot; uses the genre in some episodes, notably in the first series&#x27; third episode, &quot;Jal&quot;, where Shy FX and UK Apache&#x27;s &quot;Original Nuttah&quot; was played in Fazer&#x27;s club.

==See also==
* Dogs on Acid
* List of electronic music genres
* List of jungle and drum and bass artists
* List of jungle and drum and bass emcees

==References==

==Further reading==
* &quot;All Crews: Journeys Through Jungle / Drum and Bass Culture&quot; (2005) by Brian Belle-Fortune (), nonfiction
* &quot;Roots &#x27;n Future&quot; in &quot;Energy Flash&quot; (1998) by Simon Reynolds, Picador (), nonfiction (British edition)
* &quot;Generation Ecstasy: Into the World of Techno and Rave Culture&quot; (1998) by Simon Reynolds, Routledge. (), nonfiction (American edition)
* &quot;Rumble in the Jungle: The Invisible History of Drum and Bass&quot; (2002) by Steven Quinn, in: &quot;Transformations&quot;, No 3 (2002), nonfiction () PDF file
* &quot;State of Bass: Jungle – The Story So Far&quot; (1997) by Martin James, Boxtree (), nonfiction
* &quot;The Rough Guide to Drum &#x27;n&#x27; Bass&quot; (1999) by Peter Shapiro and Alexix Maryon (), nonfiction
* &quot;King Rat&quot; (1998) by China Miéville (), fiction

==External links==


* bassblog.pro – drum and bass mixes, since 2009
* t.me/bassblogpro – drum and bass mixes on Telegram
* DnbLyrics.com – the biggest collection of drum and bass lyrics
* History of drum &amp; bass – a BBC timeline with track listings, quotes and samples</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="0" end="13" title="Drum and bass" label="Drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="39" end="42" title="Drum and bass" label="DnB"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="44" end="51" title="Drum and bass" label="D&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="56" end="71" title="Drum and bass" label="D&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="87" end="109" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="132" end="142" title="Break (music)#Breakbeat (element of music)" label="breakbeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q189214" start="162" end="178" title="Tempo" label="beats per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q810451" start="191" end="195" title="Bass (music)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q848412" start="200" end="208" title="sub-bass" label="sub-bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="216" end="223" title="Sampling (music)" label="samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="229" end="240" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="279" end="285" title="Jungle music" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="454" end="457" title="dub music" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="462" end="468" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="491" end="497" title="Jungle music" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="567" end="578" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q903577" start="604" end="613" title="break (music)" label="breakbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q903735" start="647" end="656" title="breakcore" label="breakcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="658" end="670" title="ragga jungle" label="ragga jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640307" start="672" end="680" title="hardstep" label="hardstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="682" end="690" title="darkstep" label="darkstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335569" start="692" end="700" title="techstep" label="techstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q967654" start="702" end="711" title="neurofunk" label="neurofunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082572" start="736" end="747" title="liquid funk" label="liquid funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179786" start="805" end="812" title="sambass" label="sambass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259016" start="818" end="842" title="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass" label="drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q858579" start="894" end="902" title="big beat" label="big beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="904" end="911" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="913" end="921" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="949" end="956" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="958" end="963" title="house music" label="house"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="965" end="978" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="980" end="986" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="988" end="992" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="994" end="998" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="1003" end="1006" title="pop music" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q796316" start="1179" end="1200" title="BMG Rights Management" label="BMG Rights Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048005" start="1210" end="1213" title="Ram Records (UK)" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="1527" end="1536" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q645767" start="1605" end="1609" title="rave" label="rave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585075" start="1626" end="1644" title="breakbeat hardcore" label="breakbeat hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693017" start="1646" end="1654" title="darkcore" label="darkcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="1660" end="1675" title="hardcore jungle" label="hardcore jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="1700" end="1710" title="syncopated" label="syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="2159" end="2174" title="hardcore jungle" label="hardcore jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="2199" end="2205" title="Jungle (music)" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693017" start="2215" end="2223" title="darkcore" label="darkcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="2248" end="2254" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207033" start="2256" end="2265" title="Doc Scott" label="Doc Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="2267" end="2272" title="4hero" label="4hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633297" start="2278" end="2288" title="2 Bad Mice" label="2 Bad Mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102161" start="2411" end="2417" title="Jungle (music)" label="jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076856" start="2503" end="2511" title="junglist" label="junglist"/>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="2690" end="2701" title="raggamuffin music" label="raggamuffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="2709" end="2718" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6010" start="2720" end="2722" title="Rapping" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q69488" start="2842" end="2849" title="MDMA" label="ecstasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640307" start="3827" end="3835" title="hardstep" label="hardstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373687" start="4014" end="4019" title="Blame (music producer)" label="Blame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928657" start="4024" end="4035" title="Blu Mar Ten" label="Blu Mar Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="4051" end="4056" title="4Hero" label="4Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q964002" start="4058" end="4067" title="Roni Size" label="Roni Size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335569" start="4134" end="4142" title="techstep" label="techstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="4175" end="4181" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082572" start="4243" end="4254" title="liquid funk" label="liquid funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205292" start="4336" end="4347" title="DJ Dextrous" label="DJ Dextrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="4623" end="4633" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166726" start="4706" end="4711" title="Grime music" label="grime"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="4716" end="4723" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067983" start="4768" end="4786" title="Chase &amp;amp; Status" label="Chase &amp;amp; Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q44399" start="4788" end="4794" title="Netsky (musician)" label="Netsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q13427115" start="4796" end="4802" title="Metrik" label="Metrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q20672" start="4808" end="4816" title="Pendulum (drum and bass band)" label="Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="4834" end="4843" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987589" start="4871" end="4877" title="Generation Z" label="zoomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="5180" end="5190" title="industrial music" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986879" start="5886" end="5911" title="British African-Caribbean community" label="British African-Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276525" start="5912" end="5924" title="sound system (DJ)" label="sound system"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="5957" end="5960" title="dub music" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="5965" end="5971" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q451858" start="5998" end="6008" title="King Tubby" label="King Tubby"/>
<link wikidata="Q273049" start="6010" end="6020" title="Peter Tosh" label="Peter Tosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q576723" start="6022" end="6038" title="Sly &amp;amp; Robbie" label="Sly &amp;amp; Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q552511" start="6040" end="6052" title="Bill Laswell" label="Bill Laswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q315417" start="6054" end="6063" title="Lee &amp;quot;Scratch&amp;quot; Perry" label="Lee Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q918458" start="6065" end="6078" title="Mad Professor" label="Mad Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091811" start="6080" end="6092" title="Roots Radics" label="Roots Radics"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="6094" end="6104" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q560642" start="6109" end="6120" title="Buju Banton" label="Buju Banton"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="6288" end="6292" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="6296" end="6306" title="syncopation" label="syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="6307" end="6320" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q903577" start="6321" end="6327" title="drum break" label="breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="6329" end="6340" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q313260" start="6342" end="6350" title="Al Green" label="Al Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="6352" end="6363" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768" start="6365" end="6380" title="Ella Fitzgerald" label="Ella Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529105" start="6382" end="6410" title="Gladys Knight &amp;amp; the Pips" label="Gladys Knight &amp;amp; the Pips"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="6412" end="6426" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q125121" start="6428" end="6443" title="Aretha Franklin" label="Aretha Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217839" start="6445" end="6457" title="Otis Redding" label="Otis Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q218837" start="6459" end="6471" title="the Supremes" label="the Supremes"/>
<link wikidata="Q287206" start="6477" end="6487" title="Commodores" label="Commodores"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="6489" end="6504" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831" start="6515" end="6530" title="Michael Jackson" label="Michael Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="6570" end="6574" title="Jazz" label="Jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="6583" end="6594" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="6635" end="6640" title="Blues" label="Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q314310" start="6657" end="6667" title="Lead Belly" label="Lead Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q192133" start="6669" end="6683" title="Robert Johnson" label="Robert Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q354519" start="6685" end="6699" title="Charlie Patton" label="Charlie Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="6701" end="6713" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="6718" end="6728" title="B. B. King" label="B. B. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q294568" start="6822" end="6836" title="Henryk Gorecki" label="Henryk Gorecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q478168" start="6952" end="6964" title="The Winstons" label="The Winstons"/>
<link wikidata="Q462074" start="7034" end="7044" title="Amen break" label="Amen break"/>
<link wikidata="Q923090" start="7180" end="7196" title="Kevin Saunderson" label="Kevin Saunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q962197" start="7782" end="7792" title="Carl Craig" label="Carl Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694616" start="7928" end="7934" title="Heaven (nightclub)" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426394" start="8005" end="8013" title="Technics (brand)" label="Technics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585075" start="8185" end="8203" title="breakbeat hardcore" label="breakbeat hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q506900" start="8438" end="8455" title="Grandmaster Flash" label="Grandmaster Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q709454" start="8457" end="8471" title="Roger Troutman" label="Roger Troutman"/>
<link wikidata="Q316872" start="8473" end="8488" title="Afrika Bambaata" label="Afrika Bambaata"/>
<link wikidata="Q159351" start="8490" end="8497" title="Run DMC" label="Run DMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368449" start="8499" end="8506" title="Mac Dre" label="Mac Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="8508" end="8520" title="Public Enemy" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395950" start="8522" end="8531" title="Schooly D" label="Schooly D"/>
<link wikidata="Q216856" start="8533" end="8538" title="N.W.A" label="N.W.A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395969" start="8540" end="8549" title="Kid Frost" label="Kid Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="8551" end="8563" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="8565" end="8572" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q38875" start="8574" end="8581" title="Mos Def" label="Mos Def"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="8583" end="8595" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856396" start="8604" end="8612" title="Pharcyde" label="Pharcyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="8799" end="8821" title="electronic dance music" label="electronic dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141316" start="9063" end="9081" title="white label record" label="white label record"/>
<link wikidata="Q324346" start="9137" end="9144" title="DJ Zinc" label="DJ Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q159329" start="9161" end="9167" title="Fugees" label="Fugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q604369" start="9180" end="9192" title="Ready or Not (Fugees song)" label="Ready or Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q38257" start="9379" end="9383" title="Enya" label="Enya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263218" start="9446" end="9454" title="dubplate" label="dubplate"/>
<link wikidata="Q462074" start="9558" end="9568" title="Amen break" label="Amen break"/>
<link wikidata="Q616563" start="9684" end="9690" title="Apache (single)" label="Apache"/>
<link wikidata="Q3288535" start="9692" end="9705" title="Funky Drummer" label="Funky Drummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784466" start="9761" end="9777" title="Think (About It)" label="Think (About It)"/>
<link wikidata="Q415294" start="9818" end="9822" title="Akai" label="Akai"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="9823" end="9831" title="Sampler (musical instrument)" label="samplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q646683" start="9836" end="9846" title="Music sequencer" label="sequencers"/>
<link wikidata="Q627302" start="9854" end="9862" title="Atari ST" label="Atari ST"/>
<link wikidata="Q211028" start="9993" end="10002" title="bass drum" label="bass drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="10022" end="10028" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414221" start="10044" end="10050" title="Roland TR-808" label="TR-808"/>
<link wikidata="Q462074" start="10419" end="10429" title="Amen break" label="Amen break"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="10433" end="10444" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7801639" start="10467" end="10477" title="Tighten Up (Archie Bell &amp;amp; the Drells song)" label="Tighten Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628891" start="10521" end="10531" title="Alex Reece" label="Alex Reece"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="10745" end="10755" title="Syncopated" label="Syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="10833" end="10836" title="Time signature" label="4/4"/>
<link wikidata="Q170611" start="10872" end="10878" title="techno" label="techno"/>
<link wikidata="Q820049" start="10882" end="10888" title="gabber" label="gabber"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="10903" end="10914" title="syncopation" label="syncopation"/>
<link wikidata="Q903577" start="10940" end="10949" title="break (music)" label="breakbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q462074" start="11043" end="11053" title="Amen break" label="Amen break"/>
<link wikidata="Q810540" start="11234" end="11242" title="bassline" label="bassline"/>
<link wikidata="Q848412" start="11264" end="11272" title="sub-bass" label="sub-bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q176501" start="11445" end="11451" title="timbre" label="timbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335569" start="11498" end="11506" title="techstep" label="techstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="11551" end="11558" title="Sampling (music)" label="sampled"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="11570" end="11581" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="11667" end="11678" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029382" start="12005" end="12014" title="Consonance and dissonance" label="dissonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q663519" start="12345" end="12354" title="breakbeat" label="breakbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756101" start="12382" end="12397" title="nu skool breaks" label="nu skool breaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308387" start="13245" end="13249" title="drop (music)" label="drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016487" start="13387" end="13396" title="breakdown (music)" label="breakdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q848412" start="14258" end="14266" title="sub-bass" label="sub-bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="15280" end="15283" title="Emcees" label="MCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="15322" end="15329" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="15334" end="15340" title="reggae" label="reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q740911" start="15341" end="15346" title="ragga" label="ragga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615586" start="15586" end="15600" title="Stevie Hyper D" label="Stevie Hyper D"/>
<link wikidata="Q6098237" start="15617" end="15628" title="Ragga Twins" label="Ragga Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319083" start="15630" end="15641" title="Dynamite MC" label="Dynamite MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7534980" start="15643" end="15654" title="MC Skibadee" label="MC Skibadee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715090" start="15669" end="15676" title="MC Tali" label="MC Tali"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="15811" end="15816" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="15843" end="15851" title="Sampler (musical instrument)" label="samplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="15853" end="15864" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116434" start="15867" end="15877" title="turntables" label="turntables"/>
<link wikidata="Q810447" start="15879" end="15883" title="bass (instrument)" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="15892" end="15899" title="upright bass" label="upright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="15917" end="15923" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q320002" start="15949" end="15957" title="Sampler (musical instrument)" label="Samplers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360470" start="16037" end="16046" title="Roland V-Drums" label="drum pads"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="16064" end="16066" title="MC" label="MC"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="16338" end="16345" title="Ambient music" label="ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="16347" end="16351" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q205049" start="16357" end="16368" title="world music" label="world music"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="16407" end="16423" title="industrial music" label="industrial music"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="16425" end="16431" title="sci-fi" label="sci-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="16437" end="16444" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16499" end="16506" title="Jungle music#Jump-up" label="Jump-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641839" start="16806" end="16815" title="half-time (music)" label="half time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259016" start="16910" end="16934" title="Drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass" label="Drill &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q319526" start="17044" end="17054" title="syncopation" label="syncopated"/>
<link wikidata="Q660984" start="17124" end="17127" title="Intelligent dance music" label="IDM"/>
<link wikidata="Q553861" start="17192" end="17204" title="Squarepusher" label="Squarepusher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352724" start="17206" end="17217" title="Luke Vibert" label="Luke Vibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q223161" start="17238" end="17248" title="Aphex Twin" label="Aphex Twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="17366" end="17379" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q757143" start="17381" end="17389" title="Chill-out music" label="chillout"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="17391" end="17395" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="17400" end="17410" title="soul music" label="soul music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023435" start="17448" end="17457" title="Robert Haigh (musician)" label="Omni Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q62554723" start="17459" end="17465" title="Peshay" label="Peshay"/>
<link wikidata="Q366804" start="17467" end="17480" title="William Orbit" label="William Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049229" start="17482" end="17486" title="Seba (musician)" label="Seba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928657" start="17488" end="17499" title="Blu Mar Ten" label="Blu Mar Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5250090" start="17501" end="17510" title="Deep Blue (musician)" label="Deep Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349876" start="17512" end="17518" title="Photek" label="Photek"/>
<link wikidata="Q921236" start="17520" end="17529" title="LTJ Bukem" label="LTJ Bukem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582718" start="17544" end="17564" title="Good Looking Records" label="Good Looking Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q605344" start="17580" end="17593" title="Moving Shadow" label="Moving Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="17688" end="17692" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q205560" start="17697" end="17705" title="trip hop" label="trip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628891" start="17801" end="17811" title="Alex Reece" label="Alex Reece"/>
<link wikidata="Q921236" start="17816" end="17825" title="LTJ Bukem" label="LTJ Bukem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121411" start="17904" end="17928" title="Kruder &amp;amp; Dorfmeister" label="Kruder &amp;amp; Dorfmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q928905" start="17930" end="17947" title="Nightmares on Wax" label="Nightmares on Wax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277171" start="17949" end="17957" title="Kid Loco" label="Kid Loco"/>
<link wikidata="Q546930" start="17959" end="17979" title="Thievery Corporation" label="Thievery Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q933315" start="17985" end="17995" title="Mr. Scruff" label="Mr. Scruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082572" start="17999" end="18019" title="Liquid drum and bass" label="Liquid drum and bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179786" start="18099" end="18106" title="Sambass" label="Sambass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11403" start="18168" end="18173" title="samba" label="samba"/>
<link wikidata="Q486263" start="18175" end="18185" title="bossa nova" label="bossa nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345375" start="18196" end="18207" title="Latin music (genre)" label="Latin music"/>
<link wikidata="Q321256" start="18245" end="18253" title="DJ Marky" label="DJ Marky"/>
<link wikidata="Q756956" start="18375" end="18387" title="dark ambient" label="dark ambient"/>
<link wikidata="Q487965" start="18389" end="18399" title="Industrial music" label="industrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q388906" start="18404" end="18412" title="Hardcore (electronic dance music genre)" label="hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335569" start="18422" end="18430" title="Techstep" label="Techstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="18451" end="18457" title="Science fiction" label="sci-fi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358257" start="18458" end="18468" title="soundscape" label="soundscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982683" start="18541" end="18555" title="Bad Company (drum and bass group)" label="Bad Company UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q326768" start="18557" end="18564" title="Ed Rush" label="Ed Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098804" start="18566" end="18573" title="Optical (musician)" label="Optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037498" start="18575" end="18591" title="Dom &amp;amp; Roland" label="Dom &amp;amp; Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q605344" start="18607" end="18620" title="Moving Shadow" label="Moving Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q967654" start="18624" end="18633" title="Neurofunk" label="Neurofunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="18709" end="18713" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="18718" end="18722" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640307" start="18726" end="18734" title="Hardstep" label="Hardstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="18891" end="18902" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124054" start="18946" end="18958" title="Concord Dawn" label="Concord Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964456" start="18960" end="18973" title="Counterstrike (drum and bass group)" label="Counterstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q820995" start="18975" end="18983" title="Zardonic" label="Zardonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029750" start="18985" end="18997" title="Dirtyphonics" label="Dirtyphonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q20672" start="18999" end="19007" title="Pendulum (drum and bass band)" label="Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="19128" end="19133" title="Heavy metal music" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q903735" start="19138" end="19147" title="breakcore" label="breakcore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19644" end="19653" title="Sewerslvt" label="Sewerslvt"/>
<link wikidata="Q903735" start="19814" end="19823" title="breakcore" label="breakcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q56580" start="19828" end="19844" title="digital hardcore" label="digital hardcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q74848" start="20116" end="20127" title="The Panacea" label="The Panacea"/>
<link wikidata="Q903735" start="20181" end="20190" title="Raggacore" label="Raggacore"/>
<link wikidata="Q474027" start="20313" end="20322" title="dancehall" label="dancehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693017" start="20399" end="20407" title="Darkcore" label="Darkcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q188994" start="20526" end="20534" title="darkstep" label="darkstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q660984" start="20685" end="20708" title="Intelligent dance music" label="Intelligent dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583807" start="20728" end="20737" title="art music" label="art music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521688" start="20957" end="20967" title="Ghettotech" label="Ghettotech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858715" start="21200" end="21218" title="London Elektricity" label="London Elektricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630451" start="21226" end="21242" title="Hospital Records" label="Hospital Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q387288" start="21244" end="21250" title="Andy C" label="Andy C"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048005" start="21275" end="21278" title="Ram Records (UK)" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="21280" end="21286" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163942" start="21294" end="21304" title="Metalheadz" label="Metalheadz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205292" start="21360" end="21371" title="DJ Dextrous" label="DJ Dextrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186644" start="21475" end="21489" title="Critical Music" label="Critical Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205325" start="21491" end="21502" title="DJ Friction (UK)" label="DJ Friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q941738" start="21524" end="21532" title="DJ Fresh" label="DJ Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q850546" start="21540" end="21554" title="Breakbeat Kaos" label="Breakbeat Kaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q326768" start="21556" end="21563" title="Ed Rush" label="Ed Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098804" start="21570" end="21577" title="Optical (musician)" label="Optical"/>
<link wikidata="Q15149301" start="21603" end="21614" title="Futurebound" label="Futurebound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154114" start="21643" end="21650" title="DJ Hype" label="DJ Hype"/>
<link wikidata="Q21006848" start="21660" end="21677" title="NoCopyrightSounds" label="NoCopyrightSounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q324346" start="21691" end="21698" title="DJ Zinc" label="DJ Zinc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21706" end="21717" title="True Playaz" label="True Playaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="21814" end="21824" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="21829" end="21838" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q20672" start="21953" end="21961" title="Pendulum (drum and bass band)" label="Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q511813" start="21975" end="21984" title="In Silico (Pendulum album)" label="In Silico"/>
<link wikidata="Q796316" start="22210" end="22231" title="BMG Rights Management" label="BMG Rights Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048005" start="22241" end="22252" title="Ram Records (UK)" label="Ram Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q387288" start="22378" end="22384" title="Andy C" label="Andy C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067983" start="22535" end="22551" title="Chase and Status" label="Chase and Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848854" start="22556" end="22565" title="Sub Focus" label="Sub Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q605344" start="22595" end="22607" title="Rob Playford" label="Rob Playford"/>
<link wikidata="Q605344" start="22615" end="22628" title="Moving Shadow" label="Moving Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023435" start="22759" end="22768" title="Robert Haigh (musician)" label="Omni Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="22873" end="22878" title="vinyl record" label="vinyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619673" start="22991" end="22999" title="DJ mixes" label="DJ mixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q813240" start="23111" end="23119" title="Beatport" label="Beatport"/>
<link wikidata="Q559856" start="24152" end="24173" title="video sharing service" label="video sharing service"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="24180" end="24187" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q769222" start="24192" end="24203" title="Dailymotion" label="Dailymotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q30849" start="24205" end="24209" title="blog" label="blog"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="24212" end="24217" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="24223" end="24233" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q568769" start="24327" end="24337" title="SoundCloud" label="SoundCloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883832" start="24342" end="24350" title="Mixcloud" label="Mixcloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q20899" start="24510" end="24517" title="podcast" label="podcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q877017" start="24597" end="24609" title="pirate radio" label="pirate radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="24699" end="24710" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205325" start="24755" end="24763" title="DJ Friction (UK)" label="Friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879761" start="24787" end="24798" title="René LaVice" label="René LaVice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154114" start="24857" end="24864" title="DJ Hype" label="DJ Hype"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416895" start="24868" end="24876" title="Kiss 100 London" label="Kiss 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427786" start="24888" end="24893" title="Fabio (DJ)" label="Fabio"/>
<link wikidata="Q838398" start="24898" end="24909" title="Grooverider" label="Grooverider"/>
<link wikidata="Q795563" start="25066" end="25081" title="BBC Radio 1Xtra" label="BBC Radio 1Xtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8045047" start="25301" end="25310" title="Xtra Bass" label="Xtra Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6430573" start="25423" end="25430" title="Kool FM" label="Kool FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292588" start="25506" end="25512" title="Don FM" label="Don FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16333772" start="26504" end="26509" title="Sigma (group)" label="Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q50971" start="26511" end="26521" title="Rudimental" label="Rudimental"/>
<link wikidata="Q941738" start="26526" end="26534" title="DJ Fresh" label="DJ Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q97623539" start="26820" end="26837" title="Ministry of Sound" label="Ministry of Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163942" start="26930" end="26940" title="Metalheadz" label="Metalheadz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5427786" start="26942" end="26947" title="Fabio (DJ)" label="Fabio"/>
<link wikidata="Q838398" start="26954" end="26965" title="Grooverider" label="Grooverider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205325" start="26995" end="27007" title="Shogun Audio" label="Shogun Audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630451" start="27012" end="27028" title="Hospital Records" label="Hospital Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="27232" end="27239" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5011943" start="27285" end="27292" title="CIUT-FM" label="CIUT-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713740" start="27425" end="27432" title="KNHC" label="C89.5fm"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="27859" end="27874" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q18575" start="28189" end="28204" title="Tucson, Arizona" label="Tucson, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6341082" start="28214" end="28218" title="KXCI" label="KXCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q20474" start="28431" end="28438" title="dubstep" label="dubstep"/>
<link wikidata="Q181962" start="28444" end="28460" title="Augusta, Georgia" label="Augusta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064051" start="28462" end="28472" title="Zarbizarre" label="Zarbizarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5064051" start="28480" end="28493" title="Cereal Killaz" label="Cereal Killaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686894" start="28539" end="28543" title="WHHD" label="WHHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q145585" start="29308" end="29316" title="Resident (magazine)" label="Resident"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="29717" end="29723" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q718732" start="29743" end="29751" title="Timeless (Goldie album)" label="Timeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q501876" start="29802" end="29821" title="Mercury Music Prize" label="Mercury Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217448" start="29842" end="29851" title="New Forms" label="New Forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="29881" end="29886" title="4hero" label="4hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704807" start="29918" end="29927" title="Two Pages" label="Two Pages"/>
<link wikidata="Q20672" start="29969" end="29977" title="Pendulum (drum and bass band)" label="Pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q967599" start="29991" end="30007" title="Hold Your Colour" label="Hold Your Colour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252474" start="30128" end="30141" title="Hot Right Now" label="Hot Right Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q941738" start="30152" end="30160" title="DJ Fresh" label="DJ Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q229760" start="30263" end="30271" title="Rita Ora" label="Rita Ora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049502" start="30319" end="30330" title="Hudson Soft" label="Hudson Soft"/>
<link wikidata="Q690394" start="30344" end="30358" title="Bomberman Hero" label="Bomberman Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750244" start="30366" end="30380" title="Hi-Rez Studios" label="Hi-Rez Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q173941" start="30401" end="30416" title="Electronic Arts" label="Electronic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="" start="30429" end="30455" title="Need for Speed: Undercover" label="Need for Speed: Undercover"/>
<link wikidata="Q94912" start="30463" end="30477" title="Rockstar Games" label="Rockstar Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q132730" start="30490" end="30506" title="Grand Theft Auto" label="Grand Theft Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416204" start="30543" end="30550" title="Wipeout (video game series)" label="Wipeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009561" start="30575" end="30579" title="Wipeout Pure" label="Pure"/>
<link wikidata="Q73801" start="30631" end="30648" title="Microsoft Studios" label="Microsoft Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q128766" start="30661" end="30688" title="Forza (series)" label="Forza Horizon 2, 3, 4 and 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="30871" end="30881" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q976196" start="30910" end="30921" title="E-Z Rollers" label="E-Z Rollers"/>
<link wikidata="Q851095" start="30987" end="31022" title="Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels" label="Lock, Stock and Two Smoking Barrels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6267865" start="31115" end="31125" title="Johnny Was" label="Johnny Was"/>
<link wikidata="Q326180" start="31159" end="31164" title="Skins (UK TV series)" label="Skins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3729929" start="31219" end="31231" title="Skins (series 1)" label="first series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6125789" start="31259" end="31262" title="Jal (Skins series 1)" label="Jal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108934009" start="31310" end="31325" title="Original Nuttah" label="Original Nuttah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288438" start="31381" end="31393" title="Dogs on Acid" label="Dogs on Acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987731" start="31396" end="31427" title="List of electronic music genres" label="List of electronic music genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899705" start="31430" end="31470" title="List of jungle and drum and bass artists" label="List of jungle and drum and bass artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899705" start="31473" end="31512" title="List of jungle and drum and bass emcees" label="List of jungle and drum and bass emcees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176882" start="32282" end="32295" title="Peter Shapiro (journalist)" label="Peter Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031711" start="32337" end="32345" title="King Rat (1998 novel)" label="King Rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q319196" start="32362" end="32376" title="China Miéville" label="China Miéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="32611" end="32614" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
</links>
</doc>
