<doc id="5635" wikidata="Q7322" url="?curid=5635" title="Christopher Columbus">
<text>Christopher Columbus (; between 25 August and 31 October 1451 – 20 May 1506) was an Italian explorer and navigator from the Republic of Genoa who completed four Spanish-based voyages across the Atlantic Ocean sponsored by the Catholic Monarchs, opening the way for the widespread European exploration and colonization of the Americas. His expeditions were the first known European contact with the Caribbean and Central and South America.

The name &quot;Christopher Columbus&quot; is the anglicization of the Latin . Growing up on the coast of Liguria, he went to sea at a young age and traveled widely, as far north as the British Isles and as far south as what is now Ghana. He married Portuguese noblewoman Filipa Moniz Perestrelo, who bore a son, Diego, and was based in Lisbon for several years. He later took a Castilian mistress, Beatriz Enríquez de Arana, who bore a son, Ferdinand.

Largely self-educated, Columbus was knowledgeable in geography, astronomy, and history. He developed a plan to seek a western sea passage to the East Indies, hoping to profit from the lucrative spice trade. After the Granada War, and Columbus&#x27;s persistent lobbying in multiple kingdoms, the Catholic Monarchs, Queen Isabella I and King Ferdinand II, agreed to sponsor a journey west. Columbus left Castile in August 1492 with three ships and made landfall in the Americas on 12 October, ending the period of human habitation in the Americas now referred to as the pre-Columbian era. His landing place was an island in the Bahamas, known by its native inhabitants as Guanahani. He then visited the islands now known as Cuba and Hispaniola, establishing a colony in what is now Haiti. Columbus returned to Castile in early 1493, with captured natives. Word of his voyage soon spread throughout Europe.

Columbus made three further voyages to the Americas, exploring the Lesser Antilles in 1493, Trinidad and the northern coast of South America in 1498, and the east coast of Central America in 1502. Many of the names given to geographical features by Columbus, particularly the names of islands, are still in use. He gave the name (&#x27;Indians&#x27;) to the indigenous peoples he encountered. The extent to which he was aware that the Americas were a wholly separate landmass is uncertain; he never clearly renounced his belief he had reached the Far East. As a colonial governor, Columbus was accused by some of his contemporaries of significant brutality and removed from the post. Columbus&#x27;s strained relationship with the Crown of Castile and its colonial administrators in America led to his arrest and removal from Hispaniola in 1500, and later to protracted litigation over the privileges he and his heirs claimed were owed to them by the Crown.

Columbus&#x27;s expeditions inaugurated a period of exploration, conquest, and colonization that lasted for centuries, thus bringing the Americas into the European sphere of influence. The transfer of plants, animals, precious metals, culture, human populations, technology, diseases, and ideas between the Old World and New World that followed his first voyage are known as the Columbian exchange, named after him. These events and the effects which persist to the present are often cited as the beginning of the modern era. Diseases introduced from the Old World contributed to the depopulation of Hispaniola&#x27;s indigenous Taíno people, who were also subject to enslavement and other mistreatments by Columbus&#x27;s government. Increased public awareness of these interactions has led to Columbus being less celebrated in Western culture, which has historically idealized him as a heroic discoverer. Numerous places have been named for him, as has Columbia, a personification commonly used to represent the United States.

== Early life ==


Columbus&#x27;s early life is obscure, but scholars believe he was born in the Republic of Genoa between 25 August and 31 October 1451. His father was Domenico Colombo, a wool weaver who worked in Genoa and Savona, and owned a cheese stand at which young Christopher worked. His mother was Susanna Fontanarossa. He had three brothers—Bartholomew, Giovanni Pellegrino, and Giacomo (also called Diego)—as well as a sister, Bianchinetta. Bartholomew ran a cartography workshop in Lisbon for at least part of his adulthood.

His native language is presumed to have been a Genoese dialect (Ligurian) as his first language, though Columbus probably never wrote in it. His name in 15th-century Genoese was &quot;Cristoffa Corombo&quot;, in Italian, , and in Spanish .

In one of his writings, Columbus says he went to sea at 14. In 1470, the family moved to Savona, where Domenico took over a tavern. Some modern authors have argued that he was not from Genoa, but from the Aragon region of Spain or from Portugal. These competing hypotheses have been discounted by most scholars.
In 1473, Columbus began his apprenticeship as business agent for the wealthy Spinola, Centurione, and Di Negro families of Genoa. Later, he made a trip to the Greek island Chios in the Aegean Sea, then ruled by Genoa. In May 1476, he took part in an armed convoy sent by Genoa to carry valuable cargo to northern Europe. He probably visited Bristol, England, and Galway, Ireland, where he may have visited St. Nicholas&#x27; Collegiate Church. It has been speculated he went to Iceland in 1477, though many scholars doubt this. It is known that in the autumn of 1477, he sailed on a Portuguese ship from Galway to Lisbon, where he found his brother Bartholomew, and they continued trading for the Centurione family. Columbus based himself in Lisbon from 1477 to 1485. In 1478, the Centuriones sent Columbus on a sugar-buying trip to Madeira. He married Felipa Perestrello e Moniz, daughter of Bartolomeu Perestrello, a Portuguese nobleman of Lombard origin, who had been the donatary captain of Porto Santo.

In 1479 or 1480, Columbus&#x27;s son Diego was born. Between 1482 and 1485, Columbus traded along the coasts of West Africa, reaching the Portuguese trading post of Elmina at the Guinea coast in present-day Ghana. Before 1484, Columbus returned to Porto Santo to find that his wife had died. He returned to Portugal to settle her estate and take Diego with him. He left Portugal for Castile in 1485, where he took a mistress in 1487, a 20-year-old orphan named Beatriz Enríquez de Arana. It is likely that Beatriz met Columbus when he was in Córdoba, a gathering place for Genoese merchants and where the court of the Catholic Monarchs was located at intervals. Beatriz, unmarried at the time, gave birth to Columbus&#x27;s second son, Fernando Columbus, in July 1488, named for the monarch of Aragon. Columbus recognized the boy as his offspring. Columbus entrusted his older, legitimate son Diego to take care of Beatriz and pay the pension set aside for her following his death, but Diego was negligent in his duties.

Columbus learned Latin, Portuguese, and Castilian. He read widely about astronomy, geography, and history, including the works of Ptolemy, Pierre d&#x27;Ailly&#x27;s &#x27;, the travels of Marco Polo and Sir John Mandeville, Pliny&#x27;s &quot;Natural History&quot;, and Pope Pius II&#x27;s &#x27;. According to historian Edmund Morgan,
Columbus was not a scholarly man. Yet he studied these books, made hundreds of marginal notations in them and came out with ideas about the world that were characteristically simple and strong and sometimes wrong ...

== Quest for Asia ==

=== Background ===
Under the Mongol Empire&#x27;s hegemony over Asia and the &quot;Pax Mongolica&quot;, Europeans had long enjoyed a safe land passage on the Silk Road to India, parts of East Asia, including China and Maritime Southeast Asia, which were sources of valuable goods. With the fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453, the Silk Road was closed to Christian traders.

In 1474, the Florentine astronomer Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli suggested to King Afonso V of Portugal that sailing west across the Atlantic would be a quicker way to reach the Maluku (Spice) Islands, China, and Japan than the route around Africa, but Afonso rejected his proposal. In the 1480s, the Columbus brothers proposed a plan to reach the East Indies by sailing west. Columbus supposedly wrote Toscanelli in 1481 and received encouragement, along with a copy of a map the astronomer had sent Afonso implying that a westward route to Asia was possible. Columbus&#x27;s plans were complicated by the opening of the Cape Route to Asia around Africa in 1488.

Columbus had to wait until 1492 for King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of Spain to support his voyage across the Atlantic to find gold, spices, a safer route to the East, and converts to Christianity.

Carol Delaney and other commentators have argued that Columbus was a Christian millennialist and apocalypticist and that these beliefs motivated his quest for Asia in a variety of ways. Columbus often wrote about seeking gold in the log books of his voyages and writes about acquiring it &quot;in such quantity that the sovereigns... will undertake and prepare to go conquer the Holy Sepulcher&quot; in a fulfillment of Biblical prophecy. Columbus often wrote about converting all races to Christianity. Abbas Hamandi argues that Columbus was motivated by the hope of &quot;[delivering] Jerusalem from Muslim hands&quot; by &quot;using the resources of newly discovered lands&quot;.

=== Geographical considerations ===
Despite a popular misconception to the contrary, nearly all educated Westerners of Columbus&#x27;s time knew that the Earth is spherical, a concept that had been understood since antiquity. The techniques of celestial navigation, which uses the position of the Sun and the stars in the sky, had long been in use by astronomers and were beginning to be implemented by mariners.

However Columbus made several errors in calculating the size of the Earth, the distance the continent extended to the east, and therefore the distance to the west to reach his goal.

First, as far back as the 3rd century BC, Eratosthenes had correctly computed the circumference of the Earth by using simple geometry and studying the shadows cast by objects at two remote locations. In the 1st century BC, Posidonius confirmed Eratosthenes&#x27;s results by comparing stellar observations at two separate locations. These measurements were widely known among scholars, but Ptolemy&#x27;s use of the smaller, old-fashioned units of distance led Columbus to underestimate the size of the Earth by about a third.

Second, three cosmographical parameters determined the bounds of Columbus&#x27;s enterprise: the distance across the ocean between Europe and Asia, which depended on the extent of the oikumene, i.e., the Eurasian land-mass stretching east–west between Spain and China; the circumference of the Earth; and the number of miles or leagues in a degree of longitude, which was possible to deduce from the theory of the relationship between the size of the surfaces of water and the land as held by the followers of Aristotle in medieval times.

From Pierre d&#x27;Ailly&#x27;s &quot;&quot; (1410), Columbus learned of Alfraganus&#x27;s estimate that a degree of latitude (equal to approximately a degree of longitude along the equator) spanned 56.67 Arabic miles (equivalent to or 76.2 mi), but he did not realize that this was expressed in the Arabic mile (about ) rather than the shorter Roman mile (about 1,480 m) with which he was familiar. Columbus therefore estimated the size of the Earth to be about 75% of Eratosthenes&#x27;s calculation.

Third, most scholars of the time accepted Ptolemy&#x27;s estimate that Eurasia spanned 180° longitude, rather than the actual 130° (to the Chinese mainland) or 150° (to Japan at the latitude of Spain). Columbus believed an even higher estimate, leaving a smaller percentage for water. In d&#x27;Ailly&#x27;s &quot;&quot;, Columbus read Marinus of Tyre&#x27;s estimate that the longitudinal span of Eurasia was 225° at the latitude of Rhodes. Some historians, such as Samuel Eliot Morison, have suggested that he followed the statement in the apocryphal book 2 Esdras (6:42) that &quot;six parts [of the globe] are habitable and the seventh is covered with water.&quot; He was also aware of Marco Polo&#x27;s claim that Japan (which he called &quot;Cipangu&quot;) was some to the east of China (&quot;Cathay&quot;), and closer to the equator than it is. He was influenced by Toscanelli&#x27;s idea that there were inhabited islands even farther to the east than Japan, including the mythical Antillia, which he thought might lie not much farther to the west than the Azores, and the distance westward from the Canary Islands to the Indies as only 68 degrees, equivalent to (a 58% error).

Based on his sources, Columbus estimated a distance of from the Canary Islands west to Japan; the actual distance is . No ship in the 15th century could have carried enough food and fresh water for such a long voyage, and the dangers involved in navigating through the uncharted ocean would have been formidable. Most European navigators reasonably concluded that a westward voyage from Europe to Asia was unfeasible. The Catholic Monarchs, however, having completed the , an expensive war against the Moors in the Iberian Peninsula, were eager to obtain a competitive edge over other European countries in the quest for trade with the Indies. Columbus&#x27;s project, though far-fetched, held the promise of such an advantage.
=== Nautical considerations ===
Though Columbus was wrong about the number of degrees of longitude that separated Europe from the Far East and about the distance that each degree represented, he did take advantage of the trade winds, which would prove to be the key to his successful navigation of the Atlantic Ocean. He planned to first sail to the Canary Islands before continuing west with the northeast trade wind. Part of the return to Spain would require traveling against the wind using an arduous sailing technique called beating, during which progress is made very slowly. To effectively make the return voyage, Columbus would need to follow the curving trade winds northeastward to the middle latitudes of the North Atlantic, where he would be able to catch the westerlies that blow eastward to the coast of Western Europe.

The navigational technique for travel in the Atlantic appears to have been exploited first by the Portuguese, who referred to it as the (&#x27;turn of the sea&#x27;). Through his marriage to his first wife, Felipa Perestrello, Columbus had access to the nautical charts and logs that had belonged to her deceased father, Bartolomeu Perestrello, who had served as a captain in the Portuguese navy under Prince Henry the Navigator. In the mapmaking shop where he worked with his brother Bartholomew, Columbus also had ample opportunity to hear the stories of old seamen about their voyages to the western seas, but his knowledge of the Atlantic wind patterns was still imperfect at the time of his first voyage. By sailing due west from the Canary Islands during hurricane season, skirting the so-called horse latitudes of the mid-Atlantic, he risked being becalmed and running into a tropical cyclone, both of which he avoided by chance.

=== Quest for financial support for a voyage ===
By about 1484, Columbus proposed his planned voyage to King John II of Portugal. The king submitted Columbus&#x27;s proposal to his advisors, who rejected it, correctly, on the grounds that Columbus&#x27;s estimate for a voyage of 2,400 nmi was only a quarter of what it should have been. In 1488, Columbus again appealed to the court of Portugal, and John II again granted him an audience. That meeting also proved unsuccessful, in part because not long afterwards Bartolomeu Dias returned to Portugal with news of his successful rounding of the southern tip of Africa (near the Cape of Good Hope).

Columbus sought an audience with the monarchs Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile, who had united several kingdoms in the Iberian Peninsula by marrying and now ruled together. On 1 May 1486, permission having been granted, Columbus presented his plans to Queen Isabella, who in turn referred it to a committee. The learned men of Spain, like their counterparts in Portugal, replied that Columbus had grossly underestimated the distance to Asia. They pronounced the idea impractical and advised the Catholic Monarchs to pass on the proposed venture. To keep Columbus from taking his ideas elsewhere, and perhaps to keep their options open, the sovereigns gave him an allowance, totaling about 14,000 for the year, or about the annual salary of a sailor. In May 1489, the queen sent him another 10,000 , and the same year the monarchs furnished him with a letter ordering all cities and towns under their dominion to provide him food and lodging at no cost.

Columbus also dispatched his brother Bartholomew to the court of Henry VII of England to inquire whether the English Crown might sponsor his expedition, but he was captured by pirates en route, and only arrived in early 1491. By that time, Columbus had retreated to La Rábida Friary, where the Spanish Crown sent him 20,000 &quot;maravedis&quot; to buy new clothes and instructions to return to the Spanish court for renewed discussions.

=== Agreement with the Spanish Crown ===
Columbus waited at King Ferdinand&#x27;s camp until Ferdinand and Isabella conquered Granada, the last Muslim stronghold on the Iberian Peninsula, in January 1492. A council led by Isabella&#x27;s confessor, Hernando de Talavera, found Columbus&#x27;s proposal to reach the Indies implausible. Columbus had left for France when Ferdinand intervened, first sending Talavera and Bishop Diego Deza to appeal to the queen. Isabella was finally convinced by the king&#x27;s clerk Luis de Santángel, who argued that Columbus would take his ideas elsewhere, and offered to help arrange the funding. Isabella then sent a royal guard to fetch Columbus, who had traveled 2 leagues (over 10 km) toward Córdoba.

In the April 1492 &quot;Capitulations of Santa Fe&quot;, King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella promised Columbus that if he succeeded he would be given the rank of &quot;Admiral of the Ocean Sea&quot; and appointed Viceroy and Governor of all the new lands he might claim for Spain. He had the right to nominate three persons, from whom the sovereigns would choose one, for any office in the new lands. He would be entitled to one-tenth () of all the revenues from the new lands in perpetuity. He also would have the option of buying one-eighth interest in any commercial venture in the new lands, and receive one-eighth () of the profits.

In 1500, during his third voyage to the Americas, Columbus was arrested and dismissed from his posts. He and his sons, Diego and Fernando, then conducted a lengthy series of court cases against the Castilian Crown, known as the , alleging that the Crown had illegally reneged on its contractual obligations to Columbus and his heirs. The Columbus family had some success in their first litigation, as a judgment of 1511 confirmed Diego&#x27;s position as viceroy but reduced his powers. Diego resumed litigation in 1512, which lasted until 1536, and further disputes initiated by heirs continued until 1790.

== Voyages ==


Between 1492 and 1504, Columbus completed four round-trip voyages between Spain and the Americas, each voyage being sponsored by the Crown of Castile. On his first voyage he reached the Americas, initiating the European exploration and colonization of the continent, as well as the Columbian exchange. His role in history is thus important to the Age of Discovery, Western history, and human history writ large.

In Columbus&#x27;s letter on the first voyage, published following his first return to Spain, he claimed that he had reached Asia, as previously described by Marco Polo and other Europeans. Over his subsequent voyages, Columbus refused to acknowledge that the lands he visited and claimed for Spain were not part of Asia, in the face of mounting evidence to the contrary. This might explain, in part, why the American continent was named after the Florentine explorer Amerigo Vespucci—who received credit for recognizing it as a &quot;New World&quot;—and not after Columbus.

=== First voyage (1492–1493) ===
On the evening of 3 August 1492, Columbus departed from Palos de la Frontera with three ships. The largest was a carrack, the &quot;Santa María&quot;, owned and captained by Juan de la Cosa, and under Columbus&#x27;s direct command. The other two were smaller caravels, the &quot;Pinta&quot; and the &quot;Niña&quot;, piloted by the Pinzón brothers. Columbus first sailed to the Canary Islands. There he restocked provisions and made repairs then departed from San Sebastián de La Gomera on 6 September, for what turned out to be a five-week voyage across the ocean.

On 7 October, the crew spotted &quot;[i]mmense flocks of birds&quot;. On 11 October, Columbus changed the fleet&#x27;s course to due west, and sailed through the night, believing land was soon to be found. At around 02:00 the following morning, a lookout on the &quot;Pinta&quot;, Rodrigo de Triana, spotted land. The captain of the &quot;Pinta&quot;, Martín Alonso Pinzón, verified the sight of land and alerted Columbus. Columbus later maintained that he had already seen a light on the land a few hours earlier, thereby claiming for himself the lifetime pension promised by Ferdinand and Isabella to the first person to sight land. Columbus called this island (in what is now the Bahamas) (&#x27;Holy Savior&#x27;); the Natives called it Guanahani. Christopher Columbus&#x27;s journal entry of 12 October 1492 states:I saw some who had marks of wounds on their bodies and I made signs to them asking what they were; and they showed me how people from other islands nearby came there and tried to take them, and how they defended themselves; and I believed and believe that they come here from to take them captive. They should be good and intelligent servants, for I see that they say very quickly everything that is said to them; and I believe they would become Christians very easily, for it seemed to me that they had no religion. Our Lord pleasing, at the time of my departure I will take six of them from here to Your Highnesses in order that they may learn to speak.

Columbus called the inhabitants of the lands that he visited (&#x27;Indians&#x27;). He initially encountered the Lucayan, Taíno, and Arawak peoples. Noting their gold ear ornaments, Columbus took some of the Arawaks prisoner and insisted that they guide him to the source of the gold. Columbus did not believe he needed to create a fortified outpost, writing, &quot;the people here are simple in war-like matters ... I could conquer the whole of them with fifty men, and govern them as I pleased.&quot; The Taínos told Columbus that another indigenous tribe, the Caribs, were fierce warriors and cannibals, who made frequent raids on the Taínos, often capturing their women, although this may have been a belief perpetuated by the Spaniards to justify enslaving them.

Columbus also explored the northeast coast of Cuba, where he landed on 28 October. On the night of 26 November, Martín Alonso Pinzón took the &quot;Pinta&quot; on an unauthorized expedition in search of an island called &quot;Babeque&quot; or &quot;Baneque&quot;, which the natives had told him was rich in gold. Columbus, for his part, continued to the northern coast of Hispaniola, where he landed on 6 December. There, the &quot;Santa María&quot; ran aground on 25 December 1492 and had to be abandoned. The wreck was used as a target for cannon fire to impress the native peoples. Columbus was received by the native &quot;cacique&quot; Guacanagari, who gave him permission to leave some of his men behind. Columbus left 39 men, including the interpreter Luis de Torres, and founded the settlement of La Navidad, in present-day Haiti. Columbus took more natives prisoner and continued his exploration. He kept sailing along the northern coast of Hispaniola with a single ship until he encountered Pinzón and the &quot;Pinta&quot; on 6 January.

On 13 January 1493, Columbus made his last stop of this voyage in the Americas, in the Bay of Rincón in northeast Hispaniola. There he encountered the Ciguayos, the only natives who offered violent resistance during this voyage. The Ciguayos refused to trade the amount of bows and arrows that Columbus desired; in the ensuing clash one Ciguayo was stabbed in the buttocks and another wounded with an arrow in his chest. Because of these events, Columbus called the inlet the (&#x27;Bay of Arrows&#x27;).

Columbus headed for Spain on the &quot;Niña&quot;, but a storm separated him from the &quot;Pinta&quot;, and forced the &quot;Niña&quot; to stop at the island of Santa Maria in the Azores. Half of his crew went ashore to say prayers of thanksgiving in a chapel for having survived the storm. But while praying, they were imprisoned by the governor of the island, ostensibly on suspicion of being pirates. After a two-day stand-off, the prisoners were released, and Columbus again set sail for Spain.

Another storm forced Columbus into the port at Lisbon. From there he went to north of Lisbon to meet King John II of Portugal, who told Columbus that he believed the voyage to be in violation of the 1479 Treaty of Alcáçovas. After spending more than a week in Portugal, Columbus set sail for Spain. Returning to Palos on 15 March 1493, he was given a hero&#x27;s welcome and soon afterward received by Isabella and Ferdinand in Barcelona. To them he presented kidnapped Taínos and various plants and items he had collected.

One of the ten Natives taken on the return trip was a Lucayan Taíno from Guanahani thought to be 13–15 years of age, who Columbus adopted as his son upon their arrival in Spain; the boy, whose Lucayan name is unknown, received the name &quot;Diego&quot; at baptism. Initially, Diego had been recognized for his intelligence and rapid acquisition of Spanish customs, and would serve as a guide and interpreter on each of Columbus&#x27;s subsequent voyages. By the second voyage&#x27;s departure later in 1493, Diego was the only Native out of the ten taken to Europe who had not died or become seriously ill as the result of disease; while on this voyage, he played a vital role in the discovery of La Navidad. He subsequently married and had a son, also named Diego, who died of illness in 1506. Following Columbus&#x27;s death, Diego spent the rest of his life confined to Santo Domingo, and does not reappear in the historical record following a smallpox epidemic that swept Hispaniola in 1519.

Columbus&#x27;s letter on the first voyage, probably dispatched to the Spanish court upon arrival in Lisbon, was instrumental in spreading the news throughout Europe about his voyage. Almost immediately after his arrival in Spain, printed versions began to appear, and word of his voyage spread rapidly. Most people initially believed that he had reached Asia. The Bulls of Donation, three papal bulls of Pope Alexander VI delivered in 1493, purported to grant overseas territories to Portugal and the Catholic Monarchs of Spain. They were replaced by the Treaty of Tordesillas of 1494.

The two earliest published copies of Columbus&#x27;s letter on the first voyage aboard the &quot;Niña&quot; were donated in 2017 by the Jay I. Kislak Foundation to the University of Miami library in Coral Gables, Florida, where they are housed.

=== Second voyage (1493–1496) ===
On 24 September 1493, Columbus sailed from Cádiz with 17 ships, and supplies to establish permanent colonies in the Americas. He sailed with nearly 1,500 men, including sailors, soldiers, priests, carpenters, stonemasons, metalworkers, and farmers. Among the expedition members were Alvarez Chanca, a physician who wrote a detailed account of the second voyage; Juan Ponce de León, the first governor of Puerto Rico and Florida; the father of Bartolomé de las Casas; Juan de la Cosa, a cartographer who is credited with making the first world map depicting the New World; and Columbus&#x27;s youngest brother Diego. The fleet stopped at the Canary Islands to take on more supplies, and set sail again on 7 October, deliberately taking a more southerly course than on the first voyage.

On 3 November, they arrived in the Windward Islands; the first island they encountered was named Dominica by Columbus, but not finding a good harbor there, they anchored off a nearby smaller island, which he named , now a part of Guadeloupe and called Marie-Galante. Other islands named by Columbus on this voyage were Montserrat, Antigua, Saint Martin, the Virgin Islands, as well as many others.

On 17 November, Columbus first sighted the eastern coast of the island of Puerto Rico, known to its native Taino people as . His fleet sailed along the island&#x27;s southern coast for a whole day, before making landfall on its northwestern coast at the Bay of Añasco, early on 19 November. Upon landing, Columbus christened the island &quot;San Juan Bautista&quot; after John the Baptist, and remained anchored there for two days from 20 to 21 November, filling the water casks of the ships in his fleet.

On 22 November, Columbus returned to Hispaniola to visit &quot;La Navidad&quot; in modern-day Haiti, where 39 Spaniards had been left during the first voyage. Columbus found the fort in ruins. He learned from Guacanagaríx, the local tribe leader, that his men had quarreled over gold and taken women from the tribe, and that after some left for the territory of Caonabo, Caonabo came and burned the fort and killed the rest of the men there.

Columbus then established a poorly located and short-lived settlement to the east, La Isabela, in the present-day Dominican Republic. By the end of 1494, disease and famine had killed two-thirds of the Spanish settlers there.

From April to August 1494, Columbus explored Cuba and Jamaica, then returned to Hispaniola. Before leaving on this exploration to Cuba, Columbus had ordered a large amount of men, under Pedro Margarit, to &quot;journey the length and breadth of the island, enforcing Spanish control and bringing all the people under the Spanish yoke.&quot; These men, in his absence, raped women, took men captive to be servants, and stole from the indigenous people. A number of Spanish were killed in retaliation. By the time Columbus returned from exploring Cuba, the four primary leaders of the Arawak people in Hispaniola were gathering for war to try to drive the Spanish from the Island. Columbus assembled a large number of troops, and joined with his one native ally, chief [Guacanagarix], met for battle. The Spanish, even though they were largely outnumbered, won this battle, and over the next 9 months Columbus continued to wage war on the native Taíno on Hispaniola until they surrendered and agreed to pay tribute.

Columbus implemented , a Spanish labor system that rewarded conquerors with the labor of conquered non-Christian people. It is also recorded that punishments to both Spaniards and natives included whippings and mutilation (cutting noses and ears).

Columbus and the colonists enslaved many of the indigenous people, including children. Natives were beaten, raped, and tortured for the location of imagined gold. Thousands committed suicide rather than face the oppression.

In February 1495, Columbus rounded up about 1,500 Arawaks, some of whom had rebelled, in a great slave raid. About 500 of the strongest were shipped to Spain as slaves, with about two hundred of those dying en route.

In June 1495, the Spanish Crown sent ships and supplies to Hispaniola. In October, Florentine merchant Gianotto Berardi, who had won the contract to provision the fleet of Columbus&#x27;s second voyage and to supply the colony on Hispaniola, received almost 40,000 worth of enslaved Indians. He renewed his effort to get supplies to Columbus, and was working to organize a fleet when he suddenly died in December. On 10 March 1496, having been away about 30 months, the fleet departed La Isabela. On 8 June the crew sighted land somewhere between Lisbon and Cape St. Vincent, and disembarked in Cádiz on 11 June.

=== Third voyage (1498–1500) ===
On 30 May 1498, Columbus left with six ships from Sanlúcar, Spain. The fleet called at Madeira and the Canary Islands, where it divided in two, with three ships heading for Hispaniola and the other three vessels, commanded by Columbus, sailing south to the Cape Verde Islands and then westward across the Atlantic. It is probable that this expedition was intended at least partly to confirm rumors of a large continent south of the Caribbean Sea, that is, South America.

On 31 July they sighted Trinidad, the most southerly of the Caribbean islands. On 5 August, Columbus sent several small boats ashore on the southern side of the Paria Peninsula in what is now Venezuela, near the mouth of the Orinoco river. This was the first recorded landing of Europeans on the mainland of South America, which Columbus realized must be a continent. The fleet then sailed to the islands of Chacachacare and Margarita, reaching the latter on 14 August, and sighted Tobago and Grenada from afar, according to some scholars.

On 19 August, Columbus returned to Hispaniola. There he found settlers in rebellion against his rule, and his unfulfilled promises of riches. Columbus had some of the Europeans tried for their disobedience; at least one rebel leader was hanged.

In October 1499, Columbus sent two ships to Spain, asking the Court of Spain to appoint a royal commissioner to help him govern. By this time, accusations of tyranny and incompetence on the part of Columbus had also reached the Court. The sovereigns sent Francisco de Bobadilla, a relative of Marquesa Beatriz de Bobadilla, a patron of Columbus and a close friend of Queen Isabella, to investigate the accusations of brutality made against the Admiral. Arriving in Santo Domingo while Columbus was away, Bobadilla was immediately met with complaints about all three Columbus brothers. He moved into Columbus&#x27;s house and seized his property, took depositions from the Admiral&#x27;s enemies, and declared himself governor.

Bobadilla reported to Spain that Columbus once punished a man found guilty of stealing corn by having his ears and nose cut off and then selling him into slavery. He claimed that Columbus regularly used torture and mutilation to govern Hispaniola. Testimony recorded in the report stated that Columbus congratulated his brother Bartholomew on &quot;defending the family&quot; when the latter ordered for a woman to be paraded naked through the streets and then had her tongue cut because she had &quot;spoken ill of the admiral and his brothers&quot;. The document also describes how Columbus put down native unrest and revolt: he first ordered a brutal suppression of the uprising in which many natives were killed, and then paraded their dismembered bodies through the streets in an attempt to discourage further rebellion. Columbus vehemently denied the charges. The neutrality and accuracy of the accusations and investigations of Bobadilla toward Columbus and his brothers have been disputed by historians, given the anti-Italian sentiment of the Spaniards and Bobadilla&#x27;s desire to take over Columbus&#x27;s position.

In early October 1500, Columbus and Diego presented themselves to Bobadilla, and were put in chains aboard &quot;La Gorda&quot;, the caravel on which Bobadilla had arrived at Santo Domingo. They were returned to Spain, and languished in jail for six weeks before King Ferdinand ordered their release. Not long after, the king and queen summoned the Columbus brothers to the Alhambra palace in Granada. The sovereigns expressed indignation at the actions of Bobadilla, who was then recalled and ordered to make restitutions of the property he had confiscated from Columbus. The royal couple heard the brothers&#x27; pleas; restored their freedom and wealth; and, after much persuasion, agreed to fund Columbus&#x27;s fourth voyage. However, Nicolás de Ovando was to replace Bobadilla and be the new governor of the West Indies.

New light was shed on the seizure of Columbus and his brother Bartholomew, the Adelantado, with the discovery by archivist Isabel Aguirre of an incomplete copy of the testimonies against them gathered by Francisco de Bobadilla at Santo Domingo in 1500. She found a manuscript copy of this (inquiry) ‌in the Archive of Simancas, Spain, uncatalogued until she and Consuelo Varela published their book, &quot;&quot; (&quot;The fall of Christopher Colón: the judgement of Bobadilla&quot;) in 2006.

=== Fourth voyage (1502–1504) ===


On 9 May 1502, Columbus left Cádiz with his flagship &quot;Santa María&quot; and three other vessels. The ships were crewed by 140 men, including his brother Bartholomew as second in command and his son Fernando. He sailed to Asilah on the Moroccan coast to rescue Portuguese soldiers said to be besieged by the Moors. The siege had been lifted by the time they arrived, so the Spaniards stayed only a day and continued on to the Canary Islands.

On 15 June, the fleet arrived at Martinique, where it lingered for several days. A hurricane was forming, so Columbus continued westward, hoping to find shelter on Hispaniola. He arrived at Santo Domingo on 29 June, but was denied port, and the new governor Francisco de Bobadilla refused to listen to his warning that a hurricane was approaching. Instead, while Columbus&#x27;s ships sheltered at the mouth of the Rio Jaina, the first Spanish treasure fleet sailed into the hurricane. Columbus&#x27;s ships survived with only minor damage, while 20 of the 30 ships in the governor&#x27;s fleet were lost along with 500 lives (including that of Francisco de Bobadilla). Although a few surviving ships managed to straggle back to Santo Domingo, &quot;&quot;, the fragile ship carrying Columbus&#x27;s personal belongings and his 4,000 pesos in gold was the sole vessel to reach Spain. The gold was his &quot;tenth&quot; () of the profits from Hispaniola, equal to 240,000 maravedis, guaranteed by the Catholic Monarchs in 1492.

After a brief stop at Jamaica, Columbus sailed to Central America, arriving at the coast of Honduras on 30 July. Here Bartholomew found native merchants and a large canoe. On 14 August, Columbus landed on the continental mainland at Punta Caxinas, now Puerto Castilla, Honduras. He spent two months exploring the coasts of Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica, seeking a strait in the western Caribbean through which he could sail to the Indian Ocean. Sailing south along the Nicaraguan coast, he found a channel that led into Almirante Bay in Panama on 5 October.

As soon as his ships anchored in Almirante Bay, Columbus encountered Ngäbe people in canoes who were wearing gold ornaments. In January 1503, he established a garrison at the mouth of the Belén River. Columbus left for Hispaniola on 16 April. On 10 May he sighted the Cayman Islands, naming them after the numerous sea turtles there. His ships sustained damage in a storm off the coast of Cuba. Unable to travel farther, on 25 June 1503 they were beached in Saint Ann Parish, Jamaica.

For six months Columbus and 230 of his men remained stranded on Jamaica. Diego Méndez de Segura, who had shipped out as a personal secretary to Columbus, and a Spanish shipmate called Bartolomé Flisco, along with six natives, paddled a canoe to get help from Hispaniola. The governor, Nicolás de Ovando y Cáceres, detested Columbus and obstructed all efforts to rescue him and his men. In the meantime Columbus, in a desperate effort to induce the natives to continue provisioning him and his hungry men, won their favor by predicting a lunar eclipse for 29 February 1504, using Abraham Zacuto&#x27;s astronomical charts. Despite the governor&#x27;s obstruction, Christopher Columbus and his men were rescued on 28 June 1504, and arrived in Sanlúcar, Spain, on 7 November.

== Later life, illness, and death ==
Columbus had always claimed that the conversion of non-believers was one reason for his explorations, and he grew increasingly religious in his later years. Probably with the assistance of his son Diego and his friend the Carthusian monk Gaspar Gorricio, Columbus produced two books during his later years: a &quot;Book of Privileges&quot; (1502), detailing and documenting the rewards from the Spanish Crown to which he believed he and his heirs were entitled, and a &quot;Book of Prophecies&quot; (1505), in which passages from the Bible were used to place his achievements as an explorer in the context of Christian eschatology.

In his later years, Columbus demanded that the Crown of Castile give him his tenth of all the riches and trade goods yielded by the new lands, as stipulated in the Capitulations of Santa Fe. Because he had been relieved of his duties as governor, the Crown did not feel bound by that contract and his demands were rejected. After his death, his heirs sued the Crown for a part of the profits from trade with America, as well as other rewards. This led to a protracted series of legal disputes known as the (&#x27;Columbian lawsuits&#x27;).
During a violent storm on his first return voyage, Columbus, then 41, had suffered an attack of what was believed at the time to be gout. In subsequent years, he was plagued with what was thought to be influenza and other fevers, bleeding from the eyes, temporary blindness and prolonged attacks of gout. The attacks increased in duration and severity, sometimes leaving Columbus bedridden for months at a time, and culminated in his death 14 years later.

Based on Columbus&#x27;s lifestyle and the described symptoms, some modern commentators suspect that he suffered from reactive arthritis, rather than gout. Reactive arthritis is a joint inflammation caused by intestinal bacterial infections or after acquiring certain sexually transmitted diseases (primarily chlamydia or gonorrhea). In 2006, Frank C. Arnett, a medical doctor, and historian Charles Merrill, published their paper in &quot;The American Journal of the Medical Sciences&quot; proposing that Columbus had a form of reactive arthritis; Merrill made the case in that same paper that Columbus was the son of Catalans and his mother possibly a member of a prominent (converted Jew) family. &quot;It seems likely that [Columbus] acquired reactive arthritis from food poisoning on one of his ocean voyages because of poor sanitation and improper food preparation&quot;, says Arnett, a rheumatologist and professor of internal medicine, pathology and laboratory medicine at the University of Texas Medical School at Houston.

Some historians such as H. Micheal Tarver and Emily Slape, as well as medical doctors such as Arnett and Antonio Rodríguez Cuartero, believe that Columbus had such a form of reactive arthritis, but according to other authorities, this is &quot;speculative&quot;, or &quot;very speculative&quot;.

After his arrival to Sanlúcar from his fourth voyage (and Queen Isabella&#x27;s death), an ill Columbus settled in Seville in April 1505. He stubbornly continued to make pleas to the Crown to defend his own personal privileges and his family&#x27;s. He moved to Segovia (where the court was at the time) on a mule by early 1506, and, on the occasion of the wedding of King Ferdinand with Germaine of Foix in Valladolid, Spain, in March 1506, Columbus moved to that city to persist with his demands. On 20 May 1506, aged 54, Columbus died in Valladolid.

== Location of remains ==

Columbus&#x27;s remains were first buried at the Chapel of Wonders at the Convent of St. Francis, Valladolid, but were then moved to the monastery of La Cartuja in Seville (southern Spain) by the will of his son Diego. They may have been exhumed in 1513 and interred at the Seville Cathedral. In about 1536, the remains of both Columbus and his son Diego were moved to a cathedral in Colonial Santo Domingo, in the present-day Dominican Republic; Columbus had requested to be buried on the island. By some accounts, in 1793, when France took over the entire island of Hispaniola, Columbus&#x27;s remains were moved to Havana, Cuba. After Cuba became independent following the Spanish–American War in 1898, at least some of these remains were moved back to the Seville Cathedral, where they were placed on an elaborate catafalque.

In June 2003, DNA samples were taken from the remains in Seville, as well as those of Columbus&#x27;s brother Diego and younger son Fernando. Initial observations suggested that the bones did not appear to match Columbus&#x27;s physique or age at death. DNA extraction proved difficult; only short fragments of mitochondrial DNA could be isolated. These matched corresponding DNA from Columbus&#x27;s brother, supporting that the two men had the same mother. Such evidence, together with anthropologic and historic analyses, led the researchers to conclude that the remains belonged to Christopher Columbus.

In 1877, a priest discovered a lead box at Santo Domingo inscribed: &quot;Discoverer of America, First Admiral&quot;. Inscriptions found the next year read &quot;Last of the remains of the first admiral, Sire Christopher Columbus, discoverer.&quot; The box contained bones of an arm and a leg, as well as a bullet. These remains were considered legitimate by physician and U.S. Assistant Secretary of State John Eugene Osborne, who suggested in 1913 that they travel through the Panama Canal as a part of its opening ceremony. These remains were kept at the Basilica Cathedral of Santa María la Menor (in the Colonial City of Santo Domingo) before being moved to the Columbus Lighthouse (Santo Domingo Este, inaugurated in 1992). The authorities in Santo Domingo have never allowed these remains to be DNA-tested, so it is unconfirmed whether they are from Columbus&#x27;s body as well.

== Commemoration ==

The figure of Columbus was not ignored in the British colonies during the colonial era: Columbus became a unifying symbol early in the history of the colonies that became the United States when Puritan preachers began to use his life story as a model for a &quot;developing American spirit&quot;. In the spring of 1692, Puritan preacher Cotton Mather described Columbus&#x27;s voyage as one of three shaping events of the modern age, connecting Columbus&#x27;s voyage and the Puritans&#x27; migration to North America, seeing them together as the key to a grand design.

The use of Columbus as a founding figure of New World nations spread rapidly after the American Revolution. This was out of a desire to develop a national history and founding myth with fewer ties to Britain. His name was the basis for the female national personification of the United States, Columbia, in use since the 1730s with reference to the original Thirteen Colonies, and also a historical name applied to the Americas and to the New World. Columbia, South Carolina and &quot;Columbia Rediviva&quot;, the ship for which the Columbia River was named, are named for Columbus.

Columbus&#x27;s name was given to the newly born Republic of Colombia in the early 19th century, inspired by the political project of &quot;Colombeia&quot; developed by revolutionary Francisco de Miranda, which was put at the service of the emancipation of continental Hispanic America.

To commemorate the 400th anniversary of the landing of Columbus, the 1893 World&#x27;s Fair in Chicago was named the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition. The U.S. Postal Service issued the first U.S. commemorative stamps, the Columbian Issue, depicting Columbus, Queen Isabella and others in various stages of his several voyages. A commemorative silver half dollar was also struck, which remains the only U.S. currency issued having a foreigner as its subject. The policies related to the celebration of the Spanish colonial empire as the vehicle of a nationalist project undertaken in Spain during the Restoration in the late 19th century took form with the commemoration of the 4th centenary on 12 October 1892 (in which the figure of Columbus was extolled by the Conservative government), eventually becoming the very same national day. Several monuments commemorating the &quot;discovery&quot; were erected in cities such as Palos, Barcelona, Granada, Madrid, Salamanca, Valladolid and Seville in the years around the 400th anniversary.

For the Columbus Quincentenary in 1992, a second Columbian issue was released jointly with Italy, Portugal, and Spain. Columbus was celebrated at Seville Expo &#x27;92, and Genoa Expo &#x27;92.

The Boal Mansion Museum, founded in 1951, contains a collection of materials concerning later descendants of Columbus and collateral branches of the family. It features a 16th-century chapel from a Spanish castle reputedly owned by Diego Colón which became the residence of Columbus&#x27;s descendants. The chapel interior was dismantled and moved from Spain in 1909 and re-erected on the Boal estate at Boalsburg, Pennsylvania. Inside it are numerous religious paintings and other objects including a reliquary with fragments of wood supposedly from the True Cross. The museum also holds a collection of documents mostly relating to Columbus descendants of the late 18th and early 19th centuries.

In many countries of the Americas, as well as Spain and Italy, Columbus Day celebrates the anniversary of Columbus&#x27;s arrival in the Americas on 12 October 1492.

== Legacy ==
The voyages of Columbus are considered a turning point in human history, marking the beginning of globalization and accompanying demographic, commercial, economic, social, and political changes.

His explorations resulted in permanent contact between the two hemispheres, and the term &quot;pre-Columbian&quot; is used to refer to the cultures of the Americas before the arrival of Columbus and his European successors. The ensuing Columbian exchange saw the massive exchange of animals, plants, fungi, diseases, technologies, mineral wealth and ideas.

In the first century after his endeavors, Columbus&#x27;s figure largely languished in the backwaters of history, and his reputation was beset by his failures as a colonial administrator. His legacy was somewhat rescued from oblivion when he began to appear as a character in Italian and Spanish plays and poems from the late 16th century onward.

Columbus was subsumed into the Western narrative of colonization and empire building, which invoked notions of &quot;translatio imperii&quot; and &quot;translatio studii&quot; to underline who was considered &quot;civilized&quot; and who was not.
The Americanization of the figure of Columbus began in the latter decades of the 18th century, after the revolutionary period of the United States, elevating the status of his reputation to a national myth, &quot;homo americanus&quot;. His landing became a powerful icon as an &quot;image of American genesis&quot;. &quot;The Discovery of America&quot; sculpture, depicting Columbus and a cowering Native maiden, was commissioned on 3 April 1837, when U.S. President Martin Van Buren sanctioned the engineering of Luigi Persico&#x27;s design. This representation of Columbus&#x27;s triumph and the Native&#x27;s recoil is a demonstration of supposed white superiority over savage, naive Natives. As recorded during its unveiling in 1844, the sculpture extends to &quot;represent the meeting of the two races&quot;, as Persico captures their first interaction, highlighting the &quot;moral and intellectual inferiority&quot; of Natives. Placed outside the U.S. Capitol building where it remained until its removal in the mid-20th century, the sculpture reflected the contemporary view of whites in the U.S. toward the Natives; they are labeled &quot;merciless Indian savages&quot; in the United States Declaration of Independence. In 1836, Pennsylvania senator and future U.S. President James Buchanan, who proposed the sculpture, described it as representing &quot;the great discoverer when he first bounded with ecstasy upon the shore, ail his toils past, presenting a hemisphere to the astonished world, with the name America inscribed upon it. Whilst he is thus standing upon the shore, a female savage, with awe and wonder depicted in her countenance, is gazing upon him.&quot;

The American Columbus myth was reconfigured later in the century when he was enlisted as an ethnic hero by immigrants to the United States who were not of Anglo-Saxon stock, such as Jewish, Italian, and Irish people, who claimed Columbus as a sort of ethnic founding father. Catholics unsuccessfully tried to promote him for canonization in the 19th century.

From the 1990s onward, a narrative of Columbus being responsible for the genocide of indigenous peoples and environmental destruction began to compete with the then predominant discourse of Columbus as Christ-bearer, scientist, or father of America. This narrative features the negative effects of Columbus&#x27; conquests on native populations. Exposed to Old World diseases, the indigenous populations of the New World collapsed, and were largely replaced by Europeans and Africans, who brought with them new methods of farming, business, governance, and religious worship.

=== Originality of discovery of America ===

Though Christopher Columbus came to be considered the European discoverer of America in Western popular culture, his historical legacy is more nuanced. After settling Iceland, the Norse settled the uninhabited southern part of Greenland beginning in the 10th century. Norsemen are believed to have then set sail from Greenland and Iceland to become the first known Europeans to reach the North American mainland, nearly 500 years before Columbus reached the Caribbean. The 1960s discovery of a Norse settlement dating c. 1000 at L&#x27;Anse aux Meadows, Newfoundland, partially corroborates accounts within the Icelandic sagas of Erik the Red&#x27;s colonization of Greenland and his son Leif Erikson&#x27;s subsequent exploration of a place he called Vinland.

In the 19th century, amid a revival of interest in Norse culture, Carl Christian Rafn and Benjamin Franklin DeCosta wrote works establishing that the Norse had preceded Columbus in colonizing the Americas. Following this, in 1874 Rasmus Bjørn Anderson argued that Columbus must have known of the North American continent before he started his voyage of discovery. Most modern scholars doubt Columbus had knowledge of the Norse settlements in America, with his arrival to the continent being most likely an independent discovery.

Europeans devised explanations for the origins of the Native Americans and their geographical distribution with narratives that often served to reinforce their own built on ancient intellectual foundations. In modern Latin America, the non-Native populations of some countries often demonstrate an ambiguous attitude toward the perspectives of indigenous peoples regarding the so-called &quot;discovery&quot; by Columbus and the era of colonialism that followed.
In his 1960 monograph, Mexican philosopher and historian Edmundo O&#x27;Gorman explicitly rejects the Columbus discovery myth, arguing that the idea that Columbus discovered America was a misleading legend fixed in the public mind through the works of American author Washington Irving during the 19th century. O&#x27;Gorman argues that to assert Columbus &quot;discovered America&quot; is to shape the facts concerning the events of 1492 to make them conform to an interpretation that arose many years later. For him, the Eurocentric view of the discovery of America sustains systems of domination in ways that favor Europeans. In a 1992 article for &quot;The UNESCO Courier&quot;, Félix Fernández-Shaw argues that the word &quot;discovery&quot; prioritizes European explorers as the &quot;heroes&quot; of the contact between the Old and New World. He suggests that the word &quot;encounter&quot; is more appropriate, being a more universal term which includes Native Americans in the narrative.

=== America as a distinct land ===
Historians have traditionally argued that Columbus remained convinced until his death that his journeys had been along the east coast of Asia as he originally intended (excluding arguments such as Anderson&#x27;s). On his third voyage he briefly referred to South America as a &quot;hitherto unknown&quot; continent, while also rationalizing that it was the Earthly Paradise (Eden) located &quot;at the end of the Orient&quot;. Columbus continued to claim in his later writings that he had reached Asia; in a 1502 letter to Pope Alexander VI, he asserts that Cuba is the east coast of Asia. On the other hand, in a document in the &quot;Book of Privileges&quot; (1502), Columbus refers to the New World as the &quot;Indias Occidentales&quot; (&#x27;West Indies&#x27;), which he says &quot;were unknown to all the world&quot;.

=== Shape of the Earth ===

Washington Irving&#x27;s 1828 biography of Columbus popularized the idea that Columbus had difficulty obtaining support for his plan because many Catholic theologians insisted that the Earth was flat, but this is a popular misconception which can be traced back to 17th-century Protestants campaigning against Catholicism. In fact, the spherical shape of the Earth had been known to scholars since antiquity, and was common knowledge among sailors, including Columbus. Coincidentally, the oldest surviving globe of the Earth, the Erdapfel, was made in 1492, just before Columbus&#x27;s return to Europe from his first voyage. As such it contains no sign of the Americas and yet demonstrates the common belief in a spherical Earth.

In 1492, Columbus correctly measured Polaris&#x27;s diurnal motion around true north as having a diameter of almost 7°. In 1498, while sailing west through the doldrums 8° north in July and again in August sailing the trade winds 13° north, Columbus reported seeing Polaris with a diurnal motion of 10° in diameter. He accounted for the shift by concluding that Earth&#x27;s figure is pear-shaped, with the &#x27;stalk&#x27; portion (comparing this to a woman&#x27;s breast) being nearest Heaven and upon which was centered the Earthly Paradise. Although Columbus&#x27;s later readings were incorrect, 20th-century satellite data happens to indicate that the Earth has a slight pear shape.

=== Criticism and defense ===
Columbus has been criticized both for his brutality and for initiating the depopulation of the indigenous peoples of the Caribbean, whether by imported diseases or intentional violence. According to scholars of Native American history, George Tinker and Mark Freedman, Columbus was responsible for creating a cycle of &quot;murder, violence, and slavery&quot; to maximize exploitation of the Caribbean islands&#x27; resources, and that Native deaths on the scale at which they occurred would not have been caused by new diseases alone. Further, they describe the proposition that disease and not genocide caused these deaths as &quot;American holocaust denial&quot;. Historian Kris Lane disputes whether it is appropriate to use the term &quot;genocide&quot; when the atrocities were not Columbus&#x27;s intent, but resulted from his decrees, family business goals, and negligence. Other scholars defend Columbus&#x27;s actions or allege that the worst accusations against him are not based in fact while others claim that &quot;he has been blamed for events far beyond his own reach or knowledge&quot;.

As a result of the protests and riots that followed the murder of George Floyd in 2020, many public monuments of Christopher Columbus have been removed.

==== Brutality ====
Some historians have criticized Columbus for initiating the widespread colonization of the Americas and for abusing its native population. On St. Croix, Columbus&#x27;s friend Michele da Cuneo—according to his own account—kept an indigenous woman he captured, whom Columbus &quot;gave to [him]&quot;, then brutally raped her.

According to some historians, the punishment for an indigenous person, aged 14 and older, failing to pay a hawk&#x27;s bell, or &quot;cascabela&quot;, worth of gold dust every six months (based on Bartolomé de las Casas&#x27;s account) was cutting off the hands of those without tokens, often leaving them to bleed to death. Other historians dispute such accounts. For example, a study of Spanish archival sources showed that the &quot;cascabela&quot; quotas were imposed by Guarionex, not Columbus, and that there is no mention, in the primary sources, of punishment by cutting off hands for failing to pay. Columbus had an economic interest in the enslavement of the Hispaniola natives and for that reason was not eager to baptize them, which attracted criticism from some churchmen. Consuelo Varela, a Spanish historian, stated that &quot;Columbus&#x27;s government was characterized by a form of tyranny. Even those who loved him had to admit the atrocities that had taken place.&quot; Other historians have argued that some of the accounts of the brutality of Columbus and his brothers have been exaggerated as part of the Black Legend, a historical tendency towards anti-Spanish and anti-Catholic sentiment in historical sources dating as far back as the 16th century, which they speculate may continue to taint scholarship into the present day.

According to historian Emily Berquist Soule, the immense Portuguese profits from the maritime trade in African slaves along the West African coast served as an inspiration for Columbus to create a counterpart of this apparatus in the New World using indigenous American slaves. Historian William J. Connell has argued that while Columbus &quot;brought the entrepreneurial form of slavery to the New World&quot;, this &quot;was a phenomenon of the times&quot;, further arguing that &quot;we have to be very careful about applying 20th-century understandings of morality to the morality of the 15th century.&quot; In a less popular defense of colonization, Spanish ambassador has argued, &quot;Normally we melded with the cultures in America, we stayed there, we spread our language and culture and religion.&quot;

British historian Basil Davidson has dubbed Columbus the &quot;father of the slave trade&quot;, citing the fact that the first license to ship enslaved Africans to the Caribbean was issued by the Catholic Monarchs in 1501 to the first royal governor of Hispaniola, Nicolás de Ovando.

==== Depopulation ====
Around the turn of the 21st century, estimates for the population of Hispaniola ranged between 250,000 and two million, but genetic analysis published in late 2020 suggests that smaller figures are more likely, perhaps as low as 10,000–50,000 for Hispaniola and Puerto Rico combined. Based on the previous figures of a few hundred thousand, some have estimated that a third or more of the natives in Haiti were dead within the first two years of Columbus&#x27;s governorship. Contributors to depopulation included disease, warfare, and harsh enslavement. Indirect evidence suggests that some serious illness may have arrived with the 1,500 colonists who accompanied Columbus&#x27; second expedition in 1493. Charles C. Mann writes that &quot;It was as if the suffering these diseases had caused in Eurasia over the past millennia were concentrated into the span of decades.&quot; A third of the natives forced to work in gold and silver mines died every six months. Within three to six decades, the surviving Arawak population numbered only in the hundreds. The indigenous population of the Americas overall is thought to have been reduced by about 90% in the century after Columbus&#x27;s arrival. Among indigenous peoples, Columbus is often viewed as a key agent of genocide. Samuel Eliot Morison, a Harvard University historian and author of a multivolume biography on Columbus, writes, &quot;The cruel policy initiated by Columbus and pursued by his successors resulted in complete genocide.&quot;

According to Noble David Cook, &quot;There were too few Spaniards to have killed the millions who were reported to have died in the first century after Old and New World contact.&quot; He instead estimates that the death toll was caused by smallpox, which may have caused a pandemic only after the arrival of Hernán Cortés in 1519. According to some estimates, smallpox had an 80–90% fatality rate in Native American populations. The natives had no acquired immunity to these new diseases and suffered high fatalities. There is also evidence that they had poor diets and were overworked. Historian Andrés Reséndez of University of California, Davis, says the available evidence suggests &quot;slavery has emerged as major killer&quot; of the indigenous populations of the Caribbean between 1492 and 1550 more so than diseases such as smallpox, influenza and malaria. He says that indigenous populations did not experience a rebound like European populations did following the Black Death because unlike the latter, a large portion of the former were subjected to deadly forced labor in the mines.

The diseases that devastated the Native Americans came in multiple waves at different times, sometimes as much as centuries apart, which would mean that survivors of one disease may have been killed by others, preventing the population from recovering. Historian David Stannard describes the depopulation of the indigenous Americans as &quot;neither inadvertent nor inevitable&quot;, saying it was the result of both disease and intentional genocide.

==== Navigational expertise ====
Biographers and historians have a wide range of opinions about Columbus&#x27;s expertise and experience navigating and captaining ships. One scholar lists some European works ranging from the 1890s to 1980s that support Columbus&#x27;s experience and skill as among the best in Genoa, while listing some American works over a similar timeframe that portray the explorer as an untrained entrepreneur, having only minor crew or passenger experience prior to his noted journeys. According to Morison, Columbus&#x27;s success in utilizing the trade winds might owe significantly to luck.

== Physical appearance ==
Contemporary descriptions of Columbus, including those by his son Fernando and Bartolomé de las Casas, describe him as taller than average, with light skin (often sunburnt), blue or hazel eyes, high cheekbones and freckled face, an aquiline nose, and blond to reddish hair and beard (until about the age of 30, when it began to whiten). One Spanish commentator described his eyes using the word &quot;garzos&quot;, now usually translated as &quot;light blue&quot;, but it seems to have indicated light grey-green or hazel eyes to Columbus&#x27;s contemporaries. The word &quot;rubios&quot; can mean &quot;blond&quot;, &quot;fair&quot;, or &quot;ruddy&quot;. Although an abundance of artwork depicts Columbus, no authentic contemporary portrait is known.

A well-known image of Columbus is a portrait by Sebastiano del Piombo, which has been reproduced in many textbooks. It agrees with descriptions of Columbus in that it shows a large man with auburn hair, but the painting dates from 1519 so cannot have been painted from life. Furthermore, the inscription identifying the subject as Columbus was probably added later, and the face shown differs from that of other images.

Sometime between 1531 and 1536, Alejo Fernández painted an altarpiece, &quot;The Virgin of the Navigators&quot;, that includes a depiction of Columbus. The painting was commissioned for a chapel in Seville&#x27;s Casa de Contratación (House of Trade) in the Alcázar of Seville and remains there.

At the World&#x27;s Columbian Exposition in 1893, 71 alleged portraits of Columbus were displayed; most of them did not match contemporary descriptions.

== See also ==
* Christopher Columbus in fiction
* Columbus Day
* Egg of Columbus
* Christopher Columbus House
* History of the Americas
* Peopling of the Americas
* &quot;Lugares colombinos&quot;

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* in 
* Crosby, A. W. (1987) &quot;The Columbian Voyages: the Columbian Exchange, and their Historians.&quot; Washington, D.C.: American Historical Association.
* 
* Fuson, Robert H. (1992) &quot;The Log of Christopher Columbus&quot;. International Marine
* 
* 
** 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* Wey, Gómez Nicolás (2008). The tropics of empire: Why Columbus sailed south to the Indies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
* Wilford, John Noble (1991), &quot;The Mysterious History of Columbus: An Exploration of the Man, the Myth, the Legacy&quot;, New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

== External links ==

* 
* &quot;Journals and Other Documents on the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus&quot;, translated and edited by Samuel Eliot Morison in PDF format
* Excerpts from the log of Christopher Columbus&#x27;s first voyage
* The Letter of Columbus to Luis de Sant Angel Announcing His Discovery
* Columbus Monuments Pages (overview of monuments for Columbus all over the world)
* &quot;But for Columbus There Would Be No America&quot;, Tiziano Thomas Dossena, &quot;Bridgepugliausa.it&quot;, 2012.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="0" end="20" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q50001" start="84" end="91" title="Italians" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="124" end="141" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578423" start="156" end="208" title="Voyages of Christopher Columbus" label="four Spanish-based voyages across the Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="226" end="243" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="289" end="300" title="Age of Discovery" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="305" end="333" title="colonization of the Americas" label="colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q116188907" start="489" end="502" title="Anglicisation (linguistics)" label="anglicization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="545" end="552" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="625" end="638" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="671" end="676" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410239" start="711" end="734" title="Filipa Moniz Perestrelo" label="Filipa Moniz Perestrelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="752" end="757" title="Diego Columbus" label="Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q463646" start="838" end="863" title="Beatriz Enríquez de Arana" label="Beatriz Enríquez de Arana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406718" start="881" end="890" title="Ferdinand Columbus" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="1038" end="1049" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778604" start="1087" end="1098" title="spice trade" label="spice trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552718" start="1110" end="1121" title="Granada War" label="Granada War"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="1214" end="1224" title="Isabella I" label="Isabella I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="1234" end="1246" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="1462" end="1479" title="pre-Columbian era" label="pre-Columbian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="1516" end="1527" title="the Bahamas" label="the Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144797" start="1564" end="1573" title="Guanahani" label="Guanahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="1625" end="1635" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798978" start="1650" end="1658" title="La Navidad" label="a colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1674" end="1679" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825721" start="1748" end="1766" title="Columbus&amp;#x27;s letter on the first voyage" label="Word of his voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="1866" end="1881" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="1891" end="1899" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2157" end="2175" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="2530" end="2546" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823766" start="2658" end="2679" title="Pleitos colombinos" label="protracted litigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="3065" end="3074" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="3079" end="3088" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="3137" end="3155" title="Columbian exchange" label="Columbian exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="3272" end="3282" title="modern era" label="modern era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3342" end="3354" title="Genocide of indigenous peoples#Indigenous peoples of the Americas (pre-1948)" label="depopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="3387" end="3392" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="3426" end="3437" title="enslavement" label="enslavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="3587" end="3602" title="Western culture" label="Western culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299657" start="3674" end="3696" title="List of places named for Christopher Columbus" label="places have been named"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112443" start="3713" end="3721" title="Columbia (personification)" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="3886" end="3903" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056171" start="3958" end="3974" title="Domenico Colombo" label="Domenico Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13320" start="4014" end="4020" title="Savona" label="Savona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436617" start="4097" end="4117" title="Susanna Fontanarossa" label="Susanna Fontanarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q186138" start="4141" end="4152" title="Bartholomew Columbus" label="Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="4260" end="4271" title="cartography" label="cartography"/>
<link wikidata="Q597" start="4284" end="4290" title="Lisbon" label="Lisbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479433" start="4375" end="4390" title="Genoese dialect" label="Genoese dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="4392" end="4400" title="Ligurian language" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13320" start="4658" end="4664" title="Savona" label="Savona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="4774" end="4780" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164184" start="4958" end="4965" title="Spinola family" label="Spinola"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="5053" end="5058" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q34575" start="5066" end="5076" title="Aegean Sea" label="Aegean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="5222" end="5229" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="5244" end="5250" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291423" start="5287" end="5323" title="St. Nicholas&amp;#x27; Collegiate Church" label="St. Nicholas&amp;#x27; Collegiate Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5359" end="5366" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410239" start="5734" end="5760" title="Filipa Moniz Perestrelo" label="Felipa Perestrello e Moniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q551801" start="5774" end="5796" title="Bartolomeu Perestrello" label="Bartolomeu Perestrello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="5823" end="5830" title="Lombardy" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937346" start="5856" end="5872" title="donatary captain" label="donatary captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q14206042" start="5876" end="5887" title="Porto Santo" label="Porto Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="5927" end="5932" title="Diego Columbus" label="Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="6002" end="6013" title="West Africa" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q968662" start="6055" end="6061" title="Elmina" label="Elmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q207887" start="6069" end="6081" title="Guinea coast" label="Guinea coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="6097" end="6102" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q173063" start="6273" end="6280" title="Castile (historical region)" label="Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q463646" start="6351" end="6376" title="Beatriz Enríquez de Arana" label="Beatriz Enríquez de Arana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5818" start="6432" end="6439" title="Córdoba, Spain" label="Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="6508" end="6525" title="Catholic Monarchs" label="Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406718" start="6626" end="6643" title="Fernando Columbus" label="Fernando Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="7042" end="7049" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318580" start="7051" end="7070" title="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly" label="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="7101" end="7111" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766" start="7116" end="7135" title="Sir John Mandeville" label="Sir John Mandeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="7137" end="7142" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="7156" end="7171" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q101437" start="7183" end="7195" title="Pope Pius II" label="Pope Pius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q365672" start="7234" end="7247" title="Edmund Morgan (historian)" label="Edmund Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="7518" end="7531" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473258" start="7572" end="7585" title="Pax Mongolica" label="Pax Mongolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="7647" end="7656" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7660" end="7665" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="7676" end="7685" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7697" end="7702" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919361" start="7707" end="7730" title="Maritime Southeast Asia" label="Maritime Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="7779" end="7801" title="fall of Constantinople" label="fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7809" end="7823" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q321563" start="7916" end="7942" title="Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli" label="Paolo dal Pozzo Toscanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q299119" start="7961" end="7981" title="Afonso V of Portugal" label="Afonso V of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827" start="8056" end="8062" title="Maluku Islands" label="Maluku"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903677" start="8500" end="8510" title="Cape Route" label="Cape Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044302" start="8744" end="8757" title="Carol Delaney" label="Carol Delaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="8813" end="8836" title="Millennialism" label="Christian millennialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="8841" end="8855" title="apocalypticist" label="apocalypticist"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="9123" end="9137" title="Holy Sepulcher" label="Holy Sepulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915341" start="9164" end="9181" title="Biblical prophecy" label="Biblical prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="9210" end="9220" title="Conversion to Christianity" label="converting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272686" start="9472" end="9495" title="Myth of the flat Earth" label="a popular misconception"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349283" start="9582" end="9600" title="Spherical Earth" label="Earth is spherical"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="9643" end="9652" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="9672" end="9692" title="celestial navigation" label="celestial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43182" start="10067" end="10079" title="Eratosthenes" label="Eratosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185770" start="10248" end="10258" title="Posidonius" label="Posidonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q631942" start="10567" end="10581" title="cosmographical" label="cosmographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q838988" start="10737" end="10745" title="oikumene" label="oikumene"/>
<link wikidata="Q660818" start="10881" end="10888" title="League (unit)" label="leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="10904" end="10913" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="11063" end="11072" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q318580" start="11098" end="11117" title="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly" label="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q336550" start="11166" end="11176" title="Alfraganus" label="Alfraganus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="11210" end="11218" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="11255" end="11264" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814202" start="11298" end="11309" title="Arabic mile" label="Arabic mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="11438" end="11448" title="Roman mile" label="Roman mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="11668" end="11675" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q706319" start="11933" end="11948" title="Marinus of Tyre" label="Marinus of Tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="12031" end="12037" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q982883" start="12064" end="12084" title="Samuel Eliot Morison" label="Samuel Eliot Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q170207" start="12139" end="12149" title="Biblical apocrypha" label="apocryphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q230150" start="12155" end="12163" title="2 Esdras" label="2 Esdras"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12165" end="12169" title=":wikisource:Bible (King James)/II Esdras#Chapter 6" label="6:42"/>
<link wikidata="Q576922" start="12588" end="12596" title="Antillia" label="Antillia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="12663" end="12669" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="12706" end="12720" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="13287" end="13292" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="13300" end="13317" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q160603" start="13734" end="13745" title="trade winds" label="trade winds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14043" end="14050" title="Point of sail#Close-hauled" label="beating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12343832" start="14285" end="14295" title="westerlies" label="westerlies"/>
<link wikidata="Q551801" start="14669" end="14691" title="Bartolomeu Perestrello" label="Bartolomeu Perestrello"/>
<link wikidata="Q182897" start="14750" end="14776" title="Prince Henry the Navigator" label="Prince Henry the Navigator"/>
<link wikidata="Q756721" start="15109" end="15125" title="Atlantic hurricane season" label="hurricane season"/>
<link wikidata="Q972926" start="15150" end="15165" title="horse latitudes" label="horse latitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="15231" end="15247" title="tropical cyclone" label="tropical cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q217637" start="15395" end="15414" title="John II of Portugal" label="John II of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q130377" start="15801" end="15816" title="Bartolomeu Dias" label="Bartolomeu Dias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="15915" end="15932" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860" start="15982" end="16004" title="Ferdinand II of Aragon" label="Ferdinand II of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q45859" start="16009" end="16030" title="Isabella I of Castile" label="Isabella I of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q186138" start="16943" end="16954" title="Bartholomew Columbus" label="Bartholomew"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="16971" end="16991" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580841" start="17172" end="17188" title="La Rábida Friary" label="La Rábida Friary"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="17305" end="17318" title="Cortes Generales" label="Spanish court"/>
<link wikidata="Q8810" start="17471" end="17478" title="Granada" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q238445" start="17484" end="17506" title="Emirate of Granada" label="last Muslim stronghold"/>
<link wikidata="Q559368" start="17594" end="17614" title="Hernando de Talavera" label="Hernando de Talavera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1220594" start="17770" end="17780" title="Diego Deza" label="Diego Deza"/>
<link wikidata="Q728735" start="17861" end="17878" title="Luis de Santángel" label="Luis de Santángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728627" start="18111" end="18136" title="Capitulations of Santa Fe" label="Capitulations of Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="18298" end="18305" title="Viceroy" label="Viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="19437" end="19445" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="19482" end="19498" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q16855525" start="19569" end="19580" title="Exploration of the Americas" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="19585" end="19614" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="colonization of the continent"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="19631" end="19649" title="Columbian exchange" label="Columbian exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="19696" end="19712" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137175" start="19714" end="19729" title="Western history" label="Western history"/>
<link wikidata="Q200325" start="19735" end="19748" title="human history" label="human history"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825721" start="19765" end="19807" title="Columbus&amp;#x27;s letter on the first voyage" label="Columbus&amp;#x27;s letter on the first voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="20210" end="20220" title="Florence" label="Florentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q47674" start="20230" end="20246" title="Amerigo Vespucci" label="Amerigo Vespucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="20297" end="20306" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q622030" start="20427" end="20447" title="Palos de la Frontera" label="Palos de la Frontera"/>
<link wikidata="Q220635" start="20484" end="20491" title="carrack" label="carrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q107900" start="20503" end="20514" title="Santa María (ship)" label="Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q345620" start="20545" end="20560" title="Juan de la Cosa" label="Juan de la Cosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q169560" start="20631" end="20638" title="caravel" label="caravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q501355" start="20651" end="20656" title="Pinta (ship)" label="Pinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q501652" start="20677" end="20681" title="Niña" label="Niña"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388890" start="20704" end="20719" title="Pinzón brothers" label="Pinzón brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q512009" start="20832" end="20858" title="San Sebastián de La Gomera" label="San Sebastián de La Gomera"/>
<link wikidata="Q552774" start="21220" end="21237" title="Rodrigo de Triana" label="Rodrigo de Triana"/>
<link wikidata="Q505653" start="21291" end="21311" title="Martín Alonso Pinzón" label="Martín Alonso Pinzón"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="21658" end="21669" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="the Natives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144797" start="21680" end="21689" title="Guanahani" label="Guanahani"/>
<link wikidata="Q893385" start="21691" end="21726" title="Christopher Columbus&amp;#x27;s journal" label="Christopher Columbus&amp;#x27;s journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289481" start="22529" end="22536" title="Lucayan people" label="Lucayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="22538" end="22543" title="Taíno" label="Taíno"/>
<link wikidata="Q117244" start="22549" end="22555" title="Arawak" label="Arawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q27106" start="22979" end="22985" title="Kalinago" label="Caribs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2853058" start="23012" end="23021" title="Human cannibalism" label="cannibals"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="23557" end="23567" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q599898" start="23812" end="23819" title="cacique" label="cacique"/>
<link wikidata="Q741356" start="23826" end="23837" title="Guacanagari" label="Guacanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876575" start="23944" end="23958" title="Luis de Torres" label="Luis de Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798978" start="23990" end="24000" title="La Navidad" label="La Navidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="24017" end="24022" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585825" start="24321" end="24334" title="Bay of Rincón" label="Bay of Rincón"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119242" start="24385" end="24393" title="Ciguayos" label="Ciguayos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4874190" start="24717" end="24730" title="Bay of Arrows" label="Bay of Arrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q593355" start="25445" end="25464" title="Treaty of Alcáçovas" label="Treaty of Alcáçovas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131553661" start="26008" end="26013" title="Diego Columbus (Lucayan)" label="Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="26640" end="26653" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825721" start="26764" end="26806" title="Columbus&amp;#x27;s letter on the first voyage" label="Columbus&amp;#x27;s letter on the first voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286535" start="27129" end="27146" title="Bulls of Donation" label="Bulls of Donation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="27169" end="27186" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="27320" end="27341" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="27520" end="27539" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q427559" start="27551" end="27572" title="Coral Gables, Florida" label="Coral Gables, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q15682" start="27675" end="27680" title="Cádiz" label="Cádiz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274892" start="27915" end="27929" title="Diego Álvarez Chanca" label="Alvarez Chanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="28036" end="28047" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q345620" start="28099" end="28114" title="Juan de la Cosa" label="Juan de la Cosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420466" start="28169" end="28202" title="Map of Juan de la Cosa" label="world map depicting the New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q183416" start="28453" end="28469" title="Windward Islands" label="Windward Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q784" start="28515" end="28523" title="Dominica" label="Dominica"/>
<link wikidata="Q17012" start="28648" end="28658" title="Guadeloupe" label="Guadeloupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334492" start="28670" end="28683" title="Marie-Galante" label="Marie-Galante"/>
<link wikidata="Q13353" start="28737" end="28747" title="Montserrat" label="Montserrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="28749" end="28756" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q25596" start="28758" end="28770" title="Saint Martin (island)" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262" start="28776" end="28790" title="Virgin Islands" label="Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527656" start="28881" end="28902" title="island of Puerto Rico" label="island of Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q210623" start="28924" end="28929" title="Taino" label="Taino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390910" start="29078" end="29084" title="Añasco" label="Añasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="29189" end="29205" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="29361" end="29371" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="29418" end="29423" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q741356" start="29533" end="29545" title="Guacanagaríx" label="Guacanagaríx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010694" start="29686" end="29693" title="Caonabo" label="Caonabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543031" start="29850" end="29860" title="La Isabela" label="La Isabela"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="29881" end="29899" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4103" start="32259" end="32275" title="Cape St. Vincent" label="Cape St. Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q210887" start="32398" end="32406" title="Sanlúcar de Barrameda" label="Sanlúcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="32844" end="32852" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668558" start="32981" end="32996" title="Paria Peninsula" label="Paria Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q131792" start="33045" end="33052" title="Orinoco" label="Orinoco"/>
<link wikidata="Q77021" start="33228" end="33240" title="Chacachacare" label="Chacachacare"/>
<link wikidata="Q334738" start="33245" end="33254" title="Margarita Island" label="Margarita"/>
<link wikidata="Q185111" start="33302" end="33308" title="Tobago" label="Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="33313" end="33320" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q545606" start="33862" end="33884" title="Francisco de Bobadilla" label="Francisco de Bobadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q20100559" start="33909" end="33929" title="Beatriz de Bobadilla" label="Beatriz de Bobadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q132781" start="34538" end="34545" title="torture" label="torture"/>
<link wikidata="Q767568" start="34550" end="34560" title="mutilation" label="mutilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="36205" end="36222" title="Nicolás de Ovando" label="Nicolás de Ovando"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="36279" end="36290" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q354097" start="36372" end="36382" title="Adelantado" label="Adelantado"/>
<link wikidata="Q986572" start="36611" end="36619" title="Simancas" label="Simancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q730328" start="37050" end="37056" title="Asilah" label="Asilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="37136" end="37141" title="Moors" label="Moors"/>
<link wikidata="Q17054" start="37304" end="37314" title="Martinique" label="Martinique"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="37354" end="37363" title="hurricane" label="hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q34820" start="37461" end="37474" title="Santo Domingo" label="Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q702252" start="37707" end="37729" title="Spanish treasure fleet" label="Spanish treasure fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="38391" end="38399" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058947" start="38551" end="38576" title="Puerto Castilla, Honduras" label="Puerto Castilla, Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="38632" end="38641" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="38647" end="38657" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q804" start="38842" end="38848" title="Panama" label="Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283203" start="38933" end="38938" title="Ngäbe" label="Ngäbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884974" start="39052" end="39063" title="Belén River" label="Belén River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785" start="39132" end="39146" title="Cayman Islands" label="Cayman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326284" start="39322" end="39347" title="Saint Ann Parish, Jamaica" label="Saint Ann Parish, Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="39635" end="39662" title="Nicolás de Ovando y Cáceres" label="Nicolás de Ovando y Cáceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756695" start="39887" end="39921" title="February 1504 lunar eclipse" label="lunar eclipse for 29 February 1504"/>
<link wikidata="Q330740" start="39929" end="39943" title="Abraham Zacuto" label="Abraham Zacuto"/>
<link wikidata="Q814997" start="40198" end="40208" title="Conversion (religion)" label="conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220979" start="40383" end="40393" title="Carthusian" label="Carthusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943076" start="40476" end="40494" title="Book of Privileges" label="Book of Privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943077" start="40635" end="40653" title="Book of Prophecies" label="Book of Prophecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="40770" end="40791" title="Christian eschatology" label="Christian eschatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q217196" start="40841" end="40857" title="Crown of Castile" label="Crown of Castile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728627" start="40958" end="40983" title="Capitulations of Santa Fe" label="Capitulations of Santa Fe"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="41466" end="41470" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="41536" end="41545" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327700" start="41909" end="41927" title="reactive arthritis" label="reactive arthritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="42100" end="42109" title="chlamydia" label="chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q101896" start="42113" end="42122" title="gonorrhea" label="gonorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q327657" start="42684" end="42698" title="rheumatologist" label="rheumatologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15684" start="43383" end="43390" title="Segovia" label="Segovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236902" start="43509" end="43525" title="Germaine of Foix" label="Germaine of Foix"/>
<link wikidata="Q8356" start="43529" end="43539" title="Valladolid" label="Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5785743" start="43776" end="43810" title="Convent of St. Francis, Valladolid" label="Convent of St. Francis, Valladolid"/>
<link wikidata="Q97641872" start="43839" end="43862" title="Monastery of Santa Maria de las Cuevas" label="monastery of La Cartuja"/>
<link wikidata="Q231606" start="43976" end="43993" title="Seville Cathedral" label="Seville Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470834" start="44086" end="44108" title="Ciudad Colonial (Santo Domingo)" label="Colonial Santo Domingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="44129" end="44147" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="44320" end="44326" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="44378" end="44398" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q930343" start="44520" end="44530" title="catafalque" label="catafalque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="44547" end="44550" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="44844" end="44861" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="45021" end="45034" title="anthropology" label="anthropologic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382768" start="45549" end="45568" title="John Eugene Osborne" label="John Eugene Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="45621" end="45633" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868419" start="45700" end="45742" title="Basilica Cathedral of Santa María la Menor" label="Basilica Cathedral of Santa María la Menor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983646" start="45809" end="45828" title="Columbus Lighthouse" label="Columbus Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713354" start="45830" end="45848" title="Santo Domingo Este" label="Santo Domingo Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="46371" end="46378" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q380719" start="46388" end="46401" title="Cotton Mather" label="Cotton Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q390248" start="46789" end="46802" title="founding myth" label="founding myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142281" start="46869" end="46893" title="national personification" label="national personification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112443" start="46916" end="46924" title="Columbia (personification)" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="46980" end="46997" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="47041" end="47049" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="47061" end="47070" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q38453" start="47072" end="47096" title="Columbia, South Carolina" label="Columbia, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q383698" start="47107" end="47124" title="Columbia Rediviva" label="Columbia Rediviva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251" start="47155" end="47169" title="Columbia River" label="Columbia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q199821" start="47255" end="47275" title="Gran Colombia" label="Republic of Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q311447" start="47389" end="47409" title="Francisco de Miranda" label="Francisco de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q172754" start="47568" end="47585" title="World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="47611" end="47644" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="47650" end="47669" title="U.S. Postal Service" label="U.S. Postal Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756502" start="47692" end="47711" title="commemorative stamp" label="commemorative stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149941" start="47718" end="47733" title="Columbian Issue" label="Columbian Issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149947" start="47825" end="47857" title="Columbian half dollar" label="commemorative silver half dollar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044536" start="48096" end="48107" title="Restoration (Spain)" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760080" start="48543" end="48565" title="Columbus Quincentenary" label="Columbus Quincentenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202455" start="48681" end="48702" title="Seville Expo &amp;#x27;92" label="Seville Expo &amp;#x27;92"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277173" start="48708" end="48727" title="Genoa Expo &amp;#x27;92" label="Genoa Expo &amp;#x27;92"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132574" start="49134" end="49143" title="Boalsburg" label="Boalsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q722604" start="49232" end="49241" title="reliquary" label="reliquary"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="49285" end="49295" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="49492" end="49504" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="49707" end="49720" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202390" start="49900" end="49913" title="pre-Columbian" label="pre-Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="50076" end="50084" title="Columbian exchange" label="exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q693981" start="50628" end="50646" title="translatio imperii" label="translatio imperii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283216" start="50663" end="50680" title="translatio studii" label="translatio studii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282012" start="51080" end="51104" title="The Discovery of America (sculpture)" label="The Discovery of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820" start="51225" end="51241" title="Martin Van Buren" label="Martin Van Buren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266514" start="51272" end="51285" title="Luigi Persico" label="Luigi Persico"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="51945" end="51986" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12325" start="52044" end="52058" title="James Buchanan" label="James Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="52766" end="52778" title="canonization" label="canonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533462" start="52874" end="52904" title="genocide of indigenous peoples" label="genocide of indigenous peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="53158" end="53167" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638531" start="53182" end="53221" title="Population history of Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="indigenous populations of the New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="53603" end="53608" title="Norsemen" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="53650" end="53659" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189113" start="53952" end="53975" title="L&amp;#x27;Anse aux Meadows" label="L&amp;#x27;Anse aux Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003" start="53977" end="53989" title="Newfoundland" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q300" start="54034" end="54049" title="Icelandic sagas" label="Icelandic sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q172345" start="54053" end="54065" title="Erik the Red" label="Erik the Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q42838" start="54111" end="54123" title="Leif Erikson" label="Leif Erikson"/>
<link wikidata="Q192823" start="54175" end="54182" title="Vinland" label="Vinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10726982" start="54211" end="54249" title="Viking revival" label="a revival of interest in Norse culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q373930" start="54251" end="54270" title="Carl Christian Rafn" label="Carl Christian Rafn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888627" start="54275" end="54300" title="Benjamin Franklin DeCosta" label="Benjamin Franklin DeCosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436547" start="54415" end="54436" title="Rasmus B. Anderson" label="Rasmus Bjørn Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645643" start="54691" end="54712" title="independent discovery" label="independent discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="54754" end="54785" title="Settlement of the Americas" label="origins of the Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="55151" end="55162" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193495" start="55190" end="55199" title="monograph" label="monograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109245" start="55235" end="55256" title="Edmundo O&amp;#x27;Gorman" label="Edmundo O&amp;#x27;Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181667" start="55446" end="55463" title="Washington Irving" label="Washington Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q376717" start="55701" end="55712" title="Eurocentric" label="Eurocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106922" start="55835" end="55853" title="The UNESCO Courier" label="The UNESCO Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q19014" start="56569" end="56585" title="Earthly Paradise" label="Earthly Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="56625" end="56631" title="Orient" label="Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="56735" end="56752" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q660936" start="57251" end="57265" title="Flat Earth" label="Earth was flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903450" start="57596" end="57604" title="Erdapfel" label="Erdapfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="57835" end="57842" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195520" start="57850" end="57864" title="diurnal motion" label="diurnal motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q339264" start="57872" end="57882" title="true north" label="true north"/>
<link wikidata="Q753858" start="57958" end="57966" title="doldrums" label="doldrums"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58173" end="58194" title="Figure of the Earth#Pear shape" label="figure is pear-shaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q9103" start="58265" end="58271" title="breast" label="breast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545243" start="58755" end="58768" title="George Tinker" label="George Tinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q151296" start="59162" end="59178" title="holocaust denial" label="holocaust denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437230" start="59196" end="59205" title="Kris Lane" label="Kris Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q95965839" start="59643" end="59661" title="George Floyd protests" label="protests and riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q95579249" start="59680" end="59702" title="murder of George Floyd" label="murder of George Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59724" end="59757" title="List of monuments and memorials removed during the George Floyd protests#Christopher Columbus" label="monuments of Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q642481" start="59940" end="59949" title="St. Croix" label="St. Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="60322" end="60344" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Bartolomé de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860417" start="60514" end="60538" title="National Archives of Spain" label="Spanish archival sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614174" start="60600" end="60609" title="Guarionex" label="Guarionex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501447" start="61253" end="61265" title="Black Legend" label="Black Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013185" start="61766" end="61784" title="William J. Connell (historian)" label="William J. Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q810024" start="62310" end="62324" title="Basil Davidson" label="Basil Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10701282" start="62369" end="62380" title="Atlantic slave trade" label="slave trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q720589" start="62557" end="62574" title="Nicolás de Ovando" label="Nicolás de Ovando"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532877" start="62724" end="62740" title="genetic analysis" label="genetic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749059" start="63308" end="63323" title="Charles C. Mann" label="Charles C. Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="63398" end="63405" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q982883" start="63878" end="63898" title="Samuel Eliot Morison" label="Samuel Eliot Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="63902" end="63920" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="64343" end="64351" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="64412" end="64425" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645075" start="64552" end="64569" title="acquired immunity" label="acquired immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760258" start="64701" end="64716" title="Andrés Reséndez" label="Andrés Reséndez"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="64720" end="64751" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="65079" end="65090" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678589" start="65464" end="65478" title="David Stannard" label="David Stannard"/>
<link wikidata="Q207416" start="66376" end="66398" title="Bartolomé de las Casas" label="Bartolomé de las Casas"/>
<link wikidata="Q970198" start="66529" end="66542" title="aquiline nose" label="aquiline nose"/>
<link wikidata="" start="67086" end="67096" title=":File:Portrait of a Man, Said to be Christopher Columbus.jpg" label="a portrait"/>
<link wikidata="Q285423" start="67100" end="67121" title="Sebastiano del Piombo" label="Sebastiano del Piombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711324" start="67505" end="67520" title="Alejo Fernández" label="Alejo Fernández"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213702" start="67550" end="67578" title="The Virgin of the Navigators" label="The Virgin of the Navigators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046537" start="67686" end="67706" title="Casa de Contratación" label="Casa de Contratación"/>
<link wikidata="Q498261" start="67731" end="67749" title="Alcázar of Seville" label="Alcázar of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q285406" start="67777" end="67810" title="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition" label="World&amp;#x27;s Columbian Exposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q19879444" start="67941" end="67972" title="Christopher Columbus in fiction" label="Christopher Columbus in fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="67975" end="67987" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q940354" start="67990" end="68005" title="Egg of Columbus" label="Egg of Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661281" start="68008" end="68034" title="Christopher Columbus House" label="Christopher Columbus House"/>
<link wikidata="Q690256" start="68037" end="68060" title="History of the Americas" label="History of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13925462" start="68063" end="68087" title="Peopling of the Americas" label="Peopling of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893570" start="68096" end="68114" title="Lugares colombinos" label="Lugares colombinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q982883" start="68890" end="68910" title="Samuel Eliot Morison" label="Samuel Eliot Morison"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="68914" end="68917" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5636" wikidata="Q593644" url="?curid=5636" title="Chemist">
<text>A chemist (from Greek &quot;chēm(ía)&quot; alchemy; replacing &quot;chymist&quot; from Medieval Latin &quot;alchemist&quot;) is a graduated scientist trained in the study of chemistry, or an officially enrolled student in the field. Chemists study the composition of matter and its properties. Chemists carefully describe the properties they study in terms of quantities, with detail on the level of molecules and their component atoms. Chemists carefully measure substance proportions, chemical reaction rates, and other chemical properties. In Commonwealth English, pharmacists are often called chemists.

Chemists use their knowledge to learn the composition and properties of unfamiliar substances, as well as to reproduce and synthesize large quantities of useful naturally occurring substances and create new artificial substances and useful processes. Chemists may specialize in any number of subdisciplines of chemistry. Materials scientists and metallurgists share much of the same education and skills with chemists. The work of chemists is often related to the work of chemical engineers, who are primarily concerned with the proper design, construction and evaluation of the most cost-effective large-scale chemical plants and work closely with industrial chemists on the development of new processes and methods for the commercial-scale manufacture of chemicals and related products.

==History of chemistry==



The roots of chemistry can be traced to the phenomenon of burning. Fire was a mystical force that transformed one substance into another and thus was of primary interest to mankind. It was fire that led to the discovery of iron and glasses. After gold was discovered and became a precious metal, many people were interested to find a method that could convert other substances into gold. This led to the protoscience called alchemy. The word &quot;chemist&quot; is derived from the Neo-Latin noun &quot;chimista&quot;, an abbreviation of &quot;alchimista&quot; (alchemist). Alchemists discovered many chemical processes that led to the development of modern chemistry. 

Chemistry as we know it today, was invented by Antoine Lavoisier with his law of conservation of mass in 1783. The discoveries of the chemical elements has a long history culminating in the creation of the periodic table by Dmitri Mendeleev. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry created in 1901 gives an excellent overview of chemical discovery since the start of the 20th century.

At the Washington Academy of Sciences during World War I, it was said that the side with the best chemists would win the war.

==Education==

=== Formal education ===
Jobs for chemists generally require at least a bachelor&#x27;s degree in chemistry, which takes four years. However, many positions, especially those in research, require a Master of Science or a Doctor of Philosophy (PhD.). Most undergraduate programs emphasize mathematics and physics as well as chemistry, partly because chemistry is also known as &quot;the central science&quot;, thus chemists ought to have a well-rounded knowledge about science. At the Master&#x27;s level and higher, students tend to specialize in a particular field. Fields of specialization include biochemistry, nuclear chemistry, organic chemistry, inorganic chemistry, polymer chemistry, analytical chemistry, physical chemistry, theoretical chemistry, quantum chemistry, environmental chemistry, and thermochemistry. Postdoctoral experience may be required for certain positions.

Workers whose work involves chemistry, but not at a complexity requiring an education with a chemistry degree, are commonly referred to as &quot;chemical technicians&quot;. Such technicians commonly do such work as simpler, routine analyses for quality control or in clinical laboratories, having an associate degree. A chemical technologist has more education or experience than a chemical technician but less than a chemist, often having a bachelor&#x27;s degree in a different field of science with also an associate degree in chemistry (or many credits related to chemistry) or having the same education as a chemical technician but more experience. There are also degrees specific to become a chemical technologist, which are somewhat distinct from those required when a student is interested in becoming a professional chemist. A Chemical technologist is more involved in the management and operation of the equipment and instrumentation necessary to perform chemical analyzes than a chemical technician. They are part of the team of a chemical laboratory in which the quality of the raw material, intermediate products and finished products is analyzed. They also perform functions in the areas of environmental quality control and the operational phase of a chemical plant.

=== Training ===
In addition to all the training usually given to chemical technologists in their respective degree (or one given via an associate degree), a chemist is also trained to understand more details related to chemical phenomena so that the chemist can be capable of more planning on the steps to achieve a distinct goal via a chemistry-related endeavor. The higher the competency level achieved in the field of chemistry (as assessed via a combination of education, experience and personal achievements), the higher the responsibility given to that chemist and the more complicated the task might be. Chemistry, as a field, have so many applications that different tasks and objectives can be given to workers or scientists with these different levels of education or experience. The specific title of each job varies from position to position, depending on factors such as the kind of industry, the routine level of the task, the current needs of a particular enterprise, the size of the enterprise or hiring firm, the philosophy and management principles of the hiring firm, the visibility of the competency and individual achievements of the one seeking employment, economic factors such as recession or economic depression, among other factors, so this makes it difficult to categorize the exact roles of these chemistry-related workers as standard for that given level of education. Because of these factors affecting exact job titles with distinct responsibilities, some chemists might begin doing technician tasks while other chemists might begin doing more complicated tasks than those of a technician, such as tasks that also involve formal applied research, management, or supervision included within the responsibilities of that same job title. The level of supervision given to that chemist also varies in a similar manner, with factors similar to those that affect the tasks demanded for a particular chemist

It is important that those interested in a Chemistry degree understand the variety of roles available to them (on average), which vary depending on education and job experience. Those Chemists who hold a bachelor&#x27;s degree are most commonly involved in positions related to either research assistance (working under the guidance of senior chemists in a research-oriented activity), or, alternatively, they may work on distinct (chemistry-related) aspects of a business, organization or enterprise including aspects that involve quality control, quality assurance, manufacturing, production, formulation, inspection, method validation, visitation for troubleshooting of chemistry-related instruments, regulatory affairs, &quot;on-demand&quot; technical services, chemical analysis for non-research purposes (e.g., as a legal request, for testing purposes, or for government or non-profit agencies); chemists may also work in environmental evaluation and assessment. Other jobs or roles may include sales and marketing of chemical products and chemistry-related instruments or technical writing. The more experience obtained, the more independence and leadership or management roles these chemists may perform in those organizations. Some chemists with relatively higher experience might change jobs or job position to become a manager of a chemistry-related enterprise, a supervisor, an entrepreneur or a chemistry consultant. Other chemists choose to combine their education and experience as a chemist with a distinct credential to provide different services (e.g., forensic chemists, chemistry-related software development, patent law specialists, environmental law firm staff, scientific news reporting staff, engineering design staff, etc.).

In comparison, chemists who have obtained a Master of Science (M.S.) in chemistry or in a very related discipline may find chemist roles that allow them to enjoy more independence, leadership and responsibility earlier in their careers with less years of experience than those with a bachelor&#x27;s degree as highest degree. Sometimes, M.S. chemists receive more complex tasks duties in comparison with the roles and positions found by chemists with a bachelor&#x27;s degree as their highest academic degree and with the same or close-to-same years of job experience. There are positions that are open only to those that at least have a degree related to chemistry at the master&#x27;s level. Although good chemists without a Ph.D. degree but with relatively many years of experience may be allowed some applied research positions, the general rule is that Ph.D. chemists are preferred for research positions and are typically the preferred choice for the highest administrative positions on big enterprises involved in chemistry-related duties. Some positions, especially research oriented, will only allow those chemists who are Ph.D. holders. Jobs that involve intensive research and actively seek to lead the discovery of completely new chemical compounds under specifically assigned monetary funds and resources or jobs that seek to develop new scientific theories require a Ph.D. more often than not. Chemists with a Ph.D. as the highest academic degree are found typically on the research-and-development department of an enterprise and can also hold university positions as professors. Professors for research universities or for big universities usually have a Ph.D., and some research-oriented institutions might require post-doctoral training. Some smaller colleges (including some smaller four-year colleges or smaller non-research universities for undergraduates) as well as community colleges usually hire chemists with a M.S. as professors too (and rarely, some big universities who need part-time or temporary instructors, or temporary staff), but when the positions are scarce and the applicants are many, they might prefer Ph.D. holders instead.

=== Skills ===
Skills that a chemist may need on the job include:

* Knowledge of chemistry
* Familiarity with product development
* Using scientific rules, strategies, or concepts to solve problems
* Putting together small parts using hands and fingers with dexterity

==Employment==
Most chemists begin their lives in research laboratories. Many chemists continue working at universities. Other chemists may start companies, teach at high schools or colleges, take samples outside (as environmental chemists), or work in medical examiner offices or police departments (as forensic chemists).

Some software that chemists may find themselves using include:

* ChemSW Buffer Maker
* LabTrack Electronic Lab Notebook
* Agilent ChemStation
* Waters Empower Chromatography Data Software
* Microsoft Excel

Increasingly, chemists may also find themselves using artificial intelligence, such as for drug discovery.

=== Subdisciplines ===
Chemistry typically is divided into several major sub-disciplines. There are also several main cross-disciplinary and more specialized fields of chemistry. There is a great deal of overlap between different branches of chemistry, as well as with other scientific fields such as biology, medicine, physics, radiology, and several engineering disciplines.

*Analytical chemistry is the analysis of material samples to gain an understanding of their chemical composition and structure. Analytical chemistry incorporates standardized experimental methods in chemistry. These methods may be used in all subdisciplines of chemistry, excluding purely theoretical chemistry.
*Biochemistry is the study of the chemicals, chemical reactions and chemical interactions that take place in living organisms. Biochemistry and organic chemistry are closely related, for example, in medicinal chemistry.


*Inorganic chemistry is the study of the properties and reactions of inorganic compounds. The distinction between organic and inorganic disciplines is not absolute and there is much overlap, most importantly in the sub-discipline of organometallic chemistry. The Inorganic chemistry is also the study of atomic and molecular structure and bonding.
*Medicinal chemistry is the science involved with designing, synthesizing and developing pharmaceutical drugs. Medicinal chemistry involves the identification, synthesis and development of new chemical entities suitable for therapeutic use. It also includes the study of existing drugs, their biological properties, and their quantitative structure-activity relationships.
*Organic chemistry is the study of the structure, properties, composition, mechanisms, and chemical reaction of carbon compounds.
*Physical chemistry is the study of the physical fundamental basis of chemical systems and processes. In particular, the energetics and dynamics of such systems and processes are of interest to physical chemists. Important areas of study include chemical thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, electrochemistry, quantum chemistry, statistical mechanics, and spectroscopy. Physical chemistry has a large overlap with theoretical chemistry and molecular physics. Physical chemistry involves the use of calculus in deriving equations.
*Theoretical chemistry is the study of chemistry via theoretical reasoning (usually within mathematics or physics). In particular, the application of quantum mechanics to chemistry is called quantum chemistry. Since the end of the Second World War, the development of computers has allowed a systematic development of computational chemistry, which is the art of developing and applying computer programs for solving chemical problems. Theoretical chemistry has large overlap with condensed matter physics and molecular physics. See reductionism.

All the above major areas of chemistry employ chemists. Other fields where chemical degrees are useful include astrochemistry (and cosmochemistry), atmospheric chemistry, chemical engineering, chemo-informatics, electrochemistry, environmental science, forensic science, geochemistry, green chemistry, history of chemistry, materials science, medical science, molecular biology, molecular genetics, nanotechnology, nuclear chemistry, oenology, organometallic chemistry, petrochemistry, pharmacology, photochemistry, phytochemistry, polymer chemistry, supramolecular chemistry and surface chemistry.

==Professional societies==
Chemists may belong to professional societies specifically for professionals and researchers within the field of chemistry, such as the Royal Society of Chemistry in the United Kingdom, the American Chemical Society (ACS) in the United States, or the Institution of Chemists in India.

== Ethics ==
The &quot;Global Chemists&#x27; Code of Ethics&quot; suggests several ethical principles that all chemists should follow:

* Promoting the general public&#x27;s appreciation of chemistry
* The importance of sustainability and protecting the environment
* The importance of scientific research and publications
* Respecting safety, such as by using proper personal protective equipment
* Respecting chemical security throughout the chemical supply chain, especially for labs and industrial facilities

This code of ethics was codified in a 2016 conference held in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, run by the American Chemical Society. The points listed are inspired by the 2015 Hague Ethical Guidelines.

==Honors and awards==

The highest honor awarded to chemists is the Nobel Prize in Chemistry, awarded since 1901, by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences.

==See also==
* List of chemistry topics
* List of chemists
* List of Chemistry Societies

==References==
==External links==

*American Chemical Society
*Chemical Abstracts Service indexes and abstracts the world&#x27;s chemistry-related literature and patents
*Chemists and Materials Scientists from the U.S. Department of Labor&#x27;s &quot;Occupational Outlook Handbook&quot;
*Royal Society of Chemistry
*History of Chemistry links for chemists
*Luminaries of the Chemical Sciences accomplishments, biography, and publications from 44 of the most influential chemists
*Selected Classic Papers from the History of Chemistry
*Links for Chemists guide to web sites related to chemistry
*ChemistryViews.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q593644" start="2" end="9" title="Chemist" label="chemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="87" end="101" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="140" end="149" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="174" end="183" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="400" end="408" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="430" end="434" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="487" end="504" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q764285" start="522" end="541" title="chemical properties" label="chemical properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q105186" start="568" end="578" title="pharmacist" label="pharmacist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="900" end="927" title="Chemistry#Subdisciplines" label="subdisciplines of chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="929" end="949" title="Materials science" label="Materials scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="954" end="966" title="metallurgist" label="metallurgist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888586" start="1080" end="1097" title="chemical engineer" label="chemical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q905286" start="1219" end="1233" title="chemical plant" label="chemical plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="1484" end="1491" title="combustion" label="burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="1493" end="1497" title="Fire" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12772819" start="1636" end="1645" title="Discovery (observation)" label="discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="1649" end="1653" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="1658" end="1663" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="1673" end="1677" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q375843" start="1830" end="1842" title="protoscience" label="protoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="1850" end="1857" title="alchemy" label="alchemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="1908" end="1917" title="Neo-Latin" label="Neo-Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39689" start="1988" end="1997" title="Alchemy" label="alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281940" start="2027" end="2043" title="chemical process" label="chemical process"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="2144" end="2161" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q483948" start="2178" end="2198" title="conservation of mass" label="conservation of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195325" start="2212" end="2248" title="discoveries of the chemical elements" label="discoveries of the chemical elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="2303" end="2317" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q9106" start="2321" end="2337" title="Dmitri Mendeleev" label="Dmitri Mendeleev"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="2343" end="2367" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2517" end="2528" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="2686" end="2708" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="2812" end="2829" title="Master of Science" label="Master of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="2835" end="2855" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="2902" end="2913" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2918" end="2925" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952332" start="2996" end="3015" title="the central science" label="the central science"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="3098" end="3111" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="Master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="3214" end="3226" title="biochemistry" label="biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q243545" start="3228" end="3245" title="nuclear chemistry" label="nuclear chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="3247" end="3264" title="organic chemistry" label="organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165" start="3266" end="3285" title="inorganic chemistry" label="inorganic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q750446" start="3287" end="3304" title="polymer chemistry" label="polymer chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="3306" end="3326" title="analytical chemistry" label="analytical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="3328" end="3346" title="physical chemistry" label="physical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q321150" start="3348" end="3369" title="theoretical chemistry" label="theoretical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188403" start="3371" end="3388" title="quantum chemistry" label="quantum chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q321355" start="3390" end="3413" title="environmental chemistry" label="environmental chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183410" start="3419" end="3434" title="thermochemistry" label="thermochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125292" start="3436" end="3448" title="Postdoctoral" label="Postdoctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090503" start="3645" end="3664" title="chemical technician" label="chemical technician"/>
<link wikidata="Q827792" start="3745" end="3760" title="quality control" label="quality control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296168" start="3767" end="3788" title="Clinical laboratory" label="clinical laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="3800" end="3816" title="associate degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q176494" start="5988" end="5997" title="recession" label="recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814941" start="6001" end="6020" title="economic depression" label="economic depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q18749628" start="7421" end="7439" title="regulatory affairs" label="regulatory affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="8371" end="8388" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="10027" end="10037" title="university" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="10357" end="10375" title="community colleges" label="community colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395034" start="10745" end="10764" title="product development" label="product development"/>
<link wikidata="Q46627" start="10893" end="10902" title="dexterity" label="dexterity"/>
<link wikidata="Q31855" start="10954" end="10975" title="research laboratories" label="research laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q321355" start="11121" end="11143" title="environmental chemists" label="environmental chemists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143199" start="11157" end="11173" title="medical examiner" label="medical examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="11185" end="11203" title="police departments" label="police departments"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489716" start="11208" end="11225" title="forensic chemists" label="forensic chemists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11295" end="11314" title="ChemSW Buffer Maker" label="ChemSW Buffer Maker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11317" end="11325" title="LabTrack" label="LabTrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692545" start="11352" end="11371" title="Agilent ChemStation" label="Agilent ChemStation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11374" end="11417" title="Waters Empower Chromatography Data Software" label="Waters Empower Chromatography Data Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272" start="11420" end="11435" title="Microsoft Excel" label="Microsoft Excel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="11491" end="11514" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418791" start="11528" end="11542" title="drug discovery" label="drug discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q77604" start="11874" end="11883" title="radiology" label="radiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346" start="11924" end="11944" title="Analytical chemistry" label="Analytical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="12015" end="12035" title="chemical composition" label="chemical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671777" start="12040" end="12049" title="structure" label="structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094" start="12236" end="12248" title="Biochemistry" label="Biochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11173" start="12269" end="12278" title="chemical compound" label="chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="12280" end="12297" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053556" start="12303" end="12323" title="Cation-pi interaction" label="chemical interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239" start="12351" end="12359" title="organism" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q243455" start="12434" end="12453" title="medicinal chemistry" label="medicinal chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165" start="12458" end="12477" title="Inorganic chemistry" label="Inorganic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="12690" end="12714" title="organometallic chemistry" label="organometallic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165" start="12720" end="12739" title="Inorganic chemistry" label="Inorganic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q243455" start="12806" end="12825" title="Medicinal chemistry" label="Medicinal chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11351" start="13179" end="13196" title="Organic chemistry" label="Organic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11372" start="13309" end="13327" title="Physical chemistry" label="Physical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q149972" start="13804" end="13812" title="calculus" label="calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q321150" start="13837" end="13858" title="Theoretical chemistry" label="Theoretical chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="13927" end="13938" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="13942" end="13949" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="13986" end="14003" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q188403" start="14027" end="14044" title="quantum chemistry" label="quantum chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14067" end="14083" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q369472" start="14154" end="14177" title="computational chemistry" label="computational chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="14223" end="14239" title="computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q214781" start="14317" end="14341" title="condensed matter physics" label="condensed matter physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q489328" start="14346" end="14363" title="molecular physics" label="molecular physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q206829" start="14369" end="14381" title="reductionism" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680018" start="14495" end="14509" title="astrochemistry" label="astrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q911801" start="14515" end="14529" title="cosmochemistry" label="cosmochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q287919" start="14532" end="14553" title="atmospheric chemistry" label="atmospheric chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="14555" end="14575" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q910164" start="14577" end="14594" title="chemo-informatics" label="chemo-informatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877" start="14596" end="14612" title="electrochemistry" label="electrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="14614" end="14635" title="environmental science" label="environmental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="14637" end="14653" title="forensic science" label="forensic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q161764" start="14655" end="14667" title="geochemistry" label="geochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q725361" start="14669" end="14684" title="green chemistry" label="green chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q501353" start="14686" end="14706" title="history of chemistry" label="history of chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q228736" start="14708" end="14725" title="materials science" label="materials science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11190" start="14727" end="14742" title="medical science" label="medical science"/>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="14744" end="14761" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q210506" start="14763" end="14781" title="molecular genetics" label="molecular genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="14783" end="14797" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q243545" start="14799" end="14816" title="nuclear chemistry" label="nuclear chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q297672" start="14818" end="14826" title="oenology" label="oenology"/>
<link wikidata="Q237200" start="14828" end="14852" title="organometallic chemistry" label="organometallic chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="14854" end="14868" title="petrochemistry" label="petrochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q128406" start="14870" end="14882" title="pharmacology" label="pharmacology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188651" start="14884" end="14898" title="photochemistry" label="photochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q640068" start="14900" end="14914" title="phytochemistry" label="phytochemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q750446" start="14916" end="14933" title="polymer chemistry" label="polymer chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q756449" start="14935" end="14959" title="supramolecular chemistry" label="supramolecular chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q373184" start="14964" end="14981" title="surface chemistry" label="surface chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="15034" end="15056" title="Professional society" label="professional societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q905549" start="15147" end="15173" title="Royal Society of Chemistry" label="Royal Society of Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q247556" start="15201" end="15226" title="American Chemical Society" label="American Chemical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388316" start="15449" end="15463" title="general public" label="general public"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="15517" end="15531" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="15665" end="15694" title="personal protective equipment" label="personal protective equipment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15708" end="15725" title="chemical security" label="chemical security"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15741" end="15762" title="chemical supply chain" label="chemical supply chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865" start="15873" end="15895" title="Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia" label="Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15978" end="16002" title="Hague Ethical Guidelines" label="Hague Ethical Guidelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="16073" end="16097" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel Prize in Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="16126" end="16159" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q13212071" start="16177" end="16201" title="List of chemistry topics" label="List of chemistry topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q816854" start="16204" end="16220" title="List of chemists" label="List of chemists"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16223" end="16250" title=":Category:Chemistry societies" label="List of Chemistry Societies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5637" wikidata="Q322196" url="?curid=5637" title="Cypress Hill">
<text>Cypress Hill is an American hip hop group from South Gate, California, formed in 1988. They have sold over 20 million albums worldwide, and they have obtained multi-platinum and platinum certifications. The group has been critically acclaimed for their first five albums. They are considered to be among the main progenitors of West Coast hip hop and 1990s hip hop. All of the group members advocate for medical and recreational use of cannabis in the United States. In 2019, Cypress Hill became the first hip hop group to have a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

==History==

===Formation (1988)===
Senen Reyes (also known as Sen Dog) and Ulpiano Sergio Reyes (also known as Mellow Man Ace) are brothers born in Pinar del Río, Cuba. In 1971, their family immigrated to the United States and initially lived in South Gate, California. In 1988, the two brothers teamed up with New York City native Lawrence Muggerud (also known as DJ Muggs, previously in a rap group named 7A3) and Louis Freese (also known as B-Real) to form a hip-hop group named DVX (Devastating Vocal Excellence). The band soon lost Mellow Man Ace to a solo career, and changed their name to Cypress Hill, after a street in South Gate.

===Mainstream success with &quot;Cypress Hill&quot; and &quot;Black Sunday&quot;, addition of Eric Bobo, and &quot;III: Temples of Boom&quot; (1989–1996)===
After recording a demo in 1989, Cypress Hill signed a record deal with Ruffhouse Records. Their self-titled first album was released in August 1991. The lead single was the double A-side &quot;The Phuncky Feel One&quot;/&quot;How I Could Just Kill a Man&quot; which received heavy airplay on urban and college radio, most notably peaking at No. 1 on &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Rap Tracks chart and at No. 77 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. The other two singles released from the album were &quot;Hand on the Pump&quot; and &quot;Latin Lingo&quot;, the latter of which combined English and Spanish lyrics, a trait that was continued throughout their career. The success of these singles led &quot;Cypress Hill&quot; to sell two million copies in the U.S. alone, and it peaked at No. 31 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and was certified double platinum by the RIAA. In 1992, Cypress Hill&#x27;s first contribution to a soundtrack was the song &quot;Shoot &#x27;Em Up&quot; for the film &quot;Juice&quot;. Cypress Hill&#x27;s songs started to appear more frequently in major Hollywood films, such as &quot;Lethal Weapon 3&quot; (&quot;Latin Lingo&quot;) and &quot;White Men Can&#x27;t Jump&quot; (&quot;A to the K&quot;) also from 1992. The group made their first appearance at Lollapalooza on the side stage in 1992. It was the festival&#x27;s second year of touring, and featured a diverse lineup of acts such as Red Hot Chili Peppers, Ice Cube, Lush, Tool, Stone Temple Pilots, among others. The trio also supported the &quot;Cypress Hill&quot; album by touring with the Beastie Boys, who were touring behind their third album &quot;Check Your Head&quot;.

&quot;Black Sunday&quot;, the group&#x27;s second album, debuted at No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 in 1993, recording the highest Soundscan for a rap group up until that time. &quot;Insane in the Brain&quot; became a crossover hit, peaking at No. 19 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, at No. 16 on the Dance Club Songs chart, and at No. 1 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. &quot;Insane in the Brain&quot; also garnered the group their first Grammy nomination. &quot;Black Sunday&quot; went triple platinum in the U.S. and sold about 3.26 million copies. Cypress Hill headlined the Soul Assassins tour with House of Pain, Funkdoobiest, and The Whooliganz as support, then performed on a college tour with Rage Against the Machine and Seven Year Bitch. Also in 1993, Cypress Hill had two tracks on the &quot;Judgment Night&quot; soundtrack, teaming up with Pearl Jam (without vocalist Eddie Vedder) on the track &quot;Real Thing&quot; and Sonic Youth on &quot;I Love You Mary Jane&quot;. The soundtrack was notable for intentionally creating collaborations between the rap/hip-hop and rock/metal genres, and as a result the soundtrack peaked at No. 17 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA. On October 2, 1993, Cypress Hill performed on the comedy show &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, broadcast by NBC. Prior to their performances, studio executives, label representatives, and the group&#x27;s own associates constantly asked the trio to not smoke marijuana on-stage. DJ Muggs became irritated due to the constant inquisitions, and he subsequently lit a joint during the group&#x27;s second song. Up until that point, it was extremely uncommon to see marijuana usage on a live televised broadcast. The incident prompted NBC to ban the group from returning on the show, a distinction shared only by six other artists.

The group later played at Woodstock 94, officially making percussionist Eric Bobo a member of the group during the performance. Eric Bobo was known as the son of Willie Bobo and as a touring member of the Beastie Boys, who Cypress Hill previously toured with in 1992. That same year, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; named the group as the Best Rap Group in their music awards voted by critics and readers. Cypress Hill then played at Lollapalooza for two successive years, topping the bill in 1995. They also appeared on the &quot;Homerpalooza&quot; episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. The group received their second Grammy nomination in 1995 for &quot;I Ain&#x27;t Goin&#x27; Out Like That&quot;.

Cypress Hill&#x27;s third album &quot;&quot; was released in 1995, peaking at No. 3 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and at No. 3 on the Canadian Albums Chart. The album was certified platinum by the RIAA. &quot;Throw Your Set in the Air&quot; was the most successful single off the album, peaking at No. 45 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 and No. 11 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. The single also earned Cypress Hill&#x27;s third Grammy nomination. Shortly after the release of &quot;III: Temples of Boom&quot;, Sen Dog became frustrated due to the rigorous touring schedule. Just prior to an overseas tour, he departed from the group unexpectedly. Cypress Hill continued their tours throughout 1995 and 1996, with Eric Bobo and also various guest vocalists covering Sen Dog&#x27;s verses. Sen Dog later formed the rock band SX-10 to explore other musical genres. Later on in 1996, Cypress Hill appeared on the first Smokin&#x27; Grooves tour, featuring Ziggy Marley, the Fugees, Busta Rhymes, and A Tribe Called Quest. The group also released a nine track EP, &quot;Unreleased and Revamped&quot; with rare mixes.

===Focus on solo projects, &quot;IV&quot;, crossover appeal with &quot;Skull &amp; Bones&quot;, and &quot;Stoned Raiders&quot; (1997–2002)===

In 1997, the members focused on their solo careers. DJ Muggs released &quot;Soul Assassins: Chapter 1&quot;, with features from Dr. Dre, KRS-One, Wyclef Jean, and Mobb Deep. B-Real appeared with Busta Rhymes, Coolio, LL Cool J, and Method Man on &quot;Hit &#x27;Em High&quot; from the multi-platinum &quot;Space Jam Soundtrack&quot;. He also appeared with RBX, Nas, and KRS-One on &quot;East Coast Killer, West Coast Killer&quot; from Dr. Dre&#x27;s &quot;Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath&quot; album, and contributed to an album entitled &quot;The Psycho Realm&quot; with the group of the same name. Sen Dog also released the &quot;Get Wood&quot; sampler as part of SX-10 on the label Flip Records. In addition, Eric Bobo contributed drums to various rock bands on their albums, such as 311 and Soulfly.

In early 1998, Sen Dog returned to Cypress Hill. He cited his therapist and also his creative collaborations with the band SX-10 as catalysts for his rejoining. The quartet then embarked on the third annual Smokin&#x27; Grooves tour with Public Enemy, Wyclef Jean, Busta Rhymes, and Gang Starr. Cypress Hill released &quot;IV&quot; in October 1998 which went gold in the U.S. and peaked at No. 11 on the Billboard 200. The lead single off the album was &quot;Dr. Greenthumb&quot;, as it peaked at No. 11 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart. It also peaked at No. 70 on the Billboard Hot 100, their last appearance on the chart to date. 

In 1999, Cypress Hill composed the soundtrack for the PC first-person shooter video game &quot;&quot;, three of the band&#x27;s songs from the 1998 &quot;IV&quot; album were in the game; &quot;16 Men Till There&#x27;s No Men Left&quot;, &quot;Checkmate&quot;, and &quot;Lightning Strikes&quot;. The group also did voice work for some of the game&#x27;s characters. Also in 1999, the band released a greatest hits album in Spanish, &quot;Los Grandes Éxitos en Español&quot;.

In 2000, Cypress Hill fused genres with their fifth album, &quot;Skull &amp; Bones&quot;, which consisted of two discs. The first disc &quot;Skull&quot; was composed of rap tracks while &quot;Bones&quot; explored further the group&#x27;s forays into rock. The album peaked at No. 5 on the Billboard 200 and at No. 3 on the Canadian Albums Chart, and the album was eventually certified platinum by the RIAA. The first two singles were &quot;(Rock) Superstar&quot; for rock radio and &quot;(Rap) Superstar&quot; for urban radio. Both singles received heavy airplay on both rock and urban radio, enabling Cypress Hill to crossover again. &quot;(Rock) Superstar&quot; peaked at No. 18 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart and &quot;(Rap) Superstar&quot; peaked at No. 43 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart.

Due to the rock genre&#x27;s prominent appearance on &quot;Skull &amp; Bones&quot;, Cypress Hill employed the members of Sen Dog&#x27;s band SX-10 as backing musicians for the live shows. Cypress Hill supported &quot;Skull &amp; Bones&quot; by initially playing a summer tour with Limp Bizkit and Cold called the Back 2 Basics Tour. The tour was controversial as it was sponsored by the file sharing service Napster. In addition, Napster enabled each show of the tour to be free to the fans, and no security guards were employed during the performances. After the tour&#x27;s conclusion, the acts had not reported any disturbances. Towards the end of 2000, Cypress Hill and MxPx landed a slot opening for The Offspring on the Conspiracy of One Tour. The group also released &quot;Live at the Fillmore&quot;, a concert disc recorded at San Francisco&#x27;s The Fillmore in 2000. Cypress Hill continued their experimentation with rock on the &quot;Stoned Raiders&quot; album in 2001; however, its sales were a disappointment. The album peaked at No. 64 on the Billboard 200, the group&#x27;s lowest position to that point. Also in 2001, the group made a cameo appearance as themselves in the film &quot;How High&quot;. Cypress Hill then recorded the track &quot;Just Another Victim&quot; for WWF as a theme song for Tazz, borrowing elements from the 2000 single &quot;(Rock) Superstar&quot;. The song would later be featured on the compilation &quot;WWF Forceable Entry&quot; in March 2002, which peaked at No. 3 on the Billboard 200 and was certified gold by the RIAA.

===&quot;Till Death Do Us Part&quot;, DJ Muggs&#x27; hiatus, and extensive collaborations on &quot;Rise Up&quot; (2003–2012) ===

Cypress Hill released &quot;Till Death Do Us Part&quot; in March 2004 as it peaked at No. 21 on the Billboard 200. It featured appearances by Bob Marley&#x27;s son Damian Marley, Prodigy of Mobb Deep, and producers The Alchemist and Fredwreck. The album represented a further departure from the group&#x27;s signature sound. Reggae was a strong influence on its sound, especially on the lead single &quot;What&#x27;s Your Number?&quot;. The track featured Tim Armstrong of Rancid on guitar and backup vocals. It was based on the classic song &quot;The Guns of Brixton&quot; from The Clash&#x27;s album &quot;London Calling&quot;. &quot;What&#x27;s Your Number?&quot; saw Cypress Hill crossover into the rock charts again, as the single peaked at No. 23 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart.

Afterwards, DJ Muggs took a hiatus from the group to focus on other projects, such as Soul Assassins and his &quot;DJ Muggs vs.&quot; collaboration albums. In December 2005 another compilation album titled &quot;Greatest Hits From the Bong&quot; was released. It included nine hits from previous albums and two new tracks. In the summer of 2006, B-Real appeared on Snoop Dogg&#x27;s single &quot;Vato&quot;, which was produced by Pharrell Williams. The group&#x27;s next album was tentatively scheduled for an early 2007 release, but it was pushed back numerous times. In 2007 Cypress Hill toured as a part of the Rock the Bells tour. They headlined with Public Enemy, Wu-Tang Clan, Nas, and a reunited Rage Against the Machine.

On July 25, 2008, Cypress Hill performed at a benefit concert at the House of Blues Chicago, where a majority of the proceeds went to the Chicago Alliance to End Homelessness. In August 2009, a new song by Cypress Hill titled &quot;Get &#x27;Em Up&quot; was made available on iTunes. The song was also featured in the &quot;Madden NFL 2010&quot; video game. It was the first sampling of the group&#x27;s then-upcoming album.

Cypress Hill&#x27;s eighth studio album &quot;Rise Up&quot; featured contributions from Everlast, Tom Morello, Daron Malakian, Pitbull, Marc Anthony, and Mike Shinoda. Previously, the vast majority of the group&#x27;s albums were produced by DJ Muggs; however, &quot;Rise Up&quot; instead featured a large array of guest features and producers, with DJ Muggs only appearing on two tracks. The album was released on Priority Records/EMI Entertainment, as the group was signed to the label by new creative chairman Snoop Dogg. &quot;Rise Up&quot; was released on April 20, 2010, and it peaked at No. 19 on the Billboard 200. The single &quot;Rise Up&quot; was featured at WWE&#x27;s pay-per-view &quot;Elimination Chamber&quot; as the official theme song for the event. It also appeared in the trailer for the movie &quot;The Green Hornet&quot;. &quot;Rise Up&quot; managed to peak at No. 20 on both the Modern Rock Tracks and Mainstream Rock Tracks charts. &quot;Armada Latina&quot;, which featured Pitbull and Marc Anthony, was Cypress Hill&#x27;s last song to chart in the U.S. to date, peaking at No. 25 on the Hot Rap Tracks chart.

Cypress Hill commenced its Rise Up tour in Philadelphia on April 10, 2010. In one particular instance, the group was supposed to stop in Tucson, Arizona but canceled the show in protest of the recent immigration legislation. At the Rock en Seine festival in Paris on August 27, 2010, they had said in an interview that they would anticipate the outcome of the legislation before returning. Also in 2010, Cypress Hill performed at the Reading and Leeds Festivals on August 28 at Leeds and August 29 at Reading. On June 5, 2012, Cypress Hill and dubstep artist Rusko released a collaborative EP entitled &quot;Cypress X Rusko&quot;. DJ Muggs, who was still on a hiatus, and Eric Bobo were absent on the release. Also in 2012, Cypress Hill collaborated with Deadmau5 on his sixth studio album &quot;Album Title Goes Here&quot;, lending vocals on &quot;Failbait&quot;.

===&quot;Elephants on Acid&quot;, Hollywood Walk of Fame, and &quot;Back in Black&quot; (2013–2022)===
During the interval between Cypress Hill albums, the four members commenced work on various projects. B-Real formed the band Prophets of Rage alongside three members of Rage Against the Machine and two members of Public Enemy. He also released &quot;The Prescription&quot; EP under his Dr. Greenthumb persona. Sen Dog formed the band Powerflo alongside members of Fear Factory, downset., and Biohazard. DJ Muggs revived his Soul Assassins project as its main producer. Eric Bobo formed a duo named Ritmo Machine. He also contributed to an unreleased album by his father Willie Bobo.

On September 28, 2018, Cypress Hill released the album &quot;Elephants on Acid&quot;, which saw the return of DJ Muggs as main composer and producer (DJ Muggs subsequently stayed in the group but very rarely played any live shows). It peaked at No. 120 on the Billboard 200 and at No. 6 on the Top Independent Albums chart. Overall, four different singles were released to promote the album. In April 2019 Cypress Hill received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. Although various solo hip hop artists had received stars, Cypress Hill became the first collective hip hop group to receive a star. The entire lineup of B-Real, Sen Dog, Eric Bobo, and DJ Muggs had all attended the ceremony.

In January 2022, the group announced their 10th studio album entitled &quot;Back in Black&quot;. In addition, Cypress Hill planned to support the album by joining Slipknot alongside Ho99o9 for the second half of the 2022 Knotfest Roadshow. They had previously invited Slipknot to join their Great Smoke-Out festival back in 2009. &quot;Back in Black&quot; was released on March 18, 2022. It was the group&#x27;s first album to not feature DJ Muggs on any of the tracks, as producing duties were handled by Black Milk. &quot;Back in Black&quot; was the lowest charting album of the group&#x27;s career, and the first to not reach the Billboard 200 chart; however, it peaked at No. 69 on the Top Current Album Sales chart.

A documentary about the group, entitled &quot;Cypress Hill: Insane in the Brain&quot;, was released on the Showtime service in April 2022. Estevan Oriol, Cypress Hill&#x27;s former tour manager and close associate, directed the film. It had mainly chronicled the group&#x27;s formation and their first decade of existence. In relation to the &quot;Cypress Hill: Insane in the Brain&quot; documentary, Cypress Hill digitally released the single &quot;Crossroads&quot; in September 2022. The single featured the return of DJ Muggs on production.

===Future plans and tentative final album (2023–present)===
In an interview, Sen Dog claimed that the group will fully reunite with DJ Muggs for an 11th album; however, he stated that it will be the group&#x27;s final album of their career.

The group performed at various festivals in 2023 such as the Festival d&#x27;été de Québec, and in celebrating the 30th anniversary of their second studio album &quot;Black Sunday&quot;, they also announced several standalone concerts in North America and Europe. They also performed alongside The Pharcyde and Souls of Mischief in May 2024. They also played in Italy, Austria, and Germany throughout July. In a callback to Cypress Hill&#x27;s appearance in the 1996 &quot;Homerpalooza&quot; episode of &quot;The Simpsons&quot; (which contained a skit of the group realizing they must have ordered the London Symphony Orchestra while high to perform with), it was announced that the group would actually perform with the London Symphony Orchestra at London&#x27;s Royal Albert Hall in July 2024. The band was joined by long-time collaborator Christian Olde Wolbers on double bass.

==Style==

===Rapping===
One of the band&#x27;s most striking aspects is B-Real&#x27;s exaggeratedly high-pitched nasal vocals. In the book &quot;Check the Technique&quot;, B-Real described his nasal style, saying his rapping voice is &quot;high and annoying...the nasal style I have was just something that I developed...my more natural style wasn&#x27;t so pleasing to DJ Muggs and Sen Dog&#x27;s ears&quot; and talking about the nasal style in the book &quot;How to Rap&quot;, B-Real said &quot;you want to stand out from the others and just be distinct...when you got something that can separate you from everybody else, you gotta use it to your advantage.&quot; In the film &quot;Art of Rap&quot;, B-Real credited the Beastie Boys as an influence when developing his rapping style. Sen Dog&#x27;s voice is deeper, more violent, and often shouted alongside the rapping; his vocals are often emphasized by adding another background/choir voice to say them. Sen Dog&#x27;s style is in contrast to B-Real&#x27;s, who said &quot;Sen&#x27;s voice is so strong&quot; and &quot;it all blends together&quot; when they are both on the same track.

Both B-Real and Sen Dog started writing lyrics in both Spanish and English. Initially, B-Real was inspired to start writing raps from watching Sen Dog and Mellow Man Ace writing their lyrics, and originally B-Real was going to just be the writer for the group rather than a rapper. Their lyrics are noted for bringing a &quot;cartoonish&quot; approach to violence by Peter Shapiro and Allmusic.

===Production===
The sound and groove of their music, mostly produced by DJ Muggs, has spooky sounds and a stoned aesthetic; with its bass-heavy rhythms and odd sample loops (&quot;Insane in the Brain&quot; has a blues guitar pitched looped in its chorus), it carries a psychedelic value, which is lessened in their rock-oriented albums. The double album &quot;Skull &amp; Bones&quot; consists of a pure rap disc (&quot;Skull&quot;) and a separate rock disc (&quot;Bones&quot;). In the live album &quot;Live at The Fillmore&quot;, some of the old classics were played in a rock/metal version, with Eric Bobo playing the drums and Sen Dog&#x27;s band SX-10 as the other instrumentalists. 2010&#x27;s &quot;Rise Up&quot; was the most radically different album in regards to production. DJ Muggs had produced the majority of each prior Cypress Hill album, but he only appeared on &quot;Rise Up&quot; twice. The remaining songs were handled by various other guests. 2018&#x27;s &quot;Elephants on Acid&quot; marked the return of DJ Muggs, and the album featured a more psychedelic and hip-hop approach.

==Legacy==
Cypress Hill are often credited for being one of the few Latin American hip hop groups to break through with their own stylistic impact on rap music, in addition to finding a crossover audience among the rock community. Cypress Hill have been cited as an influence by artists such as Eminem, Baby Bash, Paul Wall, Post Malone, Luniz, and Fat Joe. Cypress Hill have also been cited as a strong influence on nu metal bands such as Deftones, Limp Bizkit, System of a Down, Linkin Park, Rage Against the Machine and Korn. Famously, the bassline during the outro of Korn&#x27;s 1994 single &quot;Blind&quot; was a direct tribute to Cypress Hill&#x27;s 1993 track &quot;Lick a Shot&quot;.

==Members==

Current
* Louis &quot;B-Real&quot; Freese – vocals (1988–present)
* Senen &quot;Sen Dog&quot; Reyes – vocals (1988–1995, 1998–present)
* Eric &quot;Eric Bobo&quot; Correa – drums, percussion (1994–present)
* Lawrence &quot;DJ Muggs&quot; Muggerud – turntables, samples (1988–2004, 2014–present)
Current touring
* Lord &quot;DJ Lord&quot; Asword – turntables, samples, vocals (2019–present)

Former
* Ulpiano &quot;Mellow Man Ace&quot; Reyes – vocals (1988)
Former touring
* Panchito &quot;Ponch&quot; Gomez – drums, percussion (1993–1994)
* Frank Mercurio – bass (2000–2002)
* Jeremy Fleener – guitar (2000–2002)
* Andy Zambrano – guitar (2000–2002)
* Julio &quot;Julio G&quot; González – turntables, samples (2004–2018)
* Michael &quot;Mix Master Mike&quot; Schwartz – turntables, samples (2018–2019)
===Timeline===
==Discography==
===Studio albums===
* &quot;Cypress Hill&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Black Sunday&quot; (1993)
* &quot;&quot; (1995)
* &quot;IV&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Skull &amp; Bones&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Stoned Raiders&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Till Death Do Us Part&quot; (2004)
* &quot;Rise Up&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Elephants on Acid&quot; (2018)
* &quot;Back in Black&quot; (2022)

==Awards and nominations==
Billboard Music Awards
Grammy Awards
MTV Video Music Awards
Hollywood Walk of Fame
|2019
|Cypress Hill
|Star


==References==

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q322196" start="0" end="12" title="Cypress Hill" label="Cypress Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="28" end="35" title="Hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q838772" start="47" end="69" title="South Gate, California" label="South Gate, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="178" end="186" title="RIAA certification" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329919" start="313" end="324" title="progenitors" label="progenitors"/>
<link wikidata="Q429264" start="328" end="346" title="West Coast hip hop" label="West Coast hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="404" end="411" title="medical marijuana" label="medical"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708739" start="416" end="428" title="Recreational drug use" label="recreational"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="436" end="444" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="542" end="564" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336275" start="630" end="637" title="Sen Dog" label="Sen Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q354121" start="679" end="693" title="Mellow Man Ace" label="Mellow Man Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q244139" start="716" end="729" title="Pinar del Río" label="Pinar del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="731" end="735" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q838772" start="814" end="836" title="South Gate, California" label="South Gate, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="879" end="892" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q955323" start="933" end="941" title="DJ Muggs" label="DJ Muggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711982" start="975" end="978" title="7A3" label="7A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q352246" start="1012" end="1018" title="B-Real" label="B-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377914" start="1437" end="1454" title="Ruffhouse Records" label="Ruffhouse Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q549277" start="1462" end="1485" title="Cypress Hill (album)" label="self-titled first album"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="1546" end="1552" title="A-side" label="A-side"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757000" start="1559" end="1579" title="The Phuncky Feel One" label="The Phuncky Feel One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079557" start="1592" end="1619" title="How I Could Just Kill a Man" label="How I Could Just Kill a Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q408978" start="1647" end="1654" title="airplay" label="airplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1722" end="1731" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322696" start="1738" end="1752" title="Hot Rap Tracks" label="Hot Rap Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="1780" end="1809" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2164" end="2189" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="2231" end="2235" title="RIAA" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305167" start="2290" end="2300" title="Juice (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q642419" start="2363" end="2368" title="Juice (1992 film)" label="Juice"/>
<link wikidata="Q751769" start="2476" end="2491" title="Lethal Weapon 3" label="Lethal Weapon 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q686168" start="2534" end="2559" title="White Men Can&amp;#x27;t Jump" label="White Men Can&amp;#x27;t Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="2648" end="2660" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="2785" end="2806" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q173637" start="2808" end="2816" title="Ice Cube" label="Ice Cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668512" start="2818" end="2822" title="Lush (band)" label="Lush"/>
<link wikidata="Q184827" start="2824" end="2828" title="Tool (band)" label="Tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q329270" start="2830" end="2849" title="Stone Temple Pilots" label="Stone Temple Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="2944" end="2956" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q608507" start="3006" end="3021" title="Check Your Head" label="Check Your Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q880587" start="3036" end="3048" title="Black Sunday (Cypress Hill album)" label="Black Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="3168" end="3177" title="Soundscan" label="Soundscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3799075" start="3220" end="3239" title="Insane in the Brain" label="Insane in the Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q504635" start="3255" end="3268" title="crossover hit" label="crossover hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638075" start="3343" end="3359" title="Dance Club Songs" label="Dance Club Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="3477" end="3483" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q752410" start="3642" end="3655" title="House of Pain" label="House of Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410259" start="3657" end="3669" title="Funkdoobiest" label="Funkdoobiest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567260" start="3675" end="3689" title="The Whooliganz" label="The Whooliganz"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="3740" end="3764" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q270055" start="3769" end="3785" title="Seven Year Bitch" label="Seven Year Bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710973" start="3842" end="3856" title="Judgment Night (film)" label="Judgment Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q3009451" start="3863" end="3873" title="Judgment Night (soundtrack)" label="soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="3891" end="3900" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q221535" start="3919" end="3931" title="Eddie Vedder" label="Eddie Vedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="3973" end="3984" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="4323" end="4342" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="4363" end="4366" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q933410" start="4910" end="4922" title="Woodstock 94" label="Woodstock 94"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="4942" end="4955" title="percussionist" label="percussionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351217" start="4956" end="4965" title="Eric Bobo" label="Eric Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361239" start="5046" end="5057" title="Willie Bobo" label="Willie Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="5174" end="5187" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q602839" start="5409" end="5421" title="Homerpalooza" label="Homerpalooza"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="5445" end="5457" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153536" start="5533" end="5570" title="I Ain&amp;#x27;t Goin&amp;#x27; Out Like That" label="I Ain&amp;#x27;t Goin&amp;#x27; Out Like That"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418776" start="5716" end="5737" title="Canadian Albums Chart" label="Canadian Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164442" start="5791" end="5816" title="Throw Your Set in the Air" label="Throw Your Set in the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048929" start="6408" end="6413" title="SX-10" label="SX-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q199418" start="6537" end="6549" title="Ziggy Marley" label="Ziggy Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q159329" start="6555" end="6561" title="Fugees" label="Fugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q59185" start="6563" end="6575" title="Busta Rhymes" label="Busta Rhymes"/>
<link wikidata="Q300602" start="6581" end="6601" title="A Tribe Called Quest" label="A Tribe Called Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q651979" start="6650" end="6673" title="Unreleased and Revamped" label="Unreleased and Revamped"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073447" start="6917" end="6942" title="Chapter 1 (Soul Assassins album)" label="Soul Assassins: Chapter 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="6969" end="6976" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q432552" start="6978" end="6985" title="KRS-One" label="KRS-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q202663" start="6987" end="6998" title="Wyclef Jean" label="Wyclef Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q727115" start="7004" end="7013" title="Mobb Deep" label="Mobb Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q310357" start="7050" end="7056" title="Coolio" label="Coolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q52440" start="7058" end="7067" title="LL Cool J" label="LL Cool J"/>
<link wikidata="Q298694" start="7073" end="7083" title="Method Man" label="Method Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291148" start="7147" end="7167" title="Space Jam (soundtrack)" label="Space Jam Soundtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041341" start="7197" end="7200" title="RBX" label="RBX"/>
<link wikidata="Q194220" start="7202" end="7205" title="Nas" label="Nas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764643" start="7297" end="7327" title="Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath" label="Dr. Dre Presents the Aftermath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758662" start="7384" end="7400" title="The Psycho Realm" label="The Psycho Realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241167" start="7412" end="7438" title="Psycho Realm" label="the group of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3746620" start="7525" end="7537" title="Flip Records (1994)" label="Flip Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q224565" start="7627" end="7630" title="311 (band)" label="311"/>
<link wikidata="Q178642" start="7635" end="7642" title="Soulfly" label="Soulfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="7883" end="7895" title="Public Enemy (band)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844524" start="7928" end="7938" title="Gang Starr" label="Gang Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655097" start="7968" end="7970" title="IV (Cypress Hill album)" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304125" start="8104" end="8118" title="Dr. Greenthumb" label="Dr. Greenthumb"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="8329" end="8331" title="Personal computer" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q283056" start="8712" end="8741" title="Los Grandes Éxitos en Español" label="Los Grandes Éxitos en Español"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785820" start="8815" end="8832" title="Skull &amp;amp; Bones (album)" label="Skull &amp;amp; Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986640" start="9190" end="9206" title="(Rock) Superstar" label="(Rock) Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16991569" start="9238" end="9253" title="(Rap) Superstar" label="(Rap) Superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="9438" end="9456" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="9823" end="9834" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107761" start="9839" end="9843" title="Cold (band)" label="Cold"/>
<link wikidata="Q22666" start="9929" end="9941" title="file sharing" label="file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="9950" end="9957" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q221101" start="10216" end="10220" title="MxPx" label="MxPx"/>
<link wikidata="Q157041" start="10247" end="10260" title="The Offspring" label="The Offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q774348" start="10268" end="10290" title="Conspiracy of One" label="Conspiracy of One Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632978" start="10322" end="10342" title="Live at the Fillmore (Cypress Hill album)" label="Live at the Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348537" start="10398" end="10410" title="The Fillmore" label="The Fillmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999931" start="10488" end="10502" title="Stoned Raiders" label="Stoned Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541605" start="10743" end="10751" title="How High" label="How High"/>
<link wikidata="Q35339" start="10832" end="10835" title="WWE" label="WWF"/>
<link wikidata="Q470015" start="10856" end="10860" title="Tazz" label="Tazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779308" start="10990" end="11009" title="WWF Forceable Entry" label="WWF Forceable Entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999943" start="11269" end="11290" title="Till Death Do Us Part (Cypress Hill album)" label="Till Death Do Us Part"/>
<link wikidata="Q409" start="11383" end="11393" title="Bob Marley" label="Bob Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q310796" start="11405" end="11418" title="Damian Marley" label="Damian Marley"/>
<link wikidata="Q522739" start="11420" end="11427" title="Prodigy (rapper)" label="Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q727115" start="11431" end="11440" title="Mobb Deep" label="Mobb Deep"/>
<link wikidata="Q704757" start="11456" end="11469" title="The Alchemist (musician)" label="The Alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453334" start="11474" end="11483" title="Fredwreck" label="Fredwreck"/>
<link wikidata="Q9794" start="11566" end="11572" title="Reggae" label="Reggae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990867" start="11646" end="11670" title="What&amp;#x27;s Your Number? (song)" label="What&amp;#x27;s Your Number?"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="11697" end="11710" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="11714" end="11720" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2403176" start="11789" end="11808" title="The Guns of Brixton" label="The Guns of Brixton"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="11820" end="11829" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q19003" start="11849" end="11863" title="London Calling" label="London Calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258719" start="12114" end="12128" title="Soul Assassins" label="Soul Assassins"/>
<link wikidata="Q222910" start="12209" end="12226" title="compilation album" label="compilation album"/>
<link wikidata="Q732369" start="12240" end="12267" title="Greatest Hits From the Bong" label="Greatest Hits From the Bong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6096" start="12393" end="12403" title="Snoop Dogg" label="Snoop Dogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545013" start="12424" end="12428" title="Vato (song)" label="Vato"/>
<link wikidata="Q14313" start="12458" end="12475" title="Pharrell Williams" label="Pharrell Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354880" start="12642" end="12656" title="Rock the Bells" label="Rock the Bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q52463" start="12697" end="12709" title="Wu-Tang Clan" label="Wu-Tang Clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q648898" start="12827" end="12841" title="House of Blues" label="House of Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="13034" end="13040" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3842306" start="13082" end="13097" title="Madden NFL 2010" label="Madden NFL 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094249" start="13230" end="13237" title="Rise Up (Cypress Hill album)" label="Rise Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q453048" start="13272" end="13280" title="Everlast (musician)" label="Everlast"/>
<link wikidata="Q297552" start="13282" end="13293" title="Tom Morello" label="Tom Morello"/>
<link wikidata="Q486786" start="13295" end="13309" title="Daron Malakian" label="Daron Malakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q187844" start="13311" end="13318" title="Pitbull (rapper)" label="Pitbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q26625" start="13320" end="13332" title="Marc Anthony" label="Marc Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q19201" start="13338" end="13350" title="Mike Shinoda" label="Mike Shinoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q522618" start="13599" end="13633" title="Priority Records" label="Priority Records/EMI Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335912" start="13824" end="13831" title="Rise Up (Cypress Hill song)" label="Rise Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q50785" start="13884" end="13903" title="Elimination Chamber (2010)" label="Elimination Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q738152" start="14004" end="14020" title="The Green Hornet (2011 film)" label="The Green Hornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q868813" start="14109" end="14131" title="Mainstream Rock (chart)" label="Mainstream Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622845" start="14146" end="14159" title="Armada Latina" label="Armada Latina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079699" start="14552" end="14565" title="Rock en Seine" label="Rock en Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="14754" end="14781" title="Reading and Leeds Festivals" label="Reading and Leeds Festivals"/>
<link wikidata="Q974298" start="14879" end="14884" title="Rusko (musician)" label="Rusko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200370" start="14928" end="14943" title="Cypress X Rusko" label="Cypress X Rusko"/>
<link wikidata="Q49009" start="15075" end="15083" title="Deadmau5" label="Deadmau5"/>
<link wikidata="Q23321" start="15116" end="15137" title="Album Title Goes Here" label="Album Title Goes Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q24706034" start="15414" end="15430" title="Prophets of Rage" label="Prophets of Rage"/>
<link wikidata="Q48700350" start="15623" end="15631" title="Powerflo" label="Powerflo"/>
<link wikidata="Q128010" start="15653" end="15665" title="Fear Factory" label="Fear Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q285923" start="15667" end="15675" title="downset." label="downset."/>
<link wikidata="Q803876" start="15681" end="15690" title="Biohazard (band)" label="Biohazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q56872125" start="15934" end="15951" title="Elephants on Acid" label="Elephants on Acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642564" start="16167" end="16189" title="Top Independent Albums" label="Top Independent Albums"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="16315" end="16337" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q111372499" start="16641" end="16654" title="Back in Black (Cypress Hill album)" label="Back in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q254138" start="16728" end="16736" title="Slipknot (band)" label="Slipknot"/>
<link wikidata="Q20684179" start="16747" end="16753" title="Ho99o9" label="Ho99o9"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423066" start="16786" end="16803" title="Knotfest" label="Knotfest Roadshow"/>
<link wikidata="Q880405" start="17071" end="17081" title="Black Milk" label="Black Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="17255" end="17278" title="Top Current Album Sales" label="Top Current Album Sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="17394" end="17402" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401095" start="17426" end="17439" title="Estevan Oriol" label="Estevan Oriol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070109" start="18135" end="18164" title="Festival d&amp;#x27;été de Québec" label="Festival d&amp;#x27;été de Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856396" start="18368" end="18380" title="The Pharcyde" label="The Pharcyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516678" start="18385" end="18402" title="Souls of Mischief" label="Souls of Mischief"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="18676" end="18701" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="18838" end="18855" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071317" start="18916" end="18938" title="Christian Olde Wolbers" label="Christian Olde Wolbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="18942" end="18953" title="double bass" label="double bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089095" start="19102" end="19121" title="Check the Technique" label="Check the Technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040802" start="19418" end="19428" title="How to Rap" label="How to Rap"/>
<link wikidata="Q214039" start="19679" end="19691" title="Beastie Boys" label="Beastie Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176882" start="20466" end="20479" title="Peter Shapiro (journalist)" label="Peter Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="21890" end="21896" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q708231" start="21898" end="21907" title="Baby Bash" label="Baby Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q709640" start="21909" end="21918" title="Paul Wall" label="Paul Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q21621919" start="21920" end="21931" title="Post Malone" label="Post Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535899" start="21933" end="21938" title="Luniz" label="Luniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q309888" start="21944" end="21951" title="Fat Joe" label="Fat Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q263734" start="22012" end="22020" title="nu metal" label="nu metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q485039" start="22035" end="22043" title="Deftones" label="Deftones"/>
<link wikidata="Q240767" start="22045" end="22056" title="Limp Bizkit" label="Limp Bizkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q45165" start="22058" end="22074" title="System of a Down" label="System of a Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q261" start="22076" end="22087" title="Linkin Park" label="Linkin Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q72092" start="22089" end="22113" title="Rage Against the Machine" label="Rage Against the Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="22118" end="22122" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707267" start="22197" end="22202" title="Blind (Korn song)" label="Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893773" start="22270" end="22281" title="Lick a Shot" label="Lick a Shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q352246" start="22325" end="22331" title="B-Real" label="B-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336275" start="22383" end="22390" title="Sen Dog" label="Sen Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351217" start="22451" end="22460" title="Eric &amp;quot;Bobo&amp;quot; Correa" label="Eric Bobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q955323" start="22526" end="22534" title="DJ Muggs" label="DJ Muggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046801" start="22552" end="22562" title="Turntablism" label="turntables"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="22564" end="22571" title="Sampling (music)" label="samples"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205366" start="22627" end="22634" title="DJ Lord" label="DJ Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q354121" start="22717" end="22731" title="Mellow Man Ace" label="Mellow Man Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q125179776" start="22967" end="22974" title="Julio G" label="Julio G"/>
<link wikidata="Q704963" start="23040" end="23055" title="Mix Master Mike" label="Mix Master Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q549277" start="23164" end="23176" title="Cypress Hill (album)" label="Cypress Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q880587" start="23198" end="23210" title="Black Sunday (Cypress Hill album)" label="Black Sunday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655097" start="23254" end="23256" title="IV (Cypress Hill album)" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785820" start="23278" end="23295" title="Skull &amp;amp; Bones (album)" label="Skull &amp;amp; Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999931" start="23317" end="23331" title="Stoned Raiders" label="Stoned Raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999943" start="23353" end="23374" title="Till Death Do Us Part (Cypress Hill album)" label="Till Death Do Us Part"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094249" start="23396" end="23403" title="Rise Up (Cypress Hill album)" label="Rise Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q56872125" start="23425" end="23442" title="Elephants on Acid" label="Elephants on Acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q111372499" start="23464" end="23477" title="Back in Black (Cypress Hill album)" label="Back in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="23519" end="23541" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="Billboard Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="23542" end="23555" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q223703" start="23556" end="23577" title="MTV Video Music Award" label="MTV Video Music Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="23579" end="23601" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q152471" start="23623" end="23627" title="List of stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Star"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5638" wikidata="Q133235" url="?curid=5638" title="Combustion">
<text>Combustion, or burning, is a high-temperature exothermic redox chemical reaction between a fuel (the reductant) and an oxidant, usually atmospheric oxygen, that produces oxidized, often gaseous products, in a mixture termed as smoke. Combustion does not always result in fire, because a flame is only visible when substances undergoing combustion vaporize, but when it does, a flame is a characteristic indicator of the reaction. While activation energy must be supplied to initiate combustion (e.g., using a lit match to light a fire), the heat from a flame may provide enough energy to make the reaction self-sustaining. The study of combustion is known as combustion science.

Combustion is often a complicated sequence of elementary radical reactions. Solid fuels, such as wood and coal, first undergo endothermic pyrolysis to produce gaseous fuels whose combustion then supplies the heat required to produce more of them. Combustion is often hot enough that incandescent light in the form of either glowing or a flame is produced. A simple example can be seen in the combustion of hydrogen and oxygen into water vapor, a reaction which is commonly used to fuel rocket engines. This reaction releases 242kJ/mol of heat and reduces the enthalpy accordingly (at constant temperature and pressure):

: &lt;chem&gt;2H_2(g){+}O_2(g)\rightarrow 2H_2O\uparrow&lt;/chem&gt;

Uncatalyzed combustion in air requires relatively high temperatures. Complete combustion is stoichiometric concerning the fuel, where there is no remaining fuel, and ideally, no residual oxidant. Thermodynamically, the chemical equilibrium of combustion in air is overwhelmingly on the side of the products. However, complete combustion is almost impossible to achieve, since the chemical equilibrium is not necessarily reached, or may contain unburnt products such as carbon monoxide, hydrogen and even carbon (soot or ash). Thus, the produced smoke is usually toxic and contains unburned or partially oxidized products. Any combustion at high temperatures in atmospheric air, which is 78 percent nitrogen, will also create small amounts of several nitrogen oxides, commonly referred to as NOx, since the combustion of nitrogen is thermodynamically favored at high, but not low temperatures. Since burning is rarely clean, fuel gas cleaning or catalytic converters may be required by law.

Fires occur naturally, ignited by lightning strikes or by volcanic products. Combustion (fire) was the first controlled chemical reaction discovered by humans, in the form of campfires and bonfires, and continues to be the main method to produce energy for humanity. Usually, the fuel is carbon, hydrocarbons, or more complicated mixtures such as wood that contain partially oxidized hydrocarbons. The thermal energy produced from the combustion of either fossil fuels such as coal or oil, or from renewable fuels such as firewood, is harvested for diverse uses such as cooking, production of electricity or industrial or domestic heating. Combustion is also currently the only reaction used to power rockets. Combustion is also used to destroy (incinerate) waste, both nonhazardous and hazardous.

Oxidants for combustion have high oxidation potential and include atmospheric or pure oxygen, chlorine, fluorine, chlorine trifluoride, nitrous oxide and nitric acid. For instance, hydrogen burns in chlorine to form hydrogen chloride with the liberation of heat and light characteristic of combustion. Although usually not catalyzed, combustion can be catalyzed by platinum or vanadium, as in the contact process.

==Types==

===Complete and incomplete===
====Complete====

In complete combustion, the reactant burns in oxygen and produces a limited number of products. When a hydrocarbon burns in oxygen, the reaction will primarily yield carbon dioxide and water. When elements are burned, the products are primarily the most common oxides. Carbon will yield carbon dioxide, sulfur will yield sulfur dioxide, and iron will yield iron(III) oxide. Nitrogen is not considered to be a combustible substance when oxygen is the oxidant. Still, small amounts of various nitrogen oxides (commonly designated  species) form when the air is the oxidative.

Combustion is not necessarily favorable to the maximum degree of oxidation, and it can be temperature-dependent. For example, sulfur trioxide is not produced quantitatively by the combustion of sulfur. species appear in significant amounts above about , and more is produced at higher temperatures. The amount of is also a function of oxygen excess.

In most industrial applications and in fires, air is the source of oxygen (). In the air, each mole of oxygen is mixed with approximately of nitrogen. Nitrogen does not take part in combustion, but at high temperatures, some nitrogen will be converted to  (mostly , with much smaller amounts of ). On the other hand, when there is insufficient oxygen to combust the fuel completely, some fuel carbon is converted to carbon monoxide, and some of the hydrogens remain unreacted. A complete set of equations for the combustion of a hydrocarbon in the air, therefore, requires an additional calculation for the distribution of oxygen between the carbon and hydrogen in the fuel.

The amount of air required for complete combustion is known as the &quot;theoretical air&quot; or &quot;stoichiometric air&quot;. The amount of air above this value actually needed for optimal combustion is known as the &quot;excess air&quot;, and can vary from 5% for a natural gas boiler, to 40% for anthracite coal, to 300% for a gas turbine.

====Incomplete====

Incomplete combustion will occur when there is not enough oxygen to allow the fuel to react completely to produce carbon dioxide and water. It also happens when the combustion is quenched by a heat sink, such as a solid surface or flame trap. As is the case with complete combustion, water is produced by incomplete combustion; however, carbon and carbon monoxide are produced instead of carbon dioxide.

For most fuels, such as diesel oil, coal, or wood, pyrolysis occurs before combustion. In incomplete combustion, products of pyrolysis remain unburnt and contaminate the smoke with noxious particulate matter and gases. Partially oxidized compounds are also a concern; partial oxidation of ethanol can produce harmful acetaldehyde, and carbon can produce toxic carbon monoxide.

The designs of combustion devices can improve the quality of combustion, such as burners and internal combustion engines. Further improvements are achievable by catalytic after-burning devices (such as catalytic converters) or by the simple partial return of the exhaust gases into the combustion process. Such devices are required by environmental legislation for cars in most countries. They may be necessary to enable large combustion devices, such as thermal power stations, to reach legal emission standards.

The degree of combustion can be measured and analyzed with test equipment. HVAC contractors, firefighters and engineers use combustion analyzers to test the efficiency of a burner during the combustion process. Also, the efficiency of an internal combustion engine can be measured in this way, and some U.S. states and local municipalities use combustion analysis to define and rate the efficiency of vehicles on the road today.

Carbon monoxide is one of the products from incomplete combustion. The formation of carbon monoxide produces less heat than formation of carbon dioxide so complete combustion is greatly preferred especially as carbon monoxide is a poisonous gas. When breathed, carbon monoxide takes the place of oxygen and combines with some of the hemoglobin in the blood, rendering it unable to transport oxygen.

====Problems associated with incomplete combustion====

=====Environmental problems=====
These oxides combine with water and oxygen in the atmosphere, creating nitric acid and sulfuric acids, which return to Earth&#x27;s surface as acid deposition, or &quot;acid rain.&quot; Acid deposition harms aquatic organisms and kills trees. Due to its formation of certain nutrients that are less available to plants such as calcium and phosphorus, it reduces the productivity of the ecosystem and farms. An additional problem associated with nitrogen oxides is that they, along with hydrocarbon pollutants, contribute to the formation of ground level ozone, a major component of smog.

=====Human health problems=====
Breathing carbon monoxide causes headache, dizziness, vomiting, and nausea. If carbon monoxide levels are high enough, humans become unconscious or die. Exposure to moderate and high levels of carbon monoxide over long periods is positively correlated with the risk of heart disease. People who survive severe carbon monoxide poisoning may suffer long-term health problems. Carbon monoxide from the air is absorbed in the lungs which then binds with hemoglobin in human&#x27;s red blood cells. This reduces the capacity of red blood cells that carry oxygen throughout the body.

===Smoldering===
Smoldering is the slow, low-temperature, flameless form of combustion, sustained by the heat evolved when oxygen directly attacks the surface of a condensed-phase fuel. It is a typically incomplete combustion reaction. Solid materials that can sustain a smoldering reaction include coal, cellulose, wood, cotton, tobacco, peat, duff, humus, synthetic foams, charring polymers (including polyurethane foam) and dust. Common examples of smoldering phenomena are the initiation of residential fires on upholstered furniture by weak heat sources (e.g., a cigarette, a short-circuited wire) and the persistent combustion of biomass behind the flaming fronts of wildfires.

===Spontaneous===
Spontaneous combustion is a type of combustion that occurs by self-heating (increase in temperature due to exothermic internal reactions), followed by thermal runaway (self-heating which rapidly accelerates to high temperatures) and finally, ignition.
For example, phosphorus self-ignites at room temperature without the application of heat. Organic materials undergoing bacterial composting can generate enough heat to reach the point of combustion.

===Turbulent===
Combustion resulting in a turbulent flame is the most used for industrial applications (e.g. gas turbines, gasoline engines, etc.) because the turbulence helps the mixing process between the fuel and oxidizer.

===Micro-gravity===
The term &#x27;micro&#x27; gravity refers to a gravitational state that is &#x27;low&#x27; (i.e., &#x27;micro&#x27; in the sense of &#x27;small&#x27; and not necessarily a millionth of Earth&#x27;s normal gravity) such that the influence of buoyancy on physical processes may be considered small relative to other flow processes that would be present at normal gravity. In such an environment, the thermal and flow transport dynamics can behave quite differently than in normal gravity conditions (e.g., a candle&#x27;s flame takes the shape of a sphere.). Microgravity combustion research contributes to the understanding of a wide variety of aspects that are relevant to both the environment of a spacecraft (e.g., fire dynamics relevant to crew safety on the International Space Station) and terrestrial (Earth-based) conditions (e.g., droplet combustion dynamics to assist developing new fuel blends for improved combustion, materials fabrication processes, thermal management of electronic systems, multiphase flow boiling dynamics, and many others).

===Micro-combustion===
Combustion processes that happen in very small volumes are considered micro-combustion. The high surface-to-volume ratio increases specific heat loss. Quenching distance plays a vital role in stabilizing the flame in such combustion chambers.

==Chemical equations==

===Stoichiometric combustion of a hydrocarbon in oxygen===

Generally, the chemical equation for stoichiometric combustion of a hydrocarbon in oxygen is:
:formula_1

For example, the stoichiometric combustion of methane in oxygen is:
:&lt;chem&gt;\underset{methane}{CH4} + 2O2 -&gt; CO2 + 2H2O&lt;/chem&gt;

===Stoichiometric combustion of a hydrocarbon in air===

If the stoichiometric combustion takes place using air as the oxygen source, the nitrogen present in the air (Atmosphere of Earth) can be added to the equation (although it does not react) to show the stoichiometric composition of the fuel in air and the composition of the resultant flue gas. Treating all non-oxygen components in air as nitrogen gives a &#x27;nitrogen&#x27; to oxygen ratio of 3.77, i.e. (100% − %) / % where % is 20.95% vol:
:formula_2
where formula_3.

For example, the stoichiometric combustion of methane in air is:
:formula_4

The stoichiometric composition of methane in air is 1 / (1 + 2 + 7.54) = 9.49% vol.

The stoichiometric combustion reaction for CHO in air:
:formula_5

The stoichiometric combustion reaction for CHOS:

:formula_6

The stoichiometric combustion reaction for CHONS:

:formula_7

The stoichiometric combustion reaction for CHOF:

:formula_8

===Trace combustion products===

Various other substances begin to appear in significant amounts in combustion products when the flame temperature is above about . When excess air is used, nitrogen may oxidize to and, to a much lesser extent, to . forms by disproportionation of , and and form by disproportionation of .

For example, when of propane is burned with of air (120% of the stoichiometric amount), the combustion products contain 3.3% . At , the equilibrium combustion products contain 0.03% and 0.002% . At , the combustion products contain 0.17% , 0.05% , 0.01% , and 0.004% .

Diesel engines are run with an excess of oxygen to combust small particles that tend to form with only a stoichiometric amount of oxygen, necessarily producing nitrogen oxide emissions. Both the United States and European Union enforce limits to vehicle nitrogen oxide emissions, which necessitate the use of special catalytic converters or treatment of the exhaust with urea (see Diesel exhaust fluid).

===Incomplete combustion of a hydrocarbon in oxygen===

The incomplete (partial) combustion of a hydrocarbon with oxygen produces a gas mixture containing mainly , , , and . Such gas mixtures are commonly prepared for use as protective atmospheres for the heat-treatment of metals and for gas carburizing. The general reaction equation for incomplete combustion of one mole of a hydrocarbon in oxygen is:

: &lt;chem&gt;\underset{fuel}{C_\mathit{x} H_\mathit{y}} + \underset{oxygen}{\mathit{z} O2} -&gt; \underset{carbon \ dioxide}{\mathit{a}CO2} + \underset{carbon\ monoxide}{\mathit{b}CO} + \underset{water}{\mathit{c}H2O} + \underset{hydrogen}{\mathit{d}H2}&lt;/chem&gt;

When &quot;z&quot; falls below roughly 50% of the stoichiometric value,  can become an important combustion product; when &quot;z&quot; falls below roughly 35% of the stoichiometric value, elemental carbon may become stable.

The products of incomplete combustion can be calculated with the aid of a material balance, together with the assumption that the combustion products reach equilibrium. For example, in the combustion of one mole of propane () with four moles of , seven moles of combustion gas are formed, and &quot;z&quot; is 80% of the stoichiometric value. The three elemental balance equations are:
* Carbon: formula_9
* Hydrogen: formula_10
* Oxygen: formula_11

These three equations are insufficient in themselves to calculate the combustion gas composition.
However, at the equilibrium position, the water-gas shift reaction gives another equation:

: &lt;chem&gt;CO + H2O -&gt; CO2 + H2&lt;/chem&gt;; formula_12

For example, at the value of &quot;K&quot; is 0.728. Solving, the combustion gas consists of 42.4% , 29.0% , 14.7% , and 13.9% . Carbon becomes a stable phase at and pressure when z is less than 30% of the stoichiometric value, at which point the combustion products contain more than 98% and and about 0.5% .

Substances or materials which undergo combustion are called fuels. The most common examples are natural gas, propane, kerosene, diesel, petrol, charcoal, coal, wood, etc.

===Liquid fuels===

Combustion of a liquid fuel in an oxidizing atmosphere actually happens in the gas phase. It is the vapor that burns, not the liquid. Therefore, a liquid will normally catch fire only above a certain temperature: its flash point. The flash point of liquid fuel is the lowest temperature at which it can form an ignitable mix with air. It is the minimum temperature at which there is enough evaporated fuel in the air to start combustion.

=== Gaseous fuels ===
Combustion of gaseous fuels may occur through one of four distinctive types of burning: diffusion flame, premixed flame, autoignitive reaction front, or as a detonation. The type of burning that actually occurs depends on the degree to which the fuel and oxidizer are mixed prior to heating: for example, a diffusion flame is formed if the fuel and oxidizer are separated initially, whereas a premixed flame is formed otherwise. Similarly, the type of burning also depends on the pressure: a detonation, for example, is an autoignitive reaction front coupled to a strong shock wave giving it its characteristic high-pressure peak and high detonation velocity.

===Solid fuels===
The act of combustion consists of three relatively distinct but overlapping phases:
* Preheating phase, when the unburned fuel is heated up to its flash point and then fire point. Flammable gases start being evolved in a process similar to dry distillation.
* Distillation phase or gaseous phase, when the mix of evolved flammable gases with oxygen is ignited. Energy is produced in the form of heat and light. Flames are often visible. Heat transfer from the combustion to the solid maintains the evolution of flammable vapours.
* Charcoal phase or solid phase, when the output of flammable gases from the material is too low for the persistent presence of flame and the charred fuel does not burn rapidly and just glows and later only smoulders.

==Combustion management==
Efficient process heating requires recovery of the largest possible part of a fuel&#x27;s heat of combustion into the material being processed. There are many avenues of loss in the operation of a heating process. Typically, the dominant loss is sensible heat leaving with the offgas (i.e., the flue gas). The temperature and quantity of offgas indicates its heat content (enthalpy), so keeping its quantity low minimizes heat loss.

In a perfect furnace, the combustion air flow would be matched to the fuel flow to give each fuel molecule the exact amount of oxygen needed to cause complete combustion. However, in the real world, combustion does not proceed in a perfect manner. Unburned fuel (usually and ) discharged from the system represents a heating value loss (as well as a safety hazard). Since combustibles are undesirable in the offgas, while the presence of unreacted oxygen there presents minimal safety and environmental concerns, the first principle of combustion management is to provide more oxygen than is theoretically needed to ensure that all the fuel burns. For methane () combustion, for example, slightly more than two molecules of oxygen are required.

The second principle of combustion management, however, is to not use too much oxygen. The correct amount of oxygen requires three types of measurement: first, active control of air and fuel flow; second, offgas oxygen measurement; and third, measurement of offgas combustibles. For each heating process, there exists an optimum condition of minimal offgas heat loss with acceptable levels of combustibles concentration. Minimizing excess oxygen pays an additional benefit: for a given offgas temperature, the NOx level is lowest when excess oxygen is kept lowest.

Adherence to these two principles is furthered by making material and heat balances on the combustion process. The material balance directly relates the air/fuel ratio to the percentage of in the combustion gas. The heat balance relates the heat available for the charge to the overall net heat produced by fuel combustion. Additional material and heat balances can be made to quantify the thermal advantage from preheating the combustion air, or enriching it in oxygen.

==Reaction mechanism==

Combustion in oxygen is a chain reaction in which many distinct radical intermediates participate. The high energy required for initiation is explained by the unusual structure of the dioxygen molecule. The lowest-energy configuration of the dioxygen molecule is a stable, relatively unreactive diradical in a triplet spin state. Bonding can be described with three bonding electron pairs and two antibonding electrons, with spins aligned, such that the molecule has nonzero total angular momentum. Most fuels, on the other hand, are in a singlet state, with paired spins and zero total angular momentum. Interaction between the two is quantum mechanically a &quot;forbidden transition&quot;, i.e. possible with a very low probability. To initiate combustion, energy is required to force dioxygen into a spin-paired state, or singlet oxygen. This intermediate is extremely reactive. The energy is supplied as heat, and the reaction then produces additional heat, which allows it to continue.

Combustion of hydrocarbons is thought to be initiated by hydrogen atom abstraction (not proton abstraction) from the fuel to oxygen, to give a hydroperoxide radical (HOO). This reacts further to give hydroperoxides, which break up to give hydroxyl radicals. There are a great variety of these processes that produce fuel radicals and oxidizing radicals. Oxidizing species include singlet oxygen, hydroxyl, monatomic oxygen, and hydroperoxyl. Such intermediates are short-lived and cannot be isolated. However, non-radical intermediates are stable and are produced in incomplete combustion. An example is acetaldehyde produced in the combustion of ethanol. An intermediate in the combustion of carbon and hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, is of special importance because it is a poisonous gas, but also economically useful for the production of syngas.

Solid and heavy liquid fuels also undergo a great number of pyrolysis reactions that give more easily oxidized, gaseous fuels. These reactions are endothermic and require constant energy input from the ongoing combustion reactions. A lack of oxygen or other improperly designed conditions result in these noxious and carcinogenic pyrolysis products being emitted as thick, black smoke.

The rate of combustion is the amount of a material that undergoes combustion over a period of time. It can be expressed in grams per second (g/s) or kilograms per second (kg/s).

Detailed descriptions of combustion processes, from the chemical kinetics perspective, require the formulation of large and intricate webs of elementary reactions. For instance, combustion of hydrocarbon fuels typically involve hundreds of chemical species reacting according to thousands of reactions.

The inclusion of such mechanisms within computational flow solvers still represents a pretty challenging task mainly in two aspects. First, the number of degrees of freedom (proportional to the number of chemical species) can be dramatically large; second, the source term due to reactions introduces a disparate number of time scales which makes the whole dynamical system stiff. As a result, the direct numerical simulation of turbulent reactive flows with heavy fuels soon becomes intractable even for modern supercomputers.

Therefore, a plethora of methodologies have been devised for reducing the complexity of combustion mechanisms without resorting to high detail levels. Examples are provided by:
* The Relaxation Redistribution Method (RRM)
* The Intrinsic Low-Dimensional Manifold (ILDM) approach and further developments
* The invariant-constrained equilibrium edge preimage curve method.
* A few variational approaches
* The Computational Singular perturbation (CSP) method and further developments.
* The Rate Controlled Constrained Equilibrium (RCCE) and Quasi Equilibrium Manifold (QEM) approach.
* The G-Scheme.
* The Method of Invariant Grids (MIG).

===Kinetic modelling===

The kinetic modelling may be explored for insight into the reaction mechanisms of thermal decomposition in the combustion of different materials by using for instance Thermogravimetric analysis.

==Temperature==

Assuming perfect combustion conditions, such as complete combustion under adiabatic conditions (i.e., no heat loss or gain), the adiabatic combustion temperature can be determined. The formula that yields this temperature is based on the first law of thermodynamics and takes note of the fact that the heat of combustion is used entirely for heating the fuel, the combustion air or oxygen, and the combustion product gases (commonly referred to as the &quot;flue gas&quot;).

In the case of fossil fuels burnt in air, the combustion temperature depends on all of the following:
* the heating value;
* the stoichiometric air to fuel ratio formula_13;
* the specific heat capacity of fuel and air;
* the air and fuel inlet temperatures.

The adiabatic combustion temperature (also known as the &quot;adiabatic flame temperature&quot;) increases for higher heating values and inlet air and fuel temperatures and for stoichiometric air ratios approaching one.

Most commonly, the adiabatic combustion temperatures for coals are around (for inlet air and fuel at ambient temperatures and for formula_14), around for oil and for natural gas.

In industrial fired heaters, power station steam generators, and large gas-fired turbines, the more common way of expressing the usage of more than the stoichiometric combustion air is &quot;percent excess combustion air&quot;. For example, excess combustion air of 15 percent means that 15 percent more than the required stoichiometric air is being used.

==Instabilities==
Combustion instabilities are typically violent pressure oscillations in a combustion chamber. These pressure oscillations can be as high as 180dB, and long-term exposure to these cyclic pressure and thermal loads reduces the life of engine components. In rockets, such as the F1 used in the Saturn V program, instabilities led to massive damage to the combustion chamber and surrounding components. This problem was solved by re-designing the fuel injector. In liquid jet engines, the droplet size and distribution can be used to attenuate the instabilities. Combustion instabilities are a major concern in ground-based gas turbine engines because of emissions. The tendency is to run lean, an equivalence ratio less than 1, to reduce the combustion temperature and thus reduce the emissions; however, running the combustion lean makes it very susceptible to combustion instability.

The Rayleigh Criterion is the basis for analysis of thermoacoustic combustion instability and is evaluated using the Rayleigh Index over one cycle of instability

formula_15

where q&#x27; is the heat release rate perturbation and p&#x27; is the pressure fluctuation.
When the heat release oscillations are in phase with the pressure oscillations, the Rayleigh Index is positive and the magnitude of the thermoacoustic instability is maximised. On the other hand, if the Rayleigh Index is negative, then thermoacoustic damping occurs. The Rayleigh Criterion implies that thermoacoustic instability can be optimally controlled by having heat release oscillations 180 degrees out of phase with pressure oscillations at the same frequency. This minimizes the Rayleigh Index.

==See also==
Related concepts
* Air–fuel ratio
* Autoignition temperature
* Chemical looping combustion
* Deflagration
* Detonation
* Dust explosion
* Explosion
* Fire
* Flame
* Global warming
* Heterogeneous combustion
* Markstein number
* Phlogiston theory (historical)
* Spontaneous combustion

Machines and equipment
* Boiler
* Bunsen burner
* External combustion engine
* Furnace
* Gas turbine
* Internal combustion engine
* Rocket engine

Scientific and engineering societies
* International Flame Research Foundation
* The Combustion Institute

Other
* Combustible dust
* Biomass burning
* List of light sources
* Open burning of waste
* Stubble burning
== References ==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="0" end="10" title="Combustion" label="Combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="15" end="22" title="Combustion" label="burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="46" end="56" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="57" end="62" title="redox" label="redox"/>
<link wikidata="Q36534" start="63" end="80" title="chemical reaction" label="chemical reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="91" end="95" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="119" end="126" title="oxidant" label="oxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="148" end="154" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130768" start="227" end="232" title="smoke" label="smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="271" end="275" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q235544" start="287" end="292" title="flame" label="flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q190474" start="436" end="453" title="activation energy" label="activation energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37507" start="513" end="518" title="match" label="match"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="659" end="677" title="Combustion" label="combustion science"/>
<link wikidata="Q845117" start="726" end="736" title="elementary reaction" label="elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="737" end="754" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radical reactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408429" start="756" end="766" title="Solid fuel" label="Solid fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="777" end="781" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="786" end="790" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12571883" start="806" end="817" title="endothermic" label="endothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="818" end="827" title="pyrolysis" label="pyrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q192593" start="963" end="975" title="incandescence" label="incandescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="976" end="981" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q902760" start="1004" end="1011" title="Smouldering" label="glowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q235544" start="1017" end="1022" title="flame" label="flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1086" end="1094" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="1099" end="1105" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="1111" end="1116" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q255722" start="1117" end="1122" title="vapor" label="vapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="1166" end="1179" title="rocket engine" label="rocket engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13035094" start="1208" end="1214" title="Joule per mole" label="kJ/mol"/>
<link wikidata="Q161064" start="1239" end="1247" title="enthalpy" label="enthalpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213185" start="1463" end="1477" title="stoichiometric" label="stoichiometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="1590" end="1610" title="chemical equilibrium" label="chemical equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="1840" end="1855" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1857" end="1865" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="1875" end="1881" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13174856" start="1883" end="1887" title="soot" label="soot"/>
<link wikidata="Q130768" start="1916" end="1921" title="smoke" label="smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="2032" end="2043" title="Atmosphere" label="atmospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="2044" end="2047" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="2069" end="2077" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="2121" end="2136" title="nitrogen oxides" label="nitrogen oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="2162" end="2165" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="2316" end="2335" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="2362" end="2366" title="Fire" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q33741" start="2396" end="2405" title="lightning" label="lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="2420" end="2428" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="2451" end="2455" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q329981" start="2537" end="2545" title="campfire" label="campfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="2551" end="2558" title="bonfire" label="bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="2650" end="2656" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="2658" end="2669" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="2709" end="2713" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="2818" end="2829" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="2839" end="2843" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="2847" end="2850" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313121" start="2860" end="2874" title="renewable fuel" label="renewable fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35808" start="2884" end="2892" title="firewood" label="firewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="2932" end="2939" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="2955" end="2966" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41291" start="3063" end="3069" title="rocket" label="rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q622772" start="3108" end="3118" title="incineration" label="incinerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="3247" end="3253" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="3255" end="3263" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="3265" end="3273" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q411305" start="3275" end="3295" title="chlorine trifluoride" label="chlorine trifluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q905750" start="3297" end="3310" title="nitrous oxide" label="nitrous oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="3315" end="3326" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3342" end="3350" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="3360" end="3368" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="3377" end="3394" title="hydrogen chloride" label="hydrogen chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q880" start="3526" end="3534" title="platinum" label="platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q722" start="3538" end="3546" title="vanadium" label="vanadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q908924" start="3558" end="3573" title="contact process" label="contact process"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="3738" end="3749" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="3922" end="3936" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282" start="3956" end="3970" title="sulfur dioxide" label="sulfur dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="3992" end="4007" title="iron(III) oxide" label="iron(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="4085" end="4092" title="Oxidizing agent" label="oxidant"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="4163" end="4163" title="NOx" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q242715" start="4336" end="4351" title="sulfur trioxide" label="sulfur trioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="4600" end="4604" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="4607" end="4610" title="air" label="air"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4816" end="4816" title="NOx#Thermal" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q207843" start="4825" end="4825" title="Nitric oxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="4856" end="4856" title="Nitrogen dioxide" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="4977" end="4992" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="5539" end="5549" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="5570" end="5581" title="gas turbine" label="gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="5941" end="5947" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="5952" end="5967" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="6060" end="6069" title="pyrolysis" label="pyrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="6326" end="6338" title="acetaldehyde" label="acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405893" start="6468" end="6475" title="Oil burner" label="burners"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="6480" end="6507" title="internal combustion engines" label="internal combustion engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="6548" end="6557" title="catalytic" label="catalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="6589" end="6608" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q320173" start="6650" end="6661" title="exhaust gas" label="exhaust gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="6722" end="6747" title="environmental legislation" label="environmental legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200297" start="6842" end="6863" title="thermal power station" label="thermal power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="6881" end="6899" title="emission standards" label="emission standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798773" start="6977" end="6981" title="HVAC" label="HVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q107711" start="6995" end="7007" title="firefighters" label="firefighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="7012" end="7021" title="engineers" label="engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042317" start="7059" end="7069" title="Fuel efficiency" label="efficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="7376" end="7397" title="incomplete combustion" label="incomplete combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q283" start="7847" end="7852" title="water" label="water"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="7857" end="7863" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83320" start="7892" end="7903" title="nitric acid" label="nitric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="7908" end="7922" title="sulfuric acids" label="sulfuric acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="8266" end="8281" title="nitrogen oxides" label="nitrogen oxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="8307" end="8318" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298060" start="8362" end="8380" title="ground level ozone" label="ground level ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="8452" end="8467" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="8752" end="8777" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="8892" end="8902" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q902760" start="9038" end="9048" title="Smoldering" label="Smoldering"/>
<link wikidata="Q80294" start="9326" end="9335" title="cellulose" label="cellulose"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="9337" end="9341" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="9343" end="9349" title="cotton" label="cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566" start="9351" end="9358" title="tobacco" label="tobacco"/>
<link wikidata="Q184624" start="9360" end="9364" title="peat" label="peat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512035" start="9366" end="9370" title="Plant litter" label="duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q172645" start="9372" end="9377" title="humus" label="humus"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="9405" end="9413" title="polymers" label="polymers"/>
<link wikidata="Q90733311" start="9425" end="9442" title="polyurethane foam" label="polyurethane foam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165632" start="9448" end="9452" title="dust" label="dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123578" start="9537" end="9558" title="upholstered furniture" label="upholstered furniture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9643" end="9664" title="combustion of biomass" label="combustion of biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="9694" end="9702" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q369012" start="9724" end="9746" title="Spontaneous combustion" label="Spontaneous combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661" start="9831" end="9841" title="exothermic" label="exothermic"/>
<link wikidata="Q212254" start="10105" end="10115" title="composting" label="composting"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="10285" end="10296" title="gas turbine" label="gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q502048" start="10299" end="10314" title="gasoline engine" label="gasoline engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="10392" end="10400" title="oxidizer" label="oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="10664" end="10672" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10833" end="10856" title="flow transport dynamics" label="flow transport dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12888135" start="10929" end="10935" title="candle" label="candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="11185" end="11212" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11352" end="11383" title="materials fabrication processes" label="materials fabrication processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15477170" start="11385" end="11425" title="Thermal management (electronics)" label="thermal management of electronic systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839067" start="11573" end="11589" title="micro-combustion" label="micro-combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q871335" start="11654" end="11663" title="Quenching" label="Quenching"/>
<link wikidata="Q909434" start="11725" end="11743" title="combustion chamber" label="combustion chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q182527" start="11846" end="11863" title="chemical equation" label="chemical equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q213185" start="11868" end="11882" title="Stoichiometry" label="stoichiometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="11899" end="11910" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="11983" end="11990" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="12217" end="12225" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="12246" end="12265" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="Atmosphere of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q909060" start="13155" end="13172" title="Adiabatic flame temperature" label="flame temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q664231" start="13283" end="13301" title="disproportionation" label="disproportionation"/>
<link wikidata="Q131189" start="13369" end="13376" title="propane" label="propane"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="13484" end="13495" title="Chemical equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="13618" end="13632" title="Diesel engines" label="Diesel engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621273" start="13683" end="13692" title="Particle" label="particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="13778" end="13792" title="NOx" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1745938" start="13846" end="13860" title="Emission standard" label="enforce limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="13935" end="13954" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="13989" end="13993" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q345372" start="13999" end="14019" title="Diesel exhaust fluid" label="Diesel exhaust fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q43648" start="14120" end="14131" title="hydrocarbon" label="hydrocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458918" start="14279" end="14293" title="Heat treating" label="heat-treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q759800" start="14312" end="14327" title="Carburizing" label="gas carburizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="14392" end="14396" title="Mole (unit)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="14770" end="14770" title="Methane" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="14897" end="14903" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276889" start="14998" end="15014" title="material balance" label="material balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q189520" start="15080" end="15091" title="Chemical equilibrium" label="equilibrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q41509" start="15131" end="15135" title="Mole (unit)" label="mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466348" start="15515" end="15539" title="water-gas shift reaction" label="water-gas shift reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="16000" end="16004" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="16058" end="16066" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q38423" start="16068" end="16074" title="Diesel fuel" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386534" start="16148" end="16159" title="liquid fuel" label="liquid fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q194376" start="16349" end="16360" title="flash point" label="flash point"/>
<link wikidata="Q909245" start="16681" end="16696" title="diffusion flame" label="diffusion flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4563566" start="16698" end="16712" title="premixed flame" label="premixed flame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16714" end="16741" title="autoignitive reaction front" label="autoignitive reaction front"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="16751" end="16761" title="detonation" label="detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="16839" end="16843" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187689" start="16848" end="16856" title="oxidizer" label="oxidizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q908624" start="17232" end="17251" title="detonation velocity" label="detonation velocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q42501" start="17394" end="17398" title="fuel" label="fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q941667" start="17440" end="17450" title="fire point" label="fire point"/>
<link wikidata="Q185662" start="17512" end="17528" title="dry distillation" label="dry distillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q235544" start="17683" end="17688" title="Flame" label="Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086659" start="17944" end="17951" title="charring" label="charred"/>
<link wikidata="Q902760" start="18009" end="18018" title="Smouldering" label="smoulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136626" start="18057" end="18072" title="Industrial furnace" label="process heating"/>
<link wikidata="Q902126" start="18137" end="18155" title="heat of combustion" label="heat of combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480581" start="18293" end="18306" title="sensible heat" label="sensible heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q320173" start="18324" end="18330" title="Exhaust gas" label="offgas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556360" start="18342" end="18350" title="flue gas" label="flue gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q161064" start="18420" end="18428" title="enthalpy" label="enthalpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962970" start="19737" end="19740" title="NOx" label="NOx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276889" start="19908" end="19924" title="material balance" label="material balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q178895" start="19946" end="19960" title="air/fuel ratio" label="air/fuel ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160121" start="20315" end="20329" title="chain reaction" label="chain reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="20353" end="20360" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q428653" start="20473" end="20481" title="dioxygen" label="dioxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497595" start="20599" end="20617" title="triplet oxygen" label="triplet spin state"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="20714" end="20719" title="Spin (physics)" label="spins"/>
<link wikidata="Q932483" start="20954" end="20974" title="forbidden transition" label="forbidden transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413613" start="21115" end="21129" title="singlet oxygen" label="singlet oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q44432" start="21198" end="21202" title="heat" label="heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q427071" start="21521" end="21537" title="hydroxyl radical" label="hydroxyl radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088474" start="21710" end="21722" title="hydroperoxyl" label="hydroperoxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q61457" start="21886" end="21898" title="acetaldehyde" label="acetaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="21929" end="21936" title="ethanol" label="ethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="22000" end="22015" title="carbon monoxide" label="carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="22058" end="22071" title="Poison" label="poisonous gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273339" start="22124" end="22130" title="syngas" label="syngas"/>
<link wikidata="Q176848" start="22193" end="22202" title="pyrolysis" label="pyrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="23360" end="23376" title="dynamical system" label="dynamical system"/>
<link wikidata="Q902806" start="24364" end="24390" title="Thermogravimetric analysis" label="Thermogravimetric analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q182453" start="24484" end="24493" title="adiabatic" label="adiabatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179380" start="24648" end="24675" title="first law of thermodynamics" label="first law of thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q902126" start="24712" end="24730" title="heat of combustion" label="heat of combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556360" start="24868" end="24876" title="flue gas" label="flue gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="24901" end="24913" title="fossil fuels" label="fossil fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q902126" start="24994" end="25007" title="Heat of combustion" label="heating value"/>
<link wikidata="Q178895" start="25015" end="25047" title="air-fuel ratio" label="stoichiometric air to fuel ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q487756" start="25066" end="25088" title="specific heat capacity" label="specific heat capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q909060" start="25208" end="25235" title="adiabatic flame temperature" label="adiabatic flame temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="25533" end="25544" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136626" start="25561" end="25574" title="Industrial furnace" label="fired heaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q159719" start="25576" end="25589" title="power station" label="power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605365" start="25590" end="25605" title="steam generator" label="steam generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="25618" end="25636" title="gas turbine" label="gas-fired turbines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437170" start="26810" end="26828" title="Thermoacoustic hot air engine" label="Rayleigh Criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178895" start="27611" end="27625" title="Air–fuel ratio" label="Air–fuel ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q558378" start="27628" end="27652" title="Autoignition temperature" label="Autoignition temperature"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985117" start="27655" end="27682" title="Chemical looping combustion" label="Chemical looping combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182714" start="27685" end="27697" title="Deflagration" label="Deflagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q786054" start="27700" end="27710" title="Detonation" label="Detonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296331" start="27713" end="27727" title="Dust explosion" label="Dust explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q179057" start="27730" end="27739" title="Explosion" label="Explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="27742" end="27746" title="Fire" label="Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q235544" start="27749" end="27754" title="Flame" label="Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="27757" end="27771" title="Global warming" label="Global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q18207750" start="27774" end="27798" title="Heterogeneous combustion" label="Heterogeneous combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900928" start="27801" end="27817" title="Markstein number" label="Markstein number"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999319" start="27820" end="27837" title="Phlogiston theory" label="Phlogiston theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q369012" start="27853" end="27875" title="Spontaneous combustion" label="Spontaneous combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195517" start="27902" end="27908" title="Boiler" label="Boiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q221262" start="27911" end="27924" title="Bunsen burner" label="Bunsen burner"/>
<link wikidata="Q843537" start="27927" end="27953" title="External combustion engine" label="External combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10715538" start="27956" end="27963" title="Furnace (house heating)" label="Furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q193470" start="27966" end="27977" title="Gas turbine" label="Gas turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="27980" end="28006" title="Internal combustion engine" label="Internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q335225" start="28009" end="28022" title="Rocket engine" label="Rocket engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15261790" start="28063" end="28102" title="International Flame Research Foundation" label="International Flame Research Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726901" start="28105" end="28129" title="The Combustion Institute" label="The Combustion Institute"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28139" end="28155" title="Combustible dust" label="Combustible dust"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28158" end="28173" title="Combustion of biomass" label="Biomass burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q65037198" start="28176" end="28197" title="List of light sources" label="List of light sources"/>
<link wikidata="Q120737826" start="28200" end="28221" title="Open burning of waste" label="Open burning of waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q13461160" start="28224" end="28239" title="Stubble burning" label="Stubble burning"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5639" wikidata="Q8209" url="?curid=5639" title="Cyrillic script">
<text>The Cyrillic script ( ) is a writing system used for various languages across Eurasia. It is the designated national script in various Slavic, Turkic, Mongolic, Uralic, Caucasian and Iranic-speaking countries in Southeastern Europe, Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, Central Asia, North Asia, and East Asia, and used by many other minority languages.

, around 250 million people in Eurasia use Cyrillic as the official script for their national languages, with Russia accounting for about half of them. With the accession of Bulgaria to the European Union on 1 January 2007, Cyrillic became the third official script of the European Union, following the Latin and Greek alphabets.

The Early Cyrillic alphabet was developed during the 9th century AD at the Preslav Literary School in the First Bulgarian Empire during the reign of Tsar Simeon I the Great, probably by the disciples of the two Byzantine brothers Cyril and Methodius, who had previously created the Glagolitic script. Among them were Clement of Ohrid, Naum of Preslav, Constantine of Preslav, Joan Ekzarh, Chernorizets Hrabar, Angelar, Sava and other scholars. The script is named in honor of Saint Cyril.

==Etymology==
Since the script was conceived and popularised by the followers of Cyril and Methodius in Bulgaria, rather than by Cyril and Methodius themselves, its name denotes homage rather than authorship.

==History==

The Cyrillic script was created during the First Bulgarian Empire. Modern scholars believe that the Early Cyrillic alphabet was created at the Preslav Literary School, the most important early literary and cultural center of the First Bulgarian Empire and of all Slavs:
Unlike the Churchmen in Ohrid, Preslav scholars were much more dependent upon Greek models and quickly abandoned the Glagolitic scripts in favor of an adaptation of the Greek uncial to the needs of Slavic, which is now known as the Cyrillic alphabet.

A number of prominent Bulgarian writers and scholars worked at the school, including Naum of Preslav until 893; Constantine of Preslav; Joan Ekzarh (also transcr. John the Exarch); and Chernorizets Hrabar, among others. The school was also a center of translation, mostly of Byzantine authors. The Cyrillic script is derived from the Greek uncial script letters, augmented by ligatures and consonants from the older Glagolitic alphabet for sounds not found in Greek. Glagolitic and Cyrillic were formalized by the Byzantine Saints Cyril and Methodius and their Bulgarian disciples, such as Saints Naum, Clement, Angelar, and Sava. They spread and taught Christianity in the whole of Bulgaria. Paul Cubberley posits that although Cyril may have codified and expanded Glagolitic, it was his students in the First Bulgarian Empire under Tsar Simeon the Great that developed Cyrillic from the Greek letters in the 890s as a more suitable script for church books.

Cyrillic spread among other Slavic peoples, as well as among non-Slavic Romanians. The earliest datable Cyrillic inscriptions have been found in the area of Preslav, in the medieval city itself and at nearby Patleina Monastery, both in present-day Shumen Province, as well as in the Ravna Monastery and in the Varna Monastery. The new script became the basis of alphabets used in various languages in Orthodox Church-dominated Eastern Europe, both Slavic and non-Slavic languages (such as Romanian, until the 1860s). For centuries, Cyrillic was also used by Catholic and Muslim Slavs.

Cyrillic and Glagolitic were used for the Church Slavonic language, especially the Old Church Slavonic variant. Hence expressions such as &quot;И is the tenth Cyrillic letter&quot; typically refer to the order of the Church Slavonic alphabet; not every Cyrillic alphabet uses every letter available in the script. The Cyrillic script came to dominate Glagolitic in the 12th century.

The literature produced in Old Church Slavonic soon spread north from Bulgaria and became the lingua franca of the Balkans and Eastern Europe.

Cyrillic in modern-day Bosnia is an extinct and disputed variant of the Cyrillic alphabet that originated in medieval period. Paleographers consider the earliest features of script had likely begun to appear between the 10th or 11th century, with the Humac tablet to be the first such document using this type of script and is believed to date from this period. It was used continuously until the 18th century, with sporadic usage extending into the 20th century.

With the orthographic reform of Saint Evtimiy of Tarnovo and other prominent representatives of the Tarnovo Literary School of the 14th and 15th centuries, such as Gregory Tsamblak and Constantine of Kostenets, the school influenced Russian, Serbian, Wallachian and Moldavian medieval culture. This is known in Russia as the second South-Slavic influence.

In 170810, the Cyrillic script used in Russia was heavily reformed by Peter the Great, who had recently returned from his Grand Embassy in Western Europe. The new letterforms, called the Civil script, became closer to those of the Latin alphabet; several archaic letters were abolished and several new letters were introduced designed by Peter himself. Letters became distinguished between upper and lower case. West European typography culture was also adopted. The pre-reform letterforms, called &#x27;Полуустав&#x27;, were notably retained in Church Slavonic and are sometimes used in Russian even today, especially if one wants to give a text a &#x27;Slavic&#x27; or &#x27;archaic&#x27; feel.

The alphabet used for the modern Church Slavonic language in Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic rites still resembles early Cyrillic. However, over the course of the following millennium, Cyrillic adapted to changes in spoken language, developed regional variations to suit the features of national languages, and was subjected to academic reform and political decrees. A notable example of such linguistic reform can be attributed to Vuk Stefanović Karadžić, who updated the Serbian Cyrillic alphabet by removing certain graphemes no longer represented in the vernacular and introducing graphemes specific to Serbian (i.e. Љ Њ Ђ Ћ Џ Ј), distancing it from the Church Slavonic alphabet in use prior to the reform. Today, many languages in the Balkans, Eastern Europe, and northern Eurasia are written in Cyrillic alphabets.

==Letters==
Cyrillic script spread throughout the East Slavic and some South Slavic territories, being adopted for writing local languages, such as Old East Slavic. Its adaptation to local languages produced a number of Cyrillic alphabets, discussed below.

=== Majuscule and minuscule ===
Capital and lowercase letters were not distinguished in old manuscripts.

Yeri () was originally a ligature of Yer and I ( + = ). Iotation was indicated by ligatures formed with the letter І: (not an ancestor of modern Ya, Я, which is derived from ), , (ligature of and ), , . Sometimes different letters were used interchangeably, for example = = , as were typographical variants like = . There were also commonly used ligatures like = .

=== Numbers ===
The letters also had numeric values, based not on Cyrillic alphabetical order, but inherited from the letters&#x27; Greek ancestors.

===Computer support===
Computer fonts for early Cyrillic alphabets are not routinely provided. Many of the letterforms differ from those of modern Cyrillic, varied a great deal between manuscripts, and changed over time. In accordance with Unicode policy, the standard does not include letterform variations or ligatures found in manuscript sources unless they can be shown to conform to the Unicode definition of a character: this aspect is the responsibility of the typeface designer.

The Unicode 5.1 standard, released on 4 April 2008, greatly improved computer support for the early Cyrillic and the modern Church Slavonic language. In Microsoft Windows, the Segoe UI user interface font is notable for having complete support for the archaic Cyrillic letters since Windows 8.

===Currency signs===
Some currency signs have derived from Cyrillic letters:
* The Ukrainian hryvnia sign (₴) is from the cursive minuscule Ukrainian Cyrillic letter He (&quot;г&quot;).
* The Russian ruble sign (₽) from the majuscule Р.
* The Kyrgyzstani som sign (⃀) from the majuscule С (es) 
* The Kazakhstani tenge sign (₸) from Т
* The Mongolian tögrög sign (₮) from Т

==Letterforms and type design==
The development of Cyrillic letter forms passed directly from the medieval stage to the late Baroque, without a Renaissance phase as in Western Europe. Late Medieval Cyrillic letters (categorized as vyaz&#x27; and still found on many icon inscriptions today) show a marked tendency to be very tall and narrow, with strokes often shared between adjacent letters.

Peter the Great, Tsar of Russia, mandated the use of westernized letter forms (ru) in the early 18th century. Over time, these were largely adopted in the other languages that use the script. Thus, unlike the majority of modern Greek typefaces that retained their own set of design principles for lower-case letters (such as the placement of serifs, the shapes of stroke ends, and stroke-thickness rules, although Greek capital letters do use Latin design principles), modern Cyrillic types are much the same as modern Latin types of the same typeface family. The development of some Cyrillic computer fonts from Latin ones has also contributed to a visual Latinization of Cyrillic type.

=== Lowercase forms ===

Cyrillic uppercase and lowercase letter forms are not as differentiated as in Latin typography. Upright Cyrillic lowercase letters are essentially small capitals (with exceptions: Cyrillic , , , , , and adopted Latin lowercase shapes, lowercase is typically based on from Latin typefaces, lowercase , and are traditional handwritten forms), although a good-quality Cyrillic typeface will still include separate small-caps glyphs.

Cyrillic typefaces, as well as Latin ones, have roman and italic forms (practically all popular modern computer fonts include parallel sets of Latin and Cyrillic letters, where many glyphs, uppercase as well as lowercase, are shared by both). However, the native typeface terminology in most Slavic languages (for example, in Russian) does not use the words &quot;roman&quot; and &quot;italic&quot; in this sense. Instead, the nomenclature follows German naming patterns:
* Roman type is called &#x27; (&quot;upright type&quot;)compare with &#x27; (&quot;regular type&quot;) in German
* Italic type is called &#x27; (&quot;cursive&quot;) or &#x27; (&quot;cursive type&quot;)from the German word &quot;&quot;, meaning italic typefaces and not cursive writing
* Cursive handwriting is &#x27; (&quot;handwritten type&quot;)in German: &#x27; or &quot;, both meaning literally &#x27;running type&#x27;
* A (mechanically) sloped oblique type of sans-serif faces is &quot; (&quot;sloped&quot; or &quot;slanted type&quot;).
* A boldfaced type is called &quot;&quot; (&quot;semi-bold type&quot;), because there existed fully boldfaced shapes that have been out of use since the beginning of the 20th century.

=== Italic and cursive forms ===
Similarly to Latin typefaces, italic and cursive forms of many Cyrillic letters (typically lowercase; uppercase only for handwritten or stylish types) are very different from their upright roman types. In certain cases, the correspondence between uppercase and lowercase glyphs does not coincide in Latin and Cyrillic types: for example, italic Cyrillic is the lowercase counterpart of not of .

Note: in some typefaces or styles, , i.e. the lowercase italic Cyrillic , may look like Latin , and , i.e. lowercase italic Cyrillic , may look like small-capital italic .
In Standard Serbian, as well as in Macedonian, some italic and cursive letters are allowed to be different, to more closely resemble the handwritten letters. The regular (upright) shapes are generally standardized in small caps form.

Notes: Depending on fonts available, the Serbian row may appear identical to the Russian row. Unicode approximations are used in the &quot;faux&quot; row to ensure it can be rendered properly across all systems.
In the Bulgarian alphabet, many lowercase letterforms may more closely resemble the cursive forms on the one hand and Latin glyphs on the other hand, e.g. by having an ascender or descender or by using rounded arcs instead of sharp corners. Sometimes, uppercase letters may have a different shape as well, e.g. more triangular, Д and Л, like Greek delta Δ and lambda Λ.

Notes: Depending on fonts available, the Bulgarian row may appear identical to the Russian row. Unicode approximations are used in the &quot;faux&quot; row to ensure it can be rendered properly across all systems; in some cases, such as ж with &quot;k&quot;-like ascender, no such approximation exists.

=== Accessing variant forms ===

Computer fonts typically default to the Central/Eastern, Russian letterforms, and require the use of OpenType Layout (OTL) features to display the Western, Bulgarian or Southern, Serbian/Macedonian forms. Depending on the choices made by the (computer) font designer, they may either be automatically activated by the &quot;local variant&quot; codice_1 feature for text tagged with an appropriate language code, or the author needs to opt-in by activating a &quot;stylistic set&quot; codice_2 or &quot;character variant&quot; codice_3 feature. These solutions only enjoy partial support and may render with default glyphs in certain software configurations, and the reader may not see the same result as the author intended.

==Cyrillic alphabets==
Among others, Cyrillic is the standard script for writing the following languages:

Slavic languages:
*Belarusian
*Bulgarian
*Macedonian
*Russian
*Rusyn
*Serbo-Croatian (Bosnian, Montenegrin and Serbian)
*Ukrainian

Non-Slavic languages of Russia:
*Abaza
*Adyghe
*Avar
*Azerbaijani (in Dagestan)
*Bashkir
*Buryat
*Chechen
*Chuvash
*Erzya
*Ingush
*Kabardian
*Kalmyk
*Karachay-Balkar

*Kildin Sami
*Komi
*Mari
*Moksha
*Nogai
*Ossetian (in North Ossetia–Alania)
*Romani
*Sakha/Yakut
*Tatar
*Tuvan
*Udmurt
*Yuit (Yupik)

Non-Slavic languages in other countries: 
*Abkhaz
*Aleut (now mostly in church texts)
*Dungan
*Kazakh (to be replaced by Latin script by 2031)
*Kyrgyz

*Mongolian (to also be written with traditional Mongolian script by 2025)
*Tajik
*Tlingit (now only in church texts)
*Turkmen (officially replaced by Latin script)
*Uzbek (also officially replaced by Latin script, but still in wide use)
*Yupik (in Alaska)
The Cyrillic script has also been used for languages of Alaska, Slavic Europe (except for Western Slavic and Slovenian), the Caucasus, the languages of Idel-Ural, Siberia, and the Russian Far East.

The first alphabet derived from Cyrillic was Abur, used for the Komi language. Other Cyrillic alphabets include the Molodtsov alphabet for the Komi language and various alphabets for Caucasian languages.

==Usage of Cyrillic versus other scripts==

===Latin script===
A number of languages written in a Cyrillic alphabet have also been written in a Latin alphabet, such as Azerbaijani, Uzbek, Serbian, and Romanian (in the Moldavian SSR until 1989 and in the Danubian Principalities throughout the 19th century). After the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, some of the former republics officially shifted from Cyrillic to Latin. The transition is complete in most of Moldova (except the breakaway region of Transnistria, where Moldovan Cyrillic is official), Turkmenistan, and Azerbaijan. Uzbekistan still uses both systems, and Kazakhstan has officially begun a transition from Cyrillic to Latin (scheduled to be complete by 2025). The Russian government has mandated that Cyrillic must be used for all public communications in all federal subjects of Russia, to promote closer ties across the federation. This act was controversial for speakers of many Slavic languages; for others, such as Chechen and Ingush speakers, the law had political ramifications. For example, the separatist Chechen government mandated a Latin script which is still used by many Chechens.

Standard Serbian uses both the Cyrillic and Latin scripts. Cyrillic is nominally the official script of Serbia&#x27;s administration according to the Serbian constitution; however, the law does not regulate scripts in standard language, or standard language itself by any means. In practice the scripts are equal, with Latin being used more often in a less official capacity.

The Zhuang alphabet, used between the 1950s and 1980s in portions of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, used a mixture of Latin, phonetic, numeral-based, and Cyrillic letters. The non-Latin letters, including Cyrillic, were removed from the alphabet in 1982 and replaced with Latin letters that closely resembled the letters they replaced.

===Romanization===

There are various systems for romanization of Cyrillic text, including transliteration to convey Cyrillic spelling in Latin letters, and transcription to convey pronunciation.

Standard Cyrillic-to-Latin transliteration systems include:
*Scientific transliteration, used in linguistics, is based on the Serbo-Croatian Latin alphabet.
*The Working Group on Romanization Systems of the United Nations recommends different systems for specific languages. These are the most commonly used around the world.
*ISO 9:1995, from the International Organization for Standardization.
*American Library Association and Library of Congress Romanization tables for Slavic alphabets (ALA-LC Romanization), used in North American libraries.
*BGN/PCGN Romanization (1947), United States Board on Geographic Names &amp; Permanent Committee on Geographical Names for British Official Use).
*GOST 16876, a now defunct Soviet transliteration standard. Replaced by GOST 7.79-2000, which is based on ISO 9.
*Various informal romanizations of Cyrillic, which adapt the Cyrillic script to Latin and sometimes Greek glyphs for compatibility with small character sets.

See also Romanization of Belarusian, Bulgarian, Kyrgyz, Russian, Macedonian and Ukrainian.

===Cyrillization===
Representing other writing systems with Cyrillic letters is called Cyrillization.
==Summary table==



*&quot;Ё&quot; in Russian is usually spelled as &quot;Е&quot;; &quot;Ё&quot; is typically printed in texts for learners and in dictionaries, and in word pairs which are differentiated only by that letter (&quot;все&quot; – &quot;всё&quot;).

==Computer encoding==
===Unicode===
As of Unicode version , Cyrillic letters, including national and historical alphabets, are encoded across several blocks:
*Cyrillic: U+0400–U+04FF
*Cyrillic Supplement: U+0500–U+052F
*Cyrillic Extended-A: U+2DE0–U+2DFF
*Cyrillic Extended-B: U+A640–U+A69F
*Cyrillic Extended-C: U+1C80–U+1C8F
*Cyrillic Extended-D: U+1E030–U+1E08F
*Phonetic Extensions: U+1D2B, U+1D78
*Combining Half Marks: U+FE2E–U+FE2F

The characters in the range U+0400 to U+045F are essentially the characters from ISO 8859-5 moved upward by 864 positions. The characters in the range U+0460 to U+0489 are historic letters, not used now. The characters in the range U+048A to U+052F are additional letters for various languages that are written with Cyrillic script.

Unicode as a general rule does not include accented Cyrillic letters. A few exceptions include:
*combinations that are considered as separate letters of respective alphabets, like Й, Ў, Ё, Ї, Ѓ, Ќ (as well as many letters of non-Slavic alphabets);
*two most frequent combinations orthographically required to distinguish homonyms in Bulgarian and Macedonian: Ѐ, Ѝ;
*a few Old and New Church Slavonic combinations: Ѷ, Ѿ, Ѽ.

To indicate stressed or long vowels, combining diacritical marks can be used after the respective letter (for example, : е́ у́ э́ etc.).

Some languages, including Church Slavonic, are still not fully supported.

Unicode 5.1, released on 4 April 2008, introduces major changes to the Cyrillic blocks. Revisions to the existing Cyrillic blocks, and the addition of Cyrillic Extended A (2DE0 ... 2DFF) and Cyrillic Extended B (A640 ... A69F), significantly improve support for the early Cyrillic alphabet, Abkhaz, Aleut, Chuvash, Kurdish, and Moksha.

===Other===
Other character encoding systems for Cyrillic:
*CP8668-bit Cyrillic character encoding established by Microsoft for use in MS-DOS also known as GOST-alternative. Cyrillic characters go in their native order, with a &quot;window&quot; for pseudographic characters.
*ISO/IEC 8859-58-bit Cyrillic character encoding established by International Organization for Standardization
*KOI8-R8-bit native Russian character encoding. Invented in the USSR for use on Soviet clones of American IBM and DEC computers. The Cyrillic characters go in the order of their Latin counterparts, which allowed the text to remain readable after transmission via a 7-bit line that removed the most significant bit from each bytethe result became a very rough, but readable, Latin transliteration of Cyrillic. Standard encoding of early 1990s for Unix systems and the first Russian Internet encoding.
*KOI8-UKOI8-R with addition of Ukrainian letters.
*MIK8-bit native Bulgarian character encoding for use in DOS.
*Windows-12518-bit Cyrillic character encoding established by Microsoft for use in Microsoft Windows. The simplest 8-bit Cyrillic encoding32 capital chars in native order at 0xc0–0xdf, 32 usual chars at 0xe0–0xff, with rarely used &quot;YO&quot; characters somewhere else. No pseudographics. Former standard encoding in some Linux distributions for Belarusian and Bulgarian, but currently displaced by UTF-8.
*GOST-main.
*GB 2312Principally simplified Chinese encodings, but there are also the basic 33 Russian Cyrillic letters (in upper- and lower-case).
*JIS and Shift JISPrincipally Japanese encodings, but there are also the basic 33 Russian Cyrillic letters (in upper- and lower-case).

===Keyboard layouts===
Each language has its own standard keyboard layout, adopted from traditional national typewriters. With the flexibility of computer input methods, there are also transliterating or phonetic/homophonic keyboard layouts made for typists who are more familiar with other layouts, like the common English QWERTY keyboard. When practical Cyrillic keyboard layouts are unavailable, computer users sometimes use transliteration (translit) or look-alike (volapuk encoding) to type in languages that are normally written with the Cyrillic alphabet. Potentially, these proxy versions could be transformed programmatically into Cyrillic at a later date.

==See also==

* Cyrillic Alphabet Day
* Cyrillic digraphs
* Cyrillic script in Unicode
* Faux Cyrillic, real or fake Cyrillic letters used to give Latin-alphabet text a Soviet or Russian feel
* List of Cyrillic digraphs and trigraphs
* Russian Braille
* Russian cursive
* Russian manual alphabet
* Bulgarian Braille
* Vladislav the Grammarian
* Yugoslav Braille
* Yugoslav manual alphabet

===Internet top-level domains in Cyrillic===

* gTLDs
* .мон
* .бг
* .қаз
* .рф
* .срб
* .укр
* .мкд
* .бел
==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
*

==Further reading==
* [cited in Šmid, 2002]
* in .
*&#x27;The Lives of St. Tsurho and St. Strahota&#x27;, Bohemia, 1495, Vatican Library


==External links==
*The Cyrillic Charset Soup overview and history of Cyrillic charsets.
*Transliteration of Non-Roman Scripts, a collection of writing systems and transliteration tables
*History and development of the Cyrillic alphabet
*Cyrillic Alphabets of Slavic Languages review of Cyrillic charsets in Slavic Languages.
*data entry in Old Cyrillic / Стара Кирилица (archived 22 February 2014)
*Cyrillic and its Long Journey East – NamepediA Blog, article about the Cyrillic script
* Unicode collation charts—including Cyrillic letters, sorted by shape</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="4" end="19" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192" start="29" end="43" title="writing system" label="writing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="78" end="85" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="135" end="141" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="143" end="149" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="151" end="159" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="161" end="167" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="169" end="178" title="Caucasian languages" label="Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="183" end="189" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranic"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="212" end="231" title="Southeastern Europe" label="Southeastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="233" end="247" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="253" end="261" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="263" end="275" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27329" start="277" end="287" title="North Asia" label="North Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="293" end="302" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="458" end="464" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23609046" start="509" end="552" title="accession of Bulgaria to the European Union" label="accession of Bulgaria to the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="621" end="635" title="Languages_of_the_European_Union#Writing_systems" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="651" end="656" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="661" end="666" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q442244" start="683" end="706" title="Early Cyrillic alphabet" label="Early Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331407" start="754" end="777" title="Preslav Literary School" label="Preslav Literary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="785" end="807" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="828" end="832" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192264" start="833" end="851" title="Simeon I of Bulgaria" label="Simeon I the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="890" end="899" title="Byzantine" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="909" end="928" title="Saints Cyril and Methodius" label="Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="961" end="978" title="Glagolitic script" label="Glagolitic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q158504" start="996" end="1012" title="Clement of Ohrid" label="Clement of Ohrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q350061" start="1014" end="1029" title="Naum of Preslav" label="Naum of Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146725" start="1031" end="1053" title="Constantine of Preslav" label="Constantine of Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q650558" start="1055" end="1066" title="John the Exarch" label="Joan Ekzarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260909" start="1068" end="1087" title="Chernorizets Hrabar" label="Chernorizets Hrabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271929" start="1089" end="1096" title="Saint Angelar" label="Angelar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046195" start="1098" end="1102" title="Saint Sava (disciple of Saints Cyril and Methodius)" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="1155" end="1166" title="Cyril the Philosopher" label="Saint Cyril"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="1250" end="1269" title="Cyril and Methodius" label="Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="1435" end="1457" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q442244" start="1492" end="1515" title="Early Cyrillic alphabet" label="Early Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331407" start="1535" end="1558" title="Preslav Literary School" label="Preslav Literary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="1655" end="1660" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q145625" start="1779" end="1796" title="Glagolitic script" label="Glagolitic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q784235" start="1837" end="1843" title="Uncial script" label="uncial"/>
<link wikidata="Q350061" start="1999" end="2014" title="Naum of Preslav" label="Naum of Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146725" start="2026" end="2048" title="Constantine of Preslav" label="Constantine of Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q650558" start="2050" end="2061" title="John the Exarch" label="Joan Ekzarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260909" start="2099" end="2118" title="Chernorizets Hrabar" label="Chernorizets Hrabar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="2189" end="2198" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="2248" end="2267" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek uncial script"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="2290" end="2298" title="Typographic ligature" label="ligature"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="2438" end="2464" title="Saints Cyril and Methodius" label="Saints Cyril and Methodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q350061" start="2511" end="2515" title="Saint Naum" label="Naum"/>
<link wikidata="Q158504" start="2517" end="2524" title="Clement of Ohrid" label="Clement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271929" start="2526" end="2533" title="Saint Angelar" label="Angelar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046195" start="2539" end="2543" title="Saint Sava (disciple of Saints Cyril and Methodius)" label="Sava"/>
<link wikidata="Q192264" start="2753" end="2769" title="Simeon the Great" label="Simeon the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="2946" end="2955" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q243616" start="3031" end="3038" title="Preslav" label="Preslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q25080060" start="3082" end="3100" title="Patleina Monastery" label="Patleina Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q184981" start="3122" end="3137" title="Shumen Province" label="Shumen Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3157" end="3172" title="Ravna Monastery" label="Ravna Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q62692266" start="3184" end="3199" title="Varna Monastery" label="Varna Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="3236" end="3244" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="3275" end="3290" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="3363" end="3371" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="3502" end="3526" title="Church Slavonic language" label="Church Slavonic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q35499" start="3543" end="3562" title="Old Church Slavonic" label="Old Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="3938" end="3951" title="lingua franca" label="lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q867589" start="4060" end="4077" title="Cyrillic alphabets" label="Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312021" start="4097" end="4112" title="medieval Bosnia" label="medieval period"/>
<link wikidata="Q167009" start="4239" end="4251" title="Humac tablet" label="Humac tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q940177" start="4491" end="4509" title="Patriarch Evtimiy of Bulgaria" label="Evtimiy of Tarnovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3657731" start="4553" end="4576" title="Tarnovo Literary School" label="Tarnovo Literary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q723304" start="4617" end="4633" title="Gregory Tsamblak" label="Gregory Tsamblak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782745" start="4638" end="4662" title="Constantine of Kostenets" label="Constantine of Kostenets"/>
<link wikidata="Q273824" start="4785" end="4797" title="South Slavs" label="South-Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="4880" end="4895" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510976" start="4932" end="4945" title="Grand Embassy of Peter the Great" label="Grand Embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="4949" end="4963" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938758" start="4997" end="5009" title="Civil script" label="Civil script"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="5590" end="5606" title="Eastern Catholic" label="Eastern Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202815" start="5946" end="5969" title="Vuk Karadžić" label="Vuk Stefanović Karadžić"/>
<link wikidata="Q829464" start="5987" end="6012" title="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet" label="Serbian Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q867589" start="6232" end="6246" title="Languages using Cyrillic" label="many languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217391" start="6254" end="6261" title="Languages of the Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q771861" start="6283" end="6299" title="Eurasiatic languages" label="northern Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35228" start="6484" end="6499" title="Old East Slavic" label="Old East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="6725" end="6733" title="ligature (typography)" label="ligature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252743" start="6756" end="6764" title="Iotation" label="Iotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108645" start="7198" end="7213" title="Greek numerals" label="Greek ancestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="7239" end="7252" title="Computer font" label="Computer font"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="7401" end="7411" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q8819" start="7456" end="7463" title="Unicode" label="Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q188725" start="7527" end="7536" title="Ligature (typography)" label="ligatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="7828" end="7843" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q97189" start="7880" end="7888" title="Segoe UI" label="Segoe UI"/>
<link wikidata="Q308229" start="8025" end="8038" title="currency sign" label="currency sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419557" start="8092" end="8104" title="hryvnia sign" label="hryvnia sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="8121" end="8128" title="cursive" label="cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="8129" end="8138" title="minuscule" label="minuscule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1098595" start="8139" end="8164" title="Ukrainian alphabet" label="Ukrainian Cyrillic letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q16335" start="8165" end="8167" title="Ge (Cyrillic)" label="He"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975411" start="8199" end="8209" title="ruble sign" label="ruble sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q35881" start="8242" end="8257" title="Kyrgyzstani som" label="Kyrgyzstani som"/>
<link wikidata="Q173751" start="8300" end="8317" title="Kazakhstani tenge" label="Kazakhstani tenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q183435" start="8340" end="8356" title="Mongolian tögrög" label="Mongolian tögrög"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533641" start="8434" end="8445" title="letter form" label="letter form"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="8472" end="8480" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q37853" start="8499" end="8506" title="Baroque" label="Baroque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="8518" end="8529" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="8542" end="8556" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920392" start="8605" end="8615" title="vyaz (Cyrillic calligraphy)" label="vyaz&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q132137" start="8640" end="8644" title="icon" label="icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="8769" end="8784" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938758" start="8822" end="8846" title="Civil script" label="westernized letter forms"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8848" end="8850" title=":ru:Гражданский шрифт" label="ru"/>
<link wikidata="Q243449" start="9111" end="9116" title="serif" label="serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="9254" end="9259" title="typeface" label="types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147633" start="9362" end="9375" title="computer font" label="computer font"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="9492" end="9501" title="capital letters" label="uppercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188561" start="9506" end="9515" title="lower case" label="lowercase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163271" start="9630" end="9644" title="small caps" label="small capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q484023" start="9962" end="9967" title="roman type" label="roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q344098" start="9972" end="9978" title="italic type" label="italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079418" start="10674" end="10681" title="Cursive" label="Cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q864011" start="10853" end="10863" title="sans-serif" label="sans-serif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163271" start="11933" end="11943" title="small caps" label="small caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064170" start="12090" end="12094" title="Faux Cyrillic" label="faux"/>
<link wikidata="Q164436" start="12170" end="12188" title="Bulgarian alphabet" label="Bulgarian alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064170" start="12675" end="12679" title="Faux Cyrillic" label="faux"/>
<link wikidata="Q260180" start="12972" end="12980" title="OpenType" label="OpenType"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644188" start="12981" end="13002" title="list of typographic features" label="Layout (OTL) features"/>
<link wikidata="Q715516" start="13268" end="13281" title="ISO 639-1" label="language code"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="13723" end="13733" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="13735" end="13744" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="13746" end="13756" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="13758" end="13765" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="13767" end="13772" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="13774" end="13788" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="13790" end="13797" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="13799" end="13810" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="13815" end="13822" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="13825" end="13834" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27567" start="13869" end="13874" title="Abaza language" label="Abaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q27776" start="13876" end="13882" title="Adyghe language" label="Adyghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561" start="13884" end="13888" title="Avar language" label="Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="13890" end="13901" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="13906" end="13914" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389" start="13917" end="13924" title="Bashkir language" label="Bashkir"/>
<link wikidata="Q33120" start="13926" end="13932" title="Buryat language" label="Buryat"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="13934" end="13941" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33348" start="13943" end="13950" title="Chuvash language" label="Chuvash"/>
<link wikidata="Q29952" start="13952" end="13957" title="Erzya language" label="Erzya"/>
<link wikidata="Q33509" start="13959" end="13965" title="Ingush language" label="Ingush"/>
<link wikidata="Q33522" start="13967" end="13976" title="Kabardian language" label="Kabardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33634" start="13978" end="13984" title="Kalmyk Oirat" label="Kalmyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33714" start="13986" end="14001" title="Karachay-Balkar language" label="Karachay-Balkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33656" start="14004" end="14015" title="Kildin Sami language" label="Kildin Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q36126" start="14017" end="14021" title="Komi language" label="Komi"/>
<link wikidata="Q973685" start="14023" end="14027" title="Mari language" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13343" start="14029" end="14035" title="Moksha language" label="Moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q33871" start="14037" end="14042" title="Nogai language" label="Nogai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="14044" end="14052" title="Ossetian language" label="Ossetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237" start="14057" end="14077" title="North Ossetia–Alania" label="North Ossetia–Alania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14080" end="14086" title="Romani orthography#Cyrillic script" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34299" start="14088" end="14099" title="Sakha language" label="Sakha/Yakut"/>
<link wikidata="Q25285" start="14101" end="14106" title="Tatar language" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q34119" start="14108" end="14113" title="Tuvan language" label="Tuvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13238" start="14115" end="14121" title="Udmurt language" label="Udmurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27993" start="14123" end="14127" title="Siberian Yupik language" label="Yuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111" start="14180" end="14186" title="Abkhaz language" label="Abkhaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="14188" end="14193" title="Aleut language" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q33050" start="14224" end="14230" title="Dungan language" label="Dungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="14232" end="14238" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9255" start="14281" end="14287" title="Kyrgyz language" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="14290" end="14299" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055705" start="14337" end="14353" title="Mongolian script" label="Mongolian script"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260" start="14364" end="14369" title="Tajik language" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14371" end="14378" title="Tlingit alphabet#Cyrillic alphabets" label="Tlingit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267" start="14407" end="14414" title="Turkmen language" label="Turkmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9264" start="14454" end="14459" title="Uzbek language" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14527" end="14532" title="Yupik languages#Writing systems" label="Yupik"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="14537" end="14543" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="14609" end="14622" title="Slavic Europe" label="Slavic Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q840454" start="14635" end="14649" title="Western Slavs" label="Western Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="14654" end="14663" title="Slovenian language" label="Slovenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="14670" end="14678" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521445" start="14697" end="14706" title="Idel-Ural" label="Idel-Ural"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="14708" end="14715" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="14725" end="14741" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q147899" start="14789" end="14793" title="Abur" label="Abur"/>
<link wikidata="Q36126" start="14808" end="14821" title="Komi language" label="Komi language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116079" start="14860" end="14878" title="Molodtsov alphabet" label="Molodtsov alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="14927" end="14946" title="Caucasian languages" label="Caucasian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="15093" end="15107" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="15117" end="15128" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9264" start="15130" end="15135" title="Uzbek language" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="15137" end="15144" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="15150" end="15158" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="15167" end="15180" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q627527" start="15203" end="15226" title="Danubian Principalities" label="Danubian Principalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q907112" start="15461" end="15473" title="Transnistria" label="Transnistria"/>
<link wikidata="Q570411" start="15481" end="15498" title="Moldovan Cyrillic alphabet" label="Moldovan Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="15513" end="15525" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="15531" end="15541" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="15543" end="15553" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="15583" end="15593" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="15691" end="15697" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43263" start="15787" end="15813" title="federal subjects of Russia" label="federal subjects of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33350" start="15947" end="15954" title="Chechen language" label="Chechen"/>
<link wikidata="Q33509" start="15959" end="15965" title="Ingush language" label="Ingush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="16132" end="16139" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16145" end="16180" title="Serbian language#Writing system" label="both the Cyrillic and Latin scripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439353" start="16504" end="16519" title="Zhuang alphabet" label="Zhuang alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="16893" end="16905" title="romanization" label="romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="16934" end="16949" title="transliteration" label="transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="16981" end="16986" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207714" start="17000" end="17013" title="Transcription (linguistics)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="Q184377" start="17024" end="17037" title="pronunciation" label="pronunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063364" start="17101" end="17127" title="Scientific transliteration of Cyrillic" label="Scientific transliteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q754989" start="17166" end="17195" title="Gaj&amp;#x27;s Latin alphabet" label="Serbo-Croatian Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="17247" end="17261" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q913336" start="17367" end="17372" title="ISO 9" label="ISO 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q603208" start="17532" end="17551" title="ALA-LC Romanization" label="ALA-LC Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055201" start="17589" end="17610" title="BGN/PCGN Romanization" label="BGN/PCGN Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514109" start="17735" end="17745" title="GOST 16876-71" label="GOST 16876"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088906" start="17806" end="17820" title="GOST 7.79-2000" label="GOST 7.79-2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630234" start="18015" end="18041" title="Romanization of Belarusian" label="Romanization of Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091969" start="18043" end="18052" title="Romanization of Bulgarian" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362703" start="18054" end="18060" title="romanization of Kyrgyz" label="Kyrgyz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453319" start="18062" end="18069" title="romanization of Russian" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393231" start="18071" end="18081" title="romanization of Macedonian" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505327" start="18086" end="18095" title="romanization of Ukrainian" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654890" start="18185" end="18198" title="Cyrillization" label="Cyrillization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512806" start="18613" end="18619" title="Unicode block" label="blocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493952" start="18622" end="18630" title="Cyrillic (Unicode block)" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512818" start="18647" end="18666" title="Cyrillic Supplement" label="Cyrillic Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525216" start="18683" end="18702" title="Cyrillic Extended-A" label="Cyrillic Extended-A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000440" start="18719" end="18738" title="Cyrillic Extended-B" label="Cyrillic Extended-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q24897367" start="18755" end="18774" title="Cyrillic Extended-C" label="Cyrillic Extended-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q113956962" start="18791" end="18810" title="Cyrillic Extended-D" label="Cyrillic Extended-D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803866" start="18829" end="18848" title="Phonetic Extensions" label="Phonetic Extensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346635" start="18866" end="18886" title="Combining Half Marks" label="Combining Half Marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q179942" start="18984" end="18994" title="ISO 8859-5" label="ISO 8859-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q181450" start="19417" end="19418" title="Й" label="Й"/>
<link wikidata="Q236983" start="19420" end="19421" title="Ў" label="Ў"/>
<link wikidata="Q30955" start="19423" end="19424" title="Ё" label="Ё"/>
<link wikidata="Q236977" start="19426" end="19427" title="Ї" label="Ї"/>
<link wikidata="Q203578" start="19429" end="19430" title="Ѓ" label="Ѓ"/>
<link wikidata="Q318641" start="19432" end="19433" title="Ќ" label="Ќ"/>
<link wikidata="Q160843" start="19558" end="19565" title="homonym" label="homonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q608781" start="19596" end="19597" title="Ѐ" label="Ѐ"/>
<link wikidata="Q375603" start="19599" end="19600" title="Ѝ" label="Ѝ"/>
<link wikidata="Q650565" start="19651" end="19652" title="Ѷ" label="Ѷ"/>
<link wikidata="Q340162" start="19654" end="19655" title="Ѿ" label="Ѿ"/>
<link wikidata="Q424863" start="19657" end="19658" title="Ѽ" label="Ѽ"/>
<link wikidata="Q685216" start="19698" end="19724" title="combining diacritical mark" label="combining diacritical mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="19825" end="19840" title="Church Slavonic language" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q442244" start="20140" end="20163" title="early Cyrillic alphabet" label="early Cyrillic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111" start="20165" end="20171" title="Abkhaz language" label="Abkhaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q27210" start="20173" end="20178" title="Aleut language" label="Aleut"/>
<link wikidata="Q33348" start="20180" end="20187" title="Chuvash language" label="Chuvash"/>
<link wikidata="Q36368" start="20189" end="20196" title="Kurdish language" label="Kurdish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13343" start="20202" end="20208" title="Moksha language" label="Moksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q184759" start="20229" end="20247" title="character encoding" label="character encoding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105775" start="20271" end="20276" title="CP866" label="CP866"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="20325" end="20334" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q47604" start="20346" end="20352" title="MS-DOS" label="MS-DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q179942" start="20488" end="20502" title="ISO/IEC 8859-5" label="ISO/IEC 8859-5"/>
<link wikidata="Q15028" start="20551" end="20597" title="International Organization for Standardization" label="International Organization for Standardization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147493" start="20599" end="20605" title="KOI8-R" label="KOI8-R"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885225" start="20891" end="20911" title="most significant bit" label="most significant bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="21044" end="21048" title="Unix" label="Unix"/>
<link wikidata="Q996151" start="21099" end="21105" title="KOI8-U" label="KOI8-U"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655919" start="21149" end="21152" title="MIK Code page" label="MIK"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="21205" end="21208" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748665" start="21211" end="21223" title="Windows-1251" label="Windows-1251"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="21293" end="21310" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="21535" end="21540" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q193537" start="21612" end="21617" title="UTF-8" label="UTF-8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421973" start="21632" end="21639" title="GB 2312" label="GB 2312"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108264" start="21767" end="21770" title="JIS encoding" label="JIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q286345" start="21775" end="21784" title="Shift JIS" label="Shift JIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q725744" start="21960" end="21975" title="keyboard layout" label="keyboard layout"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="22011" end="22021" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="22226" end="22241" title="QWERTY keyboard" label="QWERTY keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q239925" start="22585" end="22606" title="Cyrillic Alphabet Day" label="Cyrillic Alphabet Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200961" start="22609" end="22626" title="Cyrillic digraphs" label="Cyrillic digraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520269" start="22629" end="22655" title="Cyrillic script in Unicode" label="Cyrillic script in Unicode"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064170" start="22658" end="22671" title="Faux Cyrillic" label="Faux Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15650597" start="22763" end="22802" title="List of Cyrillic digraphs and trigraphs" label="List of Cyrillic digraphs and trigraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399601" start="22805" end="22820" title="Russian Braille" label="Russian Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977322" start="22823" end="22838" title="Russian cursive" label="Russian cursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400460" start="22841" end="22864" title="Russian manual alphabet" label="Russian manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226591" start="22867" end="22884" title="Bulgarian Braille" label="Bulgarian Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q955782" start="22887" end="22911" title="Vladislav the Grammarian" label="Vladislav the Grammarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916394" start="22914" end="22930" title="Yugoslav Braille" label="Yugoslav Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060385" start="22933" end="22957" title="Yugoslav manual alphabet" label="Yugoslav manual alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23007" end="23012" title="List of Internet top-level domains#Cyrillic script" label="gTLDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16049625" start="23015" end="23019" title=".мон" label=".мон"/>
<link wikidata="Q140775" start="23022" end="23025" title=".бг" label=".бг"/>
<link wikidata="Q48137" start="23028" end="23032" title=".қаз" label=".қаз"/>
<link wikidata="Q200439" start="23035" end="23038" title=".рф" label=".рф"/>
<link wikidata="Q48367" start="23041" end="23045" title=".срб" label=".срб"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045467" start="23048" end="23052" title=".укр" label=".укр"/>
<link wikidata="Q20556652" start="23055" end="23059" title=".мкд" label=".мкд"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109066" start="23062" end="23066" title=".бел" label=".бел"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5641" wikidata="Q38035" url="?curid=5641" title="Consonant">
<text>In articulatory phonetics, a consonant is a speech sound that is articulated with complete or partial closure of the vocal tract, except for the h sound, which is pronounced without any stricture in the vocal tract. Examples are and [b], pronounced with the lips; and [d], pronounced with the front of the tongue; and [g], pronounced with the back of the tongue; , pronounced throughout the vocal tract; , [v], , and [z] pronounced by forcing air through a narrow channel (fricatives); and and , which have air flowing through the nose (nasals). Most consonants are pulmonic, using air pressure from the lungs to generate a sound. Very few natural languages are non-pulmonic, making use of ejectives, implosives, and clicks. Contrasting with consonants are vowels.

Since the number of speech sounds in the world&#x27;s languages is much greater than the number of letters in any one alphabet, linguists have devised systems such as the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) to assign a unique and unambiguous symbol to each attested consonant. The English alphabet has fewer consonant letters than the English language has consonant sounds, so digraphs like , , , and are used to extend the alphabet, though some letters and digraphs represent more than one consonant. For example, the sound spelled in &quot;this&quot; is a different consonant from the sound in &quot;thin&quot;. (In the IPA, these are and , respectively.)

==Etymology==
The word &quot;consonant&quot; comes from Latin oblique stem , from &#x27;sounding-together&#x27;, a calque of Greek (plural , ).

Dionysius Thrax calls consonants ( &#x27;sounded with&#x27;) because in Greek they can only be pronounced with a vowel. He divides them into two subcategories: ( &#x27;half-sounded&#x27;), which are the continuants, and ( &#x27;unsounded&#x27;), which correspond to plosives.

This description does not apply to some languages, such as the Salishan languages, in which plosives may occur without vowels (see Nuxalk), and the modern concept of &quot;consonant&quot; does not require co-occurrence with a vowel.

==Consonant &quot;sounds&quot; and consonant &quot;letters&quot;==

The word &quot;consonant&quot; may be used ambiguously for both speech sounds and the letters of the alphabet used to write them. In English, these letters are B, C, D, F, G, J, K, L, M, N, P, Q, S, T, V, X, Z and often H, R, W, Y.

In English orthography, the letters H, R, W, Y and the digraph GH are used for both consonants and vowels. For instance, the letter Y stands for the consonant/semi-vowel in yoke&quot;, the vowel in &quot;myth&quot;, the vowel in &quot;funny, the diphthong in &quot;sky, and forms several digraphs for other diphthongs, such as &quot;say, boy, key. Similarly, R commonly indicates or modifies a vowel in non-rhotic accents.

This article is concerned with consonant sounds, however they are written.

==Consonants versus vowels==

Consonants and vowels correspond to distinct parts of a syllable: The most sonorous part of the syllable (that is, the part that is easiest to sing), called the &quot;syllabic peak&quot; or &quot;nucleus,&quot; is typically a vowel, while the less sonorous margins (called the &quot;onset&quot; and &quot;coda&quot;) are typically consonants. Such syllables may be abbreviated CV, V, and CVC, where C stands for consonant and V stands for vowel. This can be argued to be the only pattern found in most of the world&#x27;s languages, and perhaps the primary pattern in all of them. However, the distinction between consonant and vowel is not always clear cut: there are syllabic consonants and non-syllabic vowels in many of the world&#x27;s languages.

One blurry area is in segments variously called &quot;semivowels&quot;, &quot;semiconsonants&quot;, or &quot;glides&quot;. On one side, there are vowel-like segments that are not in themselves syllabic, but form diphthongs as part of the syllable nucleus, as the &quot;i&quot; in English &quot;boil&quot; . On the other, there are approximants that behave like consonants in forming onsets, but are articulated very much like vowels, as the &quot;y&quot; in English &quot;yes&quot; . Some phonologists model these as both being the underlying vowel , so that the English word &quot;bit&quot; would phonemically be , &quot;beet&quot; would be , and &quot;yield&quot; would be phonemically . Likewise, &quot;foot&quot; would be , &quot;food&quot; would be , &quot;wood&quot; would be , and &quot;wooed&quot; would be . However, there is a (perhaps allophonic) difference in articulation between these segments, with the in &quot;yes&quot; and &quot;yield&quot; and the of &quot;wooed&quot; having more constriction and a more definite place of articulation than the in &quot;boil&quot; or &quot;bit&quot; or the of &quot;foot&quot;.

The other problematic area is that of syllabic consonants, segments articulated as consonants but occupying the nucleus of a syllable. This may be the case for words such as &quot;church&quot; in rhotic dialects of English, although phoneticians differ in whether they consider this to be a syllabic consonant, , or a rhotic vowel, : Some distinguish an approximant that corresponds to a vowel , for &quot;rural&quot; as or ; others see these as a single phoneme, .

Other languages use fricative and often trilled segments as syllabic nuclei, as in Czech and several languages in Democratic Republic of the Congo, and China, including Mandarin Chinese. In Mandarin, they are historically allophones of , and spelled that way in Pinyin. Ladefoged and Maddieson call these &quot;fricative vowels&quot; and say that &quot;they can usually be thought of as syllabic fricatives that are allophones of vowels&quot;. That is, phonetically they are consonants, but phonemically they behave as vowels.

Many Slavic languages allow the trill and the lateral as syllabic nuclei (see Words without vowels). In languages like Nuxalk, it is difficult to know what the nucleus of a syllable is, or if all syllables even have nuclei. If the concept of &#x27;syllable&#x27; applies in Nuxalk, there are syllabic consonants in words like (?) &#x27;seal fat&#x27;. Miyako in Japan is similar, with &#x27;to build&#x27; and &#x27;to pull&#x27;.

Each spoken consonant can be distinguished by several phonetic &quot;features&quot;:

* The manner of articulation is how air escapes from the vocal tract when the consonant or approximant (vowel-like) sound is made. Manners include stops, fricatives, and nasals.

* The place of articulation is where in the vocal tract the obstruction of the consonant occurs, and which speech organs are involved. Places include bilabial (both lips), alveolar (tongue against the gum ridge), and velar (tongue against soft palate). In addition, there may be a simultaneous narrowing at another place of articulation, such as palatalisation or pharyngealisation. Consonants with two simultaneous places of articulation are said to be coarticulated.

* The phonation of a consonant is how the vocal cords vibrate during the articulation. When the vocal cords vibrate fully, the consonant is called voiced; when they do not vibrate at all, it is voiceless.

* The voice onset time (VOT) indicates the timing of the phonation. Aspiration is a feature of VOT.

* The airstream mechanism is how the air moving through the vocal tract is powered. Most languages have exclusively pulmonic egressive consonants, which use the lungs and diaphragm, but ejectives, clicks, and implosives use different mechanisms.

* The length is how long the obstruction of a consonant lasts. This feature is borderline distinctive in English, as in &quot;wholly&quot; vs. &quot;holy&quot; , but cases are limited to morpheme boundaries. Unrelated roots are differentiated in various languages such as Italian, Japanese, and Finnish, with two length levels, &quot;single&quot; and &quot;geminate&quot;. Estonian and some Sami languages have three phonemic lengths: short, geminate, and long geminate, although the distinction between the geminate and overlong geminate includes suprasegmental features.

* The articulatory force is how much muscular energy is involved. This has been proposed many times, but no distinction relying exclusively on force has ever been demonstrated.

All English consonants can be classified by a combination of these features, such as &quot;voiceless alveolar stop&quot; . In this case, the airstream mechanism is omitted.

Some pairs of consonants like &quot;p::b&quot;, &quot;t::d&quot; are sometimes called fortis and lenis, but this is a phonological rather than phonetic distinction.

Consonants are scheduled by their features in a number of IPA charts:


==Examples==
The recently extinct Ubykh language had only 2 or 3 vowels but 84 consonants; the Taa language has 87 consonants under one analysis, 164 under another, plus some 30 vowels and tone. The types of consonants used in various languages are by no means universal. For instance, nearly all Australian languages lack fricatives; a large percentage of the world&#x27;s languages lack voiced stops such as , , as phonemes, though they may appear phonetically. Most languages, however, do include one or more fricatives, with being the most common, and a liquid consonant or two, with the most common. The approximant is also widespread, and virtually all languages have one or more nasals, though a very few, such as the Central dialect of Rotokas, lack even these. This last language has the smallest number of consonants in the world, with just six.

===Most common===
In rhotic American English, the consonants spoken most frequently are . ( is less common in non-rhotic accents.)
The most frequent consonant in many other languages is .

The most universal consonants around the world (that is, the ones appearing in nearly all languages) are the three voiceless stops , , , and the two nasals , . However, even these common five are not completely universal. Several languages in the vicinity of the Sahara Desert, including Arabic, lack . Several languages of North America, such as Mohawk, lack both of the labials and . The Wichita language of Oklahoma and some West African languages, such as Ijo, lack the consonant on a phonemic level, but do use it phonetically, as an allophone of another consonant (of in the case of Ijo, and of in Wichita). A few languages on Bougainville Island and around Puget Sound, such as Makah, lack both of the nasals and altogether, except in special speech registers such as baby-talk. The &#x27;click language&#x27; Nǁng lacks , and colloquial Samoan lacks both alveolars, and . Despite the 80-odd consonants of Ubykh, it lacks the plain velar in native words, as do the related Adyghe and Kabardian languages. But with a few striking exceptions, such as Xavante and Tahitian—which have no dorsal consonants whatsoever—nearly all other languages have at least one velar consonant: most of the few languages that do not have a simple (that is, a sound that is generally pronounced ) have a consonant that is very similar. For instance, an areal feature of the Pacific Northwest coast is that historical *k has become palatalized in many languages, so that Saanich for example has and but no plain ; similarly, historical *k in the Northwest Caucasian languages became palatalized to in extinct Ubykh and to in most Circassian dialects.

==See also==
* IPA consonant chart with audio
*Articulatory phonetics
*List of consonants
*List of phonetics topics
*Words without vowels

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
*Ian Maddieson, &quot;Patterns of Sounds&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1984. 

==External links==
*Interactive manner and place of articulation
*Consonants (Journal of West African Languages)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1200775" start="3" end="25" title="articulatory phonetics" label="articulatory phonetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="29" end="38" title="Consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q202064" start="44" end="56" title="speech sound" label="speech sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q748953" start="117" end="128" title="vocal tract" label="vocal tract"/>
<link wikidata="Q15173" start="258" end="262" title="lips" label="lips"/>
<link wikidata="Q9614" start="306" end="312" title="tongue" label="tongue"/>
<link wikidata="Q31427" start="473" end="482" title="fricative" label="fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="537" end="542" title="nasal consonant" label="nasal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259553" start="566" end="574" title="Pulmonic consonant" label="pulmonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="690" end="699" title="Ejective consonant" label="ejectives"/>
<link wikidata="Q849417" start="701" end="711" title="Implosive consonant" label="implosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q427013" start="717" end="723" title="Click consonant" label="clicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="757" end="762" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9779" start="884" end="892" title="alphabet" label="alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="894" end="903" title="Linguistics" label="linguists"/>
<link wikidata="Q21204" start="937" end="968" title="International Phonetic Alphabet" label="International Phonetic Alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q80071" start="1010" end="1016" title="symbol" label="symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q754673" start="1049" end="1065" title="English alphabet" label="English alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191494" start="1145" end="1152" title="Digraph (orthography)" label="digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="1483" end="1488" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="1542" end="1548" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1552" end="1557" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q344124" start="1572" end="1587" title="Dionysius Thrax" label="Dionysius Thrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472788" start="1775" end="1785" title="continuant" label="continuant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="1838" end="1846" title="plosive consonant" label="plosives"/>
<link wikidata="Q33985" start="1912" end="1930" title="Salishan languages" label="Salishan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q977808" start="1980" end="1986" title="Nuxalk language" label="Nuxalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9788" start="2237" end="2260" title="Letter (alphabet)" label="letters of the alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9705" start="2311" end="2312" title="B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q9820" start="2314" end="2315" title="C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q9884" start="2317" end="2318" title="D" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q9765" start="2320" end="2321" title="F" label="F"/>
<link wikidata="Q9739" start="2323" end="2324" title="G" label="G"/>
<link wikidata="Q9773" start="2326" end="2327" title="J" label="J"/>
<link wikidata="Q9922" start="2329" end="2330" title="K" label="K"/>
<link wikidata="Q9927" start="2332" end="2333" title="L" label="L"/>
<link wikidata="Q9933" start="2335" end="2336" title="M" label="M"/>
<link wikidata="Q9937" start="2338" end="2339" title="N" label="N"/>
<link wikidata="Q9946" start="2341" end="2342" title="P" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q9950" start="2344" end="2345" title="Q" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q9956" start="2347" end="2348" title="S" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q9813" start="2350" end="2351" title="T" label="T"/>
<link wikidata="Q9963" start="2353" end="2354" title="V" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q9968" start="2356" end="2357" title="X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q9751" start="2359" end="2360" title="Z" label="Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q9914" start="2371" end="2372" title="H" label="H"/>
<link wikidata="Q9852" start="2374" end="2375" title="R" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q9964" start="2377" end="2378" title="W" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q9973" start="2380" end="2381" title="Y" label="Y"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491268" start="2387" end="2406" title="English orthography" label="English orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="2787" end="2805" title="Rhoticity in English" label="non-rhotic accents"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="2970" end="2978" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="3110" end="3117" title="syllable nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="3197" end="3202" title="syllable onset" label="onset"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="3219" end="3223" title="syllable coda" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="3721" end="3730" title="semivowel" label="semivowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="3879" end="3888" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="3998" end="4009" title="approximant" label="approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="4265" end="4277" title="phoneme" label="phonemically"/>
<link wikidata="Q26677" start="4995" end="5001" title="rhotic and non-rhotic accents" label="rhotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="5349" end="5354" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q974" start="5380" end="5412" title="Democratic Republic of the Congo" label="Democratic Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5418" end="5423" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="5435" end="5451" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="5528" end="5534" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="5799" end="5815" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="5872" end="5892" title="Words without vowels" label="Words without vowels"/>
<link wikidata="Q977808" start="5913" end="5919" title="Nuxálk language" label="Nuxalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36218" start="6146" end="6152" title="Miyako language" label="Miyako"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152224" start="6295" end="6303" title="Distinctive feature" label="features"/>
<link wikidata="Q210847" start="6318" end="6340" title="manner of articulation" label="manner of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q51606" start="6403" end="6414" title="approximant" label="approximant"/>
<link wikidata="Q214090" start="6497" end="6518" title="place of articulation" label="place of articulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q146878" start="6641" end="6649" title="bilabial consonant" label="bilabial"/>
<link wikidata="Q49749" start="6663" end="6671" title="alveolar consonant" label="alveolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q19408" start="6708" end="6713" title="velar consonant" label="velar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808790" start="6837" end="6851" title="Palatalization (phonetics)" label="palatalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500482" start="6855" end="6872" title="pharyngealisation" label="pharyngealisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2374953" start="6945" end="6958" title="Co-articulated consonant" label="coarticulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q678132" start="6967" end="6976" title="phonation" label="phonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215558" start="7003" end="7014" title="vocal cords" label="vocal cords"/>
<link wikidata="Q494510" start="7108" end="7114" title="voiced" label="voiced"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773264" start="7155" end="7164" title="voiceless" label="voiceless"/>
<link wikidata="Q627770" start="7173" end="7189" title="voice onset time" label="voice onset time"/>
<link wikidata="Q320433" start="7235" end="7245" title="Aspiration (phonetics)" label="Aspiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910701" start="7274" end="7293" title="airstream mechanism" label="airstream mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299085" start="7384" end="7402" title="pulmonic egressive" label="pulmonic egressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q827454" start="7454" end="7462" title="ejective" label="ejective"/>
<link wikidata="Q427013" start="7465" end="7470" title="click consonant" label="click"/>
<link wikidata="Q849417" start="7477" end="7486" title="implosive" label="implosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="7521" end="7527" title="gemination" label="length"/>
<link wikidata="Q852201" start="7872" end="7880" title="geminate" label="geminate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="7888" end="7896" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="7906" end="7920" title="Sami languages" label="Sami languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068506" start="8527" end="8543" title="fortis and lenis" label="fortis and lenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="8559" end="8571" title="phonology" label="phonological"/>
<link wikidata="Q36931" start="8713" end="8727" title="Ubykh language" label="Ubykh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229" start="8774" end="8786" title="Taa language" label="Taa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q957073" start="8811" end="8823" title="consonant cluster" label="one analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259552" start="8835" end="8842" title="linguo-pulmonic" label="another"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="8976" end="8996" title="Australian languages" label="Australian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q908751" start="9237" end="9253" title="liquid consonant" label="liquid consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q51593" start="9365" end="9371" title="nasal consonant" label="nasals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13203" start="9423" end="9430" title="Rotokas language" label="Rotokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="9988" end="10001" title="Sahara Desert" label="Sahara Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="10013" end="10019" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13339" start="10072" end="10078" title="Mohawk language" label="Mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q56513" start="10115" end="10131" title="Wichita language" label="Wichita language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="10135" end="10143" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322020" start="10185" end="10188" title="Ijo languages" label="Ijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q146863" start="10264" end="10273" title="allophone" label="allophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q201766" start="10358" end="10377" title="Bougainville Island" label="Bougainville Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q604141" start="10389" end="10400" title="Puget Sound" label="Puget Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280640" start="10410" end="10415" title="Makah language" label="Makah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2618974" start="10542" end="10546" title="Nǁng language" label="Nǁng"/>
<link wikidata="Q34011" start="10570" end="10576" title="Samoan language" label="Samoan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36931" start="10638" end="10643" title="Ubykh language" label="Ubykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q27776" start="10705" end="10711" title="Adyghe language" label="Adyghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q33522" start="10716" end="10725" title="Kabardian language" label="Kabardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36962" start="10781" end="10788" title="Xavante language" label="Xavante"/>
<link wikidata="Q34128" start="10793" end="10801" title="Tahitian language" label="Tahitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="11085" end="11102" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q857709" start="11181" end="11188" title="Saanich language" label="Saanich"/>
<link wikidata="Q33852" start="11256" end="11285" title="Northwest Caucasian languages" label="Northwest Caucasian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q36931" start="11319" end="11324" title="Ubykh language" label="Ubykh"/>
<link wikidata="Q858543" start="11340" end="11350" title="Circassian languages" label="Circassian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972966" start="11377" end="11407" title="IPA consonant chart with audio" label="IPA consonant chart with audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200775" start="11409" end="11431" title="Articulatory phonetics" label="Articulatory phonetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263767" start="11433" end="11451" title="List of consonants" label="List of consonants"/>
<link wikidata="Q17156280" start="11453" end="11477" title="List of phonetics topics" label="List of phonetics topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="11479" end="11499" title="Words without vowels" label="Words without vowels"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5642" wikidata="Q1536680" url="?curid=5642" title="Costume jewelry">
<text>Costume or fashion jewelry includes a range of decorative items worn for personal adornment that are manufactured as less expensive ornamentation to complement a particular fashionable outfit or garment as opposed to &quot;real&quot; (fine) jewelry, which is more costly and which may be regarded primarily as collectibles, keepsakes, or investments. From the outset, costume jewelry — also known as fashion jewelry — paralleled the styles of its more precious fine counterparts.

==Terminology==
It is also known as artificial jewellery, imitation jewellery, imitated jewelry, trinkets, fashion jewelry, junk jewelry, fake jewelry, or fallalery.

==Etymology==
The term costume jewelry dates back to the early 20th century. It reflects the use of the word &quot;costume&quot; to refer to what is now called an &quot;outfit&quot;.

==Components==

Originally, costume or fashion jewelry was made of inexpensive simulated gemstones, such as rhinestones or lucite, set in pewter, silver, nickel, or brass. During the depression years, rhinestones were even down-graded by some manufacturers to meet the cost of production.

During the World War II era, sterling silver was often incorporated into costume jewelry designs primarily because:
# The components used for base metal were needed for wartime production (i.e., military applications), and a ban was placed on their use in the private sector.
# Base metal was originally popular because it could approximate platinum&#x27;s color, sterling silver fulfilled the same function.
This resulted in a number of years during which sterling silver costume jewelry was produced and some can still be found in today&#x27;s vintage jewelry marketplace.

Modern costume jewelry incorporates a wide range of materials. High-end crystals, cubic zirconia simulated diamonds, and some semi-precious stones are used in place of precious stones. Metals include gold- or silver-plated brass, and sometimes vermeil or sterling silver. Lower-priced jewelry may still use gold plating over pewter, nickel, or other metals; items made in countries outside the United States may contain lead. Some pieces incorporate plastic, acrylic, leather, or wood.

==Historical expression==
Costume jewelry can be characterized by the period in history in which it was made.

===Art Deco period (1920–1930s)===
The Art Deco movement was an attempt to combine the harshness of mass production with the sensitivity of art and design. The movement died with the onset of the Great Depression and the outbreak of World War II.

According to Schiffer, some of the characteristics of the costume jewelry in the Art Deco period were:
* Free-flowing curves were replaced with a harshly geometric and symmetrical theme
* Long pendants, bangle bracelets, cocktail rings, and elaborate accessory items such as cigarette cases and holders

===Retro period (1935 to 1950)===
In the Retro period, designers struggled with the art versus mass production dilemma. Natural materials merged with plastics. The retro period primarily included American-made jewelry, which had a distinctly American look. With the war in Europe, many European jewelry firms were forced to shut down. Many European designers emigrated to the U.S. since the economy was recovering.

According to Schiffer, some of the characteristics of costume jewelry in the Retro period were:
* Glamour, elegance, and sophistication
* Flowers, bows, and sunburst designs with a Hollywood flair
* Moonstones, horse motifs, military influence, and ballerinas
* Bakelite and other plastic jewelry

===Art Modern period (1945 to 1960)===

In the Art Modern period following World War II, jewelry designs became more traditional and understated. The big, bold styles of the Retro period went out of style and were replaced by the more tailored styles of the 1950s and 1960s.

According to Schiffer, some of the characteristics of costume jewelry in the Art Modern period were:
* Bold, lavish jewelry
* Large, chunky bracelets, charm bracelets, Jade/opal, citrine and topaz
* Poodle pins, Christmas tree pins, and other Christmas jewelry
* Rhinestones

With the advent of the Mod period came &quot;Body Jewelry&quot;. Carl Schimel of Kim Craftsmen Jewelry was at the forefront of this style. While Kim Craftsmen closed in the early 1990s, many collectors still forage for their items at antique shows and flea markets.

==General history==
Costume jewelry has been part of the culture for almost 300 years. During the 18th century, jewelers began making pieces with inexpensive glass. In the 19th century, costume jewelry made of semi-precious material came into the market. Jewels made of semi-precious material were more affordable, and this affordability gave common people the chance to own costume jewelry.

But the real golden era for costume jewelry began in the middle of the 20th century. The new middle class wanted beautiful, but affordable jewelry. The demand for jewelry of this type coincided with the machine age and the Industrial Revolution. The revolution made the production of carefully executed replicas of admired heirloom pieces possible.

As the class structure in America changed, so did measures of real wealth. Women in all social stations, even the working-class woman, could own a small piece of costume jewelry. The average town and countrywoman could acquire and wear a considerable amount of this mass-produced jewelry that was both affordable and stylish.

Costume jewelry was also made popular by various designers in the mid-20th century. Some of the most remembered names in costume jewelry include both the high and low priced brands: Crown Trifari, Dior, Chanel, Miriam Haskell, Sherman, Monet, Napier, Corocraft, Coventry, and Kim Craftsmen.

A significant factor in the popularization of costume jewelry was Hollywood movies. The leading female stars of the 1940s and 1950s often wore and then endorsed the pieces produced by a range of designers. If you admired a necklace worn by Bette Davis in &quot;The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex&quot;, you could buy a copy from Joseff of Hollywood, who made the original. Stars such as Vivien Leigh, Elizabeth Taylor, and Jane Russell appeared in adverts for the pieces and the availability of the collections in shops such as Woolworth made it possible for ordinary women to own and wear such jewelry.

Coco Chanel greatly popularized the use of jewelry in her years as a fashion designer, bringing costume jewelry to life with gold and faux pearls. Chanel’s designs drew from a variety of historical styles, including Byzantine and Renaissance influences, often featuring crosses and intricate metalwork. Her collaboration with glassmakers, such as the Gripoix family, introduced richly colored glass beads and simulated gemstones, which added depth to her creations without the high cost of traditional precious stones. 
Kenneth Jay Lane has since the 1960s been known for creating unique pieces for Jackie Onassis, Elizabeth Taylor, Diana Vreeland, and Audrey Hepburn. He is probably best known for his three-strand faux pearl necklace worn by Barbara Bush to her husband&#x27;s inaugural ball. Other celebrated names who wore Lane’s creations include Jackie Kennedy, Babe Paley, the Duchess of Windsor, and Nancy Reagan. 

Elsa Schiaparelli brought surrealist influences into costume jewelry design, collaborating with artists such as Salvador Dalí.

In many instances, high-end fashion jewelry has achieved a &quot;collectible&quot; status and increased value over time. Today, there is a substantial secondary market for vintage fashion jewelry. The main collecting market is for &#x27;signed pieces&#x27;, that is pieces that have the maker&#x27;s mark, usually stamped on the reverse. Amongst the most sought after are Miriam Haskell, Sherman, Coro, Butler and Wilson, Crown Trifari, and Sphinx. However, there is also demand for good quality &#x27;unsigned&#x27; pieces, especially if they are of an unusual design.

== Business and industry ==
Costume jewelry is considered a discrete category of fashion accessory and displays many characteristics of a self-contained industry. Costume jewelry manufacturers are located throughout the world, with a particular concentration in parts of China and India, where entire citywide and region-wide economies are dominated by the trade of these goods. There has been considerable controversy in the United States and elsewhere about the lack of regulations in the manufacture of such jewelry—these range from human rights issues surrounding the treatment of labor, to the use of manufacturing processes in which small, but potentially harmful, amounts of toxic metals are added during production. In 2010, the Associated Press released the story that toxic levels of the metal cadmium were found in children&#x27;s jewelry. An Associated Press investigation found some pieces contained more than 80 percent of cadmium. The wider issues surrounding imports, exports, trade laws, and globalization also apply to the costume jewelry trade.

As part of the supply chain, wholesalers in the United States and other nations purchase costume jewelry from manufacturers and typically import or export it to wholesale distributors and suppliers who deal directly with retailers. Wholesale costume jewelry merchants will traditionally seek out new suppliers at trade shows. As the Internet has become increasingly important in global trade, the trade-show model has changed. Retailers can now select from a large number of wholesalers with sites on the World Wide Web. The wholesalers purchase from international suppliers who are also available on the Web from different parts of the world like Chinese, Korean, Indonesian, Thai, and Indian jewelry companies, with their wide range of products in bulk quantities. Some of these sites also market directly to consumers who can purchase costume jewelry at greatly reduced prices. Some of these websites categorize fashion jewelry separately, while others use this term in place of costume jewelry. The trend of jewelry-making at home by hobbyists for personal enjoyment or for sale on sites like Etsy has resulted in the common practice of buying wholesale costume jewelry in bulk and using it for parts.

There is a rise in demand for artificial or imitation jewelry by 85% due to the increase in gold prices, according to a 2011 report.

==See also==
* Marcasite jewelry
* Gustave Sherman

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1536680" start="0" end="26" title="Costume jewelry" label="Costume or fashion jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="47" end="91" title="jewelry" label="decorative items worn for personal adornment"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="817" end="823" title="Clothing" label="outfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q615476" start="940" end="950" title="rhinestone" label="rhinestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="955" end="961" title="lucite" label="lucite"/>
<link wikidata="Q852372" start="970" end="976" title="pewter" label="pewter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="978" end="984" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q744" start="986" end="992" title="nickel" label="nickel"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="997" end="1002" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="1151" end="1166" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q31576" start="1486" end="1501" title="sterling silver" label="sterling silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="1770" end="1778" title="crystals" label="crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q225666" start="1780" end="1794" title="cubic zirconia" label="cubic zirconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q390584" start="1942" end="1949" title="vermeil" label="vermeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="2118" end="2122" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="2148" end="2155" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q342945" start="2157" end="2164" title="Acrylic resin" label="acrylic"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="2166" end="2173" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="2335" end="2343" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2492" end="2508" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2529" end="2541" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="2943" end="2958" title="mass production" label="mass production"/>
<link wikidata="Q146578" start="3526" end="3534" title="Bakelite" label="Bakelite"/>
<link wikidata="Q134985" start="4029" end="4034" title="topaz" label="topaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q241588" start="4867" end="4879" title="middle class" label="middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="4997" end="5018" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842191" start="5097" end="5105" title="heirloom" label="heirloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q542767" start="5648" end="5652" title="Dior" label="Dior"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="5654" end="5660" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873335" start="5662" end="5676" title="Miriam Haskell" label="Miriam Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127268808" start="5678" end="5685" title="Gustave Sherman" label="Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q296" start="5687" end="5692" title="Monet" label="Monet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17142651" start="5694" end="5700" title="Napier Company (jewellery)" label="Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172080" start="5702" end="5711" title="Corocraft" label="Corocraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="5713" end="5721" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="5983" end="5994" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420016" start="6004" end="6044" title="The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex" label="The Private Lives of Elizabeth and Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q25111433" start="6078" end="6097" title="Joseff of Hollywood" label="Joseff of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q129429" start="6136" end="6148" title="Vivien Leigh" label="Vivien Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="6150" end="6166" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q217033" start="6172" end="6184" title="Jane Russell" label="Jane Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q642212" start="6277" end="6286" title="F.W. Woolworth Company" label="Woolworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q45661" start="6354" end="6365" title="Coco Chanel" label="Coco Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="6584" end="6595" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390263" start="6874" end="6890" title="Kenneth Jay Lane" label="Kenneth Jay Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="6953" end="6967" title="Jackie Onassis" label="Jackie Onassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="6969" end="6985" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q450619" start="6987" end="7001" title="Diana Vreeland" label="Diana Vreeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="7007" end="7021" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q190628" start="7098" end="7110" title="Barbara Bush" label="Barbara Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417098" start="7133" end="7142" title="inaugural" label="inaugural"/>
<link wikidata="Q464023" start="7278" end="7295" title="Elsa Schiaparelli" label="Elsa Schiaparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="7390" end="7403" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997611" start="7578" end="7585" title="vintage (design)" label="vintage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873335" start="7778" end="7792" title="Miriam Haskell" label="Miriam Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172080" start="7803" end="7807" title="Corocraft" label="Coro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065579" start="8058" end="8075" title="fashion accessory" label="fashion accessory"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="8513" end="8525" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215775" start="8659" end="8671" title="toxic metals" label="toxic metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091" start="8781" end="8788" title="cadmium" label="cadmium"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="8831" end="8847" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="8986" end="8999" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824206" start="9057" end="9069" title="supply chain" label="supply chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="9355" end="9366" title="trade shows" label="trade shows"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="9375" end="9383" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536680" start="9957" end="9972" title="fashion jewelry" label="fashion jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353939" start="10139" end="10143" title="Etsy" label="Etsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756017" start="10398" end="10415" title="Marcasite jewellery" label="Marcasite jewelry"/>
<link wikidata="Q127268808" start="10418" end="10433" title="Gustave Sherman" label="Gustave Sherman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5643" wikidata="Q42314" url="?curid=5643" title="Channel Islands">
<text>The Channel Islands are an archipelago in the English Channel, off the French coast of Normandy. They are divided into two Crown Dependencies: the Bailiwick of Jersey, which is the largest of the islands; and the Bailiwick of Guernsey, consisting of Guernsey, Alderney, Sark, Herm and some smaller islands. Historically, they are the remnants of the Duchy of Normandy. Although they are not part of the United Kingdom, the UK is responsible for the defence and international relations of the islands as it is for the other Crown Dependency, the Isle of Man, and the British Overseas Territories. The Crown Dependencies are neither members of the Commonwealth of Nations, nor part of the European Union. They have a total population of about , and the bailiwicks&#x27; capitals, Saint Helier and Saint Peter Port, have populations of 33,500 and 18,207 respectively.

&quot;Channel Islands&quot; is a geographical term, not a political unit. The two bailiwicks have been administered separately since the late 13th century. Each has its own independent laws, elections, and representative bodies (although in modern times, politicians from the islands&#x27; legislatures are in regular contact). Any institution common to both is the exception rather than the rule.

The Bailiwick of Guernsey is divided into three jurisdictions – Guernsey, Alderney and Sark – each with its own legislature. Although there are a few pan-island institutions (such as the Channel Islands Brussels Office, the Director of Civil Aviation and the Channel Islands Financial Ombudsman, which are actually joint ventures between the bailiwicks), these tend to be established structurally as equal projects between Guernsey and Jersey. Otherwise, entities whose names imply membership of both Guernsey and Jersey might in fact be from one bailiwick only. For instance, The International Stock Exchange is in Saint Peter Port and therefore is in Guernsey.

The term &quot;Channel Islands&quot; began to be used around 1830, possibly first by the Royal Navy as a collective name for the islands. The term refers only to the archipelago to the west of the Cotentin Peninsula. Other populated islands located in the English Channel, and close to the coast of Britain, such as the Isle of Wight, Hayling Island and Portsea Island, are not regarded as &quot;Channel Islands&quot;.

== Geography ==

The two major islands are Jersey and Guernsey. They make up 99% of the population and 92% of the area.

===List of islands===

===Names===
The names of the larger islands in the archipelago in general have the &quot;-ey&quot; suffix, whilst those of the smaller ones have the &quot;-hou&quot; suffix. These are believed to be from the Old Norse &quot;ey&quot; (island) and &quot;holmr&quot; (islet).

===The Chausey Islands===
The Chausey Islands south of Jersey are not generally included in the geographical definition of the Channel Islands but are occasionally described in English as &#x27;French Channel Islands&#x27; in view of their French jurisdiction. They were historically linked to the Duchy of Normandy, but they are part of the French territory along with continental Normandy, and not part of the British Isles or of the Channel Islands in a political sense. They are an incorporated part of the commune of Granville (Manche). While they are popular with visitors from France, Channel Islanders can only visit them by private or charter boats as there are no direct transport links from the other islands.

In official Jersey Standard French, the Channel Islands are called &#x27;Îles de la Manche&#x27;, while in France, the term &#x27;Îles Anglo-normandes&#x27; (Anglo-Norman Isles) is used to refer to the British &#x27;Channel Islands&#x27; in contrast to other islands in the Channel. Chausey is referred to as an &#x27;Île normande&#x27; (as opposed to &quot;Anglo-normande&quot;). &#x27;Îles Normandes&#x27; and &#x27;Archipel Normand&#x27; have also, historically, been used in Channel Island French to refer to the islands as a whole.

===Waters===
The very large tidal variation provides an environmentally rich inter-tidal zone around the islands, and some islands such as Burhou, the Écréhous, and the Minquiers have been designated Ramsar sites.

The waters around the islands include the following:
*The Swinge (between Alderney and Burhou)
*The Little Swinge (between Burhou and Les Nannels)
*La Déroute (between Jersey and Sark, and Jersey and the Cotentin)
*Le Raz Blanchard, or Race of Alderney (between Alderney and the Cotentin)
*The Great Russel (between Sark, Jéthou and Herm)
*The Little Russel (between Guernsey, Herm and Jéthou)
*Souachehouais (between Le Rigdon and L&#x27;Étacq, Jersey)
*Le Gouliot (between Sark and Brecqhou)
*La Percée (between Herm and Jéthou)

===Highest point===
The highest point in the islands is Les Platons in Jersey at 143 metres (469 ft) above sea level. The lowest point is the English Channel (sea level).

==Climate==
== History ==

===Prehistory===

The earliest evidence of human occupation of the Channel Islands has been dated to 250,000 years ago when they were attached to the landmass of continental Europe. The islands became detached by rising sea levels in the Mesolithic period. The numerous dolmens and other archaeological sites extant and recorded in history demonstrate the existence of a population large enough and organised enough to undertake constructions of considerable size and sophistication, such as the burial mound at La Hougue Bie in Jersey or the statue menhirs of Guernsey.

===From the Iron Age===
Hoards of Armorican coins have been excavated, providing evidence of trade and contact in the Iron Age period. Evidence for Roman settlement is sparse, although evidently the islands were visited by Roman officials and traders. The Roman name for the Channel Islands was &quot;I. Lenuri&quot; (Lenur Islands) and is included in the Peutinger Table. The traditional Latin names used for the islands (Caesarea for Jersey, Sarnia for Guernsey, Riduna for Alderney) derive (possibly mistakenly) from the Antonine Itinerary. Gallo-Roman culture was adopted to an unknown extent in the islands.

In the sixth century, Christian missionaries visited the islands. Samson of Dol, Helier, Marculf and Magloire are among saints associated with the islands. In the sixth century, they were already included in the diocese of Coutances where they remained until the Reformation.

There were probably some Celtic Britons who settled on the Islands in the 5th and 6th centuries AD (the indigenous Celts of Great Britain, and the ancestors of the modern Welsh, Cornish, and Bretons) who had emigrated from Great Britain in the face of invading Anglo-Saxons. But there were not enough of them to leave any trace, and the islands continued to be ruled by the king of the Franks and its church remained part of the diocese of Coutances.

From the beginning of the ninth century, Norse raiders appeared on the coasts. Norse settlement eventually succeeded initial attacks, and it is from this period that many place names of Norse origin appear, including the modern names of the islands.

===From the Duchy of Normandy===
In 933, the islands were granted to William I Longsword by Raoul, the King of Western Francia, and annexed to the Duchy of Normandy. In 1066, William II of Normandy invaded and conquered England, becoming William I of England, also known as William the Conqueror. In the period 1204–1214, King John lost the Angevin lands in northern France, including mainland Normandy, to King Philip II of France, but managed to retain control of the Channel Islands. In 1259, his successor, Henry III of England, by the Treaty of Paris, officially surrendered his claim and title to the Duchy of Normandy, while retaining the Channel Islands, as peer of France and feudal vassal of the King of France. Since then, the Channel Islands have been governed as two separate bailiwicks and were never absorbed into the Kingdom of England nor its successor kingdoms of Great Britain or the United Kingdom. During the Hundred Years&#x27; War, the Channel Islands were part of the French territory recognizing the claims of the English kings to the French throne.

The islands were invaded by the French in 1338, who held some territory until 1345. Edward III of England granted a Charter in July 1341 to Jersey, Guernsey, Sark and Alderney, confirming their customs and laws to secure allegiance to the English Crown. Owain Lawgoch, a mercenary leader of a Free Company in the service of the French Crown, attacked Jersey and Guernsey in 1372, and in 1373 Bertrand du Guesclin besieged Mont Orgueil. The young King Richard II of England reconfirmed in 1378 the Charter rights granted by his grandfather, followed in 1394 with a second Charter granting, because of great loyalty shown to the Crown, exemption forever, from English tolls, customs and duties. Jersey was occupied by the French in 1461 as part of an exchange for helping the Lancastrians fight against the Yorkists during The War of the Roses. It was retaken by the Yorkists in 1468. In 1483 a Papal bull decreed that the islands would be neutral during time of war. This privilege of neutrality enabled islanders to trade with both France and England and was respected until 1689 when it was abolished by Order in Council following the Glorious Revolution in Great Britain.

Various attempts to transfer the islands from the diocese of Coutances (to Nantes (1400), Salisbury (1496), and Winchester (1499)) had little effect until an Order in Council of 1569 brought the islands formally into the diocese of Winchester. Control by the bishop of Winchester was ineffectual as the islands had turned overwhelmingly Calvinist and the episcopacy was not restored until 1620 in Jersey and 1663 in Guernsey.

After the loss of Calais in 1558, the Channel Islands were the last remaining English holdings in France and the only French territory that was controlled by the English kings as Kings of France. This situation lasted until the English kings dropped their title and claims to the French throne in 1801, confirming the Channel Islands in a situation of a crown dependency under the sovereignty of neither Great Britain nor France but of the British crown directly.

Sark in the 16th century was uninhabited until colonised from Jersey in the 1560s. The grant of seigneurship from Elizabeth I of England in 1565 forms the basis of Sark&#x27;s constitution today.

===From the 17th century===

During the Wars of the Three Kingdoms, Jersey held out strongly for the Royalist cause, providing refuge for Charles, Prince of Wales in 1646 and 1649–1650, while the more strongly Presbyterian Guernsey more generally favoured the parliamentary cause (although Castle Cornet was held by Royalists and did not surrender until October 1651).

The islands acquired commercial and political interests in the North American colonies. Islanders became involved with the Newfoundland fisheries in the 17th century. In recognition for all the help given to him during his exile in Jersey in the 1640s, Charles II gave George Carteret, Bailiff and governor, a large grant of land in the American colonies, which he promptly named New Jersey, now part of the United States of America. Sir Edmund Andros, bailiff of Guernsey, was an early colonial governor in North America, and head of the short-lived Dominion of New England.

In the late 18th century, the islands were dubbed &quot;the French Isles&quot;. Wealthy French émigrés fleeing the French Revolution sought residency in the islands. Many of the town domiciles existing today were built in that time. In Saint Peter Port, a large part of the harbour had been built by 1865.

===20th century===

====World War II====


The islands were occupied by the German Army during World War II.

The British Government demilitarised the islands in June 1940, and the lieutenant-governors were withdrawn on 21 June, leaving the insular administrations to continue government as best they could under impending military occupation.

Before German troops landed, between 30 June and 4 July 1940, evacuation took place. Many young men had already left to join the Allied armed forces, as volunteers. 6,600 out of 50,000 left Jersey while 17,000 out of 42,000 left Guernsey. Thousands of children were evacuated with their schools to England and Scotland.
The population of Sark largely remained where they were; but in Alderney, all but six people left. In Alderney, the occupying Germans built four prison camps which housed approximately 6,000 people, of whom over 700 died. Due to the destruction of documents, it is impossible to state how many forced workers died in the other islands. Some have claimed that Alderney had the only Nazi concentration camps on British soil. Others have pointed out that, technically, Alderney was not British soil.

The Royal Navy blockaded the islands from time to time, particularly following the Invasion of Normandy in June 1944. There was considerable hunger and privation during the five years of German occupation, particularly in the final months when the population was close to starvation. Intense negotiations resulted in some humanitarian aid being sent via the Red Cross, leading to the arrival of Red Cross parcels in the supply ship SS &quot;Vega&quot; in December 1944.

The German occupation of 1940–45 was harsh: over 2,000 islanders were deported by the Germans, and some Jews were sent to concentration camps; partisan resistance and retribution, accusations of collaboration, and slave labour also occurred. Many Spaniards, initially refugees from the Spanish Civil War, were brought to the islands to build fortifications. Later, Russians and Central Europeans continued the work. Many land mines were laid, with 65,718 land mines laid in Jersey alone.

There was no resistance movement in the Channel Islands on the scale of that in mainland France. This has been ascribed to a range of factors including the physical separation of the islands, the density of troops (up to one German for every two Islanders), the small size of the islands precluding any hiding places for resistance groups, and the absence of the Gestapo from the occupying forces. Moreover, much of the population of military age had already joined the British Army.

The end of the occupation came after VE-Day on 8 May 1945, with Jersey and Guernsey being liberated on 9 May. The German garrison in Alderney was left until 16 May, and it was one of the last of the Nazi German remnants to surrender. The first evacuees returned on the first sailing from Great Britain on 23 June, but the people of Alderney were unable to start returning until December 1945. Many of the evacuees who returned home had difficulty reconnecting with their families after five years of separation.

====After 1945====
Following the liberation of 1945, reconstruction led to a transformation of the economies of the islands, attracting immigration and developing tourism. The legislatures were reformed and non-party governments embarked on social programmes, aided by the incomes from offshore finance, which grew rapidly from the 1960s. The islands decided not to join the European Economic Community when the UK joined. Since the 1990s, declining profitability of agriculture and tourism has challenged the governments of the islands.

== Flag gallery ==
== Governance ==

The Channel Islands fall into two separate self-governing bailiwicks, the Bailiwick of Guernsey and the Bailiwick of Jersey. Each of these is a British Crown Dependency, and neither is a part of the United Kingdom. They have been parts of the Duchy of Normandy since the 10th century, and Queen Elizabeth II was often referred to by her traditional and conventional title of Duke of Normandy. However, pursuant to the Treaty of Paris (1259), she governed in her right as The Queen (the &quot;Crown in right of Jersey&quot;, and the &quot;Crown in right of the &quot;république&quot; of the Bailiwick of Guernsey&quot;), and not as the Duke. This notwithstanding, it is a matter of local pride for monarchists to treat the situation otherwise: the Loyal toast at formal dinners was to &#x27;The Queen, our Duke&#x27;, rather than to &#x27;Her Majesty, The Queen&#x27; as in the UK. The Queen died in 2022 and her son Charles III became the King.

A bailiwick is a territory administered by a bailiff. Although the words derive from a common root (&#x27;bail&#x27; = &#x27;to give charge of&#x27;) there is a vast difference between the meanings of the word &#x27;bailiff&#x27; in Great Britain and in the Channel Islands; a bailiff in Britain is a court-appointed private debt-collector authorised to collect judgment debts, in the Channel Islands, the Bailiff in each bailiwick is the civil head, presiding officer of the States, and also head of the judiciary, and thus the most important citizen in the bailiwick.

In the early 21st century, the existence of governmental offices such as the bailiffs&#x27; with multiple roles straddling the different branches of government came under increased scrutiny for their apparent contravention of the doctrine of separation of powers—most notably in the Guernsey case of &quot;McGonnell -v- United Kingdom&quot; (2000) 30 EHRR 289. That case, following final judgement at the European Court of Human Rights, became part of the impetus for much recent constitutional change, particularly the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 (2005 c.4) in the UK, including the separation of the roles of the Lord Chancellor, the abolition of the House of Lords&#x27; judicial role, and its replacement by the UK Supreme Court. The islands&#x27; bailiffs, however, still retain their historic roles.

The systems of government in the islands date from Norman times, which accounts for the names of the legislatures, the States, derived from the Norman &#x27;États&#x27; or &#x27;estates&#x27; (i.e. the Crown, the Church, and the people). The States have evolved over the centuries into democratic parliaments.
The UK Parliament has power to legislate for the islands, but Acts of Parliament do not extend to the islands automatically. Usually, an Act gives power to extend its application to the islands by an Order in Council, after consultation. For the most part the islands legislate for themselves. Each island has its own primary legislature, known as the States of Guernsey and the States of Jersey, with Chief Pleas in Sark and the States of Alderney. The Channel Islands are not represented in the UK Parliament. Laws passed by the States are given royal assent by the King-in-Council, to whom the islands&#x27; governments are responsible.

The islands have never been part of the European Union, and thus were not a party to the 2016 referendum on the EU membership, but were part of the Customs Territory of the European Community by virtue of Protocol Three to the Treaty on European Union. In September 2010, a Channel Islands Brussels Office was set up jointly by the two Bailiwicks to develop the Channel Islands&#x27; influence with the EU, to advise the Channel Islands&#x27; governments on European matters, and to promote economic links with the EU.

Both bailiwicks are members of the British–Irish Council, and Jèrriais and Guernésiais are recognised regional languages of the islands.

The legal courts are separate; separate courts of appeal have been in place since 1961. Among the legal heritage from Norman law is the Clameur de haro. The basis of the legal systems of both Bailiwicks is Norman customary law (Coutume) rather than the English Common Law, although elements of the latter have become established over time.

Islanders are full British citizens, but were not classed as European citizens unless by descent from a UK national. Any British citizen who applies for a passport in Jersey or Guernsey receives a passport bearing the words &quot;British Islands, Bailiwick of Jersey&quot; or &quot;British Islands, Bailiwick of Guernsey&quot;. Under the provisions of Protocol Three, Channel Islanders who do not have a close connection with the UK (no parent or grandparent from the UK, and have never been resident in the UK for a five-year period) did not automatically benefit from the EU provisions on free movement within the EU, and their passports received an endorsement to that effect. This affected only a minority of islanders.

Under the UK Interpretation Act 1978, the Channel Islands are deemed to be part of the British Islands, not to be confused with the British Isles. For the purposes of the British Nationality Act 1981, the &quot;British Islands&quot; include the United Kingdom (Great Britain and Northern Ireland), the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, taken together, unless the context otherwise requires.

== Economy ==

Tourism is still important. However, Jersey and Guernsey have, since the 1960s, become major offshore financial centres. Historically Guernsey&#x27;s horticultural and greenhouse activities have been more significant than in Jersey, and Guernsey has maintained light industry as a higher proportion of its economy than Jersey. In Jersey, potatoes are an important export crop, shipped mostly to the UK.

Jersey is heavily reliant on financial services, with 39.4% of Gross Value Added (GVA) in 2018 contributed by the sector. Rental income comes second at 15.1% with other business activities at 11.2%. Tourism 4.5% with agriculture contributing just 1.2% and manufacturing even lower at 1.1%. GVA has fluctuated between £4.5 and £5 billion for 20 years.

Jersey has had a steadily rising population, increasing from below 90,000 in 2000 to over 105,000 in 2018 which combined with a flat GVA has resulted in GVA per head of population falling from £57,000 to £44,000 per person. 

In 2018, Guernsey had a GDP of £3.2 billion and with a stable population of around 66,000 has had a steadily rising GDP, and a GVA per head of population which in 2018 surpassed £52,000.

Both bailiwicks issue their own banknotes and coins, which circulate freely in all the islands alongside UK coinage and Bank of England and Scottish banknotes.

== Transport and communications ==

===Post===

Since 1969, Jersey and Guernsey have operated postal administrations independently of the UK&#x27;s Royal Mail, with their own postage stamps, which can be used for postage only in their respective Bailiwicks. UK stamps are no longer valid, but mail to the islands, and to the Isle of Man, is charged at UK inland rates. It was not until the early 1990s that the islands joined the UK&#x27;s postcode system, Jersey postcodes using the initials JE and Guernsey GY.

===Transport===
====Road====

Each of the three largest islands has a distinct vehicle registration scheme:
*Guernsey (GBG): a number of up to five digits;
*Jersey (GBJ): &quot;J&quot; followed by up to six digits (&quot;JSY&quot; vanity plates are also issued);
*Alderney (GBA): &quot;AY&quot; followed by up to five digits (four digits are the most that have been used, as redundant numbers are re-issued).

In Sark, where most motor traffic is prohibited, the few vehicles – nearly all tractors – do not display plates. Bicycles display tax discs.

====Sea====
In the 1960s, names used for the cross-Channel ferries plying the mail route between the islands and Weymouth, Dorset, were taken from the popular Latin names for the islands: (Jersey), (Guernsey) and (Alderney). Fifty years later, the ferry route between the Channel Islands and the UK is operated by Condor Ferries from both St Helier, Jersey and St Peter Port, Guernsey, using high-speed catamaran fast craft to Poole in the UK. A regular passenger ferry service on the Commodore Clipper goes from both Channel Island ports to Portsmouth daily, and carries both passengers and freight.

Ferry services to Normandy are operated by , and services between Jersey and Saint-Malo are operated by and Condor Ferries. The Isle of Sark Shipping Company operates small ferries to Sark. Normandy Trader operates an ex military tank landing craft for transporting freight between the islands and France.

On 20 August 2013, , which had operated a &quot;lift-on lift-off&quot; container service for 80 years between the Port of Southampton and the Port of Jersey, ceased trading. Senator Alan Maclean, a Jersey politician, had previously tried to save the 90-odd jobs furnished by the company to no avail. On 20 September, it was announced that Channel Island Lines would continue this service, and would purchase the MV &quot;Huelin Dispatch&quot; from Associated British Ports who in turn had purchased them from the receiver in the bankruptcy. The new operator was to be funded by Rockayne Limited, a closely held association of Jersey businesspeople.

====Air====

There are three airports in the Channel Islands: Alderney Airport, Guernsey Airport and Jersey Airport. They are directly connected to each other by services operated by Blue Islands and Aurigny.

====Rail====
Historically, there have been railway networks on Jersey, Guernsey, and Alderney, but all of the lines on Jersey and Guernsey have been closed and dismantled. Today there are three working railways in the Channel Islands, of which the Alderney Railway is the only one providing a regular timetabled passenger service. The other two are a gauge miniature railway, also on Alderney, and the heritage steam railway operated on Jersey as part of the Pallot Heritage Steam Museum.

===Media===
The Channel Islands are served by a number of local radio services – BBC Radio Jersey and BBC Radio Guernsey, Channel 103 and Island FM – as well as regional television news opt-outs from BBC Channel Islands and ITV Channel Television.

On 1 August 2021, DAB+ digital radio became available for the first time, introducing new stations like the local Bailiwick Radio and Soleil Radio, and UK-wide services like Capital, Heart, and Times Radio.

There are two broadcast transmitters serving Jersey – at Frémont Point and Les Platons – as well as one at Les Touillets in Guernsey and a relay in Alderney.

There are several local newspapers including the Guernsey Press and the Jersey Evening Post and magazines.

===Telephone===

Jersey always operated its own telephone services independently of Britain&#x27;s national system, Guernsey established its own telephone service in 1968. Both islands still form part of the British telephone numbering plan, but Ofcom on the mainlines does not have responsibility for telecommunications regulatory and licensing issues on the islands. It is responsible for wireless telegraphy licensing throughout the islands, and by agreement, for broadcasting regulation in the two large islands only. Submarine cables connect the various islands and provide connectivity with England and France.

===Internet===
Modern broadband speeds are available on all of the islands, including full-fibre (FTTH) in Jersey (offering speeds of up to 1 Gbit/s on all broadband connections) and VDSL and some business and homes with fibre connectivity in Guernsey. Providers include Sure and JT.

The two Bailiwicks each have their own internet domain, .GG (Guernsey, Alderney, Sark) and .JE (Jersey), which are managed by channelisles.net.

== Culture ==


The Norman language predominated in the islands until the nineteenth century, when increasing influence from English-speaking settlers and easier transport links led to Anglicisation. There are four main dialects/languages of Norman in the islands, Auregnais (Alderney, extinct in late twentieth century), Dgèrnésiais (Guernsey), Jèrriais (Jersey) and Sercquiais (Sark, an offshoot of Jèrriais).

Victor Hugo spent many years in exile, first in Jersey and then in Guernsey, where he finished &quot;Les Misérables&quot;. Guernsey is the setting of Hugo&#x27;s later novel &quot;Les Travailleurs de la Mer&quot; (&quot;Toilers of the Sea&quot;). A &quot;Guernsey-man&quot; also makes an appearance in chapter 91 of Herman Melville&#x27;s &quot;Moby-Dick&quot;.

The annual &quot;Muratti&quot;, the inter-island football match, is considered the sporting event of the year, although, due to broadcast coverage, it no longer attracts the crowds of spectators, travelling between the islands, that it did during the twentieth century.

Cricket is popular in the Channel Islands. The Jersey cricket team and the Guernsey cricket team are both associate members of the International Cricket Council. The teams have played each other in the inter-insular match since 1957. In 2001 and 2002, the Channel Islands entered a team into the MCCA Knockout Trophy, the one-day tournament of the minor counties of English and Welsh cricket.

Channel Island sportsmen and women compete in the Commonwealth Games for their respective islands and the islands have also been enthusiastic supporters of the Island Games. Shooting is a popular sport, in which islanders have won Commonwealth medals.

Guernsey&#x27;s traditional colour for sporting and other purposes is green and Jersey&#x27;s is red.

The main islanders have traditional animal nicknames:

*Guernsey: &quot;les ânes&quot; (&quot;donkeys&quot; in French and Norman): the steepness of St Peter Port streets required beasts of burden, but Guernsey people also claim it is a symbol of their strength of characterwhich Jersey people traditionally interpret as stubbornness.
*Jersey: &quot;les crapauds&quot; (&quot;toads&quot; in French and Jèrriais): Jersey has toads and snakes, which Guernsey lacks.
*Sark: &quot;les corbins&quot; (&quot;crows&quot; in Sercquiais, Dgèrnésiais and Jèrriais, &quot;les corbeaux&quot; in French): crows could be seen from the sea on the island&#x27;s coast.
*Alderney: &quot;les lapins&quot; (&quot;rabbits&quot; in French and Auregnais): the island is noted for its warrens.

=== Religion ===

Christianity was brought to the islands around the sixth century; according to tradition, Jersey was evangelised by St Helier, Guernsey by St Samson of Dol, and the smaller islands were occupied at various times by monastic communities representing strands of Celtic Christianity. At the Reformation, the previously Catholic islands converted to Calvinism under the influence of an influx of French-language pamphlets published in Geneva. Anglicanism was imposed in the seventeenth century, but the Nonconformist local tendency returned with a strong adoption of Methodism. In the late twentieth century, a strong Catholic presence re-emerged with the arrival of numerous Portuguese workers (both from mainland Portugal and the island of Madeira). Their numbers have been reinforced by recent migrants from Poland and elsewhere in Eastern Europe. Today, Evangelical churches have been established. Services are held in a number of languages.

According to 2015 statistics, 39% of the population was non-religious.

== Other islands in the English Channel ==
A number of islands in the English Channel are part of France. Among these are Bréhat, Île de Batz, Chausey, Tatihou and the Îles Saint-Marcouf.

The Isle of Wight, which is part of England, lies just off the coast of Great Britain, between the Channel and the Solent.

Hayling and Portsea islands, both being near or part of Portsmouth, are also part of England (and thus part of the United Kingdom).

== See also ==
*German occupation of the Channel Islands
*List of churches, chapels and meeting halls in the Channel Islands
*Places named after the Channel Islands

== Notes ==
== References ==
==Bibliography==
*Encyclopædia Britannica Vol. 5 (1951), Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., Chicago – London – Toronto
* – Republished 
*Hamlin, John F. &quot;No &#x27;Safe Haven&#x27;: Military Aviation in the Channel Islands 1939–1945&quot; &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot;, No. 83, September/October 1999, pp. 6–15 
*

== External links ==
*States of Alderney
*States of Guernsey
*States of Jersey
*Government of Sark </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="4" end="19" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="27" end="38" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="46" end="61" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="87" end="95" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="123" end="141" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="147" end="166" title="Jersey" label="Bailiwick of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="213" end="234" title="Bailiwick of Guernsey" label="Bailiwick of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="250" end="258" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q179313" start="260" end="268" title="Alderney" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405693" start="270" end="274" title="Sark" label="Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q202023" start="276" end="280" title="Herm" label="Herm"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="350" end="367" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="403" end="417" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="545" end="556" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="566" end="594" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="646" end="669" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="687" end="701" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="768" end="776" title="Capital city" label="capitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="778" end="790" title="Saint Helier" label="Saint Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q174262" start="795" end="811" title="Saint Peter Port" label="Saint Peter Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996207" start="948" end="957" title="bailiwick" label="bailiwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="1377" end="1388" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q15675825" start="1842" end="1874" title="The International Stock Exchange" label="The International Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="2018" end="2028" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q463529" start="2126" end="2144" title="Cotentin Peninsula" label="Cotentin Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="2249" end="2262" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541751" start="2264" end="2278" title="Hayling Island" label="Hayling Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228829" start="2283" end="2297" title="Portsea Island" label="Portsea Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048822" start="2648" end="2652" title="-hou" label="-hou"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2701" end="2710" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q292600" start="2797" end="2804" title="Chausey" label="Chausey"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="3179" end="3192" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12589" start="3300" end="3306" title="Manche" label="Manche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047043" start="3501" end="3523" title="Jersey Legal French" label="Jersey Standard French"/>
<link wikidata="Q945712" start="4166" end="4172" title="Burhou" label="Burhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q776075" start="4178" end="4186" title="Écréhous" label="Écréhous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435852" start="4196" end="4205" title="Minquiers" label="Minquiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19683138" start="4227" end="4239" title="Ramsar sites" label="Ramsar sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767687" start="4296" end="4306" title="The Swinge" label="The Swinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3421358" start="4478" end="4494" title="Alderney Race" label="Race of Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114565" start="4536" end="4548" title="Great Russel" label="Great Russel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377211" start="4586" end="4599" title="Little Russel" label="Little Russel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199337" start="4830" end="4841" title="Les Platons" label="Les Platons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23582173" start="5186" end="5203" title="past sea level" label="rising sea levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="5211" end="5221" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101659" start="5243" end="5249" title="dolmen" label="dolmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395892" start="5485" end="5498" title="La Hougue Bie" label="La Hougue Bie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145153" start="5516" end="5529" title="statue menhir" label="statue menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q641203" start="5579" end="5587" title="Armorica" label="Armorica"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="5589" end="5593" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="5663" end="5671" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q12767" start="5901" end="5916" title="Tabula Peutingeriana" label="Peutinger Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q512256" start="6069" end="6087" title="Antonine Itinerary" label="Antonine Itinerary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364601" start="6089" end="6100" title="Gallo-Roman" label="Gallo-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269091" start="6225" end="6238" title="Samson of Dol" label="Samson of Dol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401089" start="6240" end="6246" title="Helier" label="Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q685409" start="6248" end="6255" title="Marculf" label="Marculf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463964" start="6260" end="6268" title="Magloire" label="Magloire"/>
<link wikidata="Q654701" start="6371" end="6391" title="diocese of Coutances" label="diocese of Coutances"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="6461" end="6475" title="Celtic Britons" label="Celtic Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="6560" end="6573" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="6607" end="6612" title="Welsh people" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="6614" end="6621" title="Cornish people" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q309197" start="6627" end="6634" title="Breton people" label="Bretons"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="6697" end="6709" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q654701" start="6865" end="6885" title="diocese of Coutances" label="diocese of Coutances"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="6929" end="6934" title="Vikings" label="Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733063" start="6935" end="6942" title="Viking expansion" label="raiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q313017" start="7208" end="7227" title="William I Longsword" label="William I Longsword"/>
<link wikidata="Q273273" start="7231" end="7236" title="Rudolph of France" label="Raoul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7238" end="7265" title="List of French monarchs#Carolingian Dynasty (752–987)" label="the King of Western Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="7286" end="7303" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="7314" end="7336" title="William I of England" label="William II of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="7461" end="7470" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q538677" start="7480" end="7493" title="Angevin lands" label="Angevin lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34428" start="7546" end="7570" title="Philip II of France" label="King Philip II of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="7650" end="7670" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q394387" start="7679" end="7694" title="Treaty of Paris (1259)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="7972" end="7990" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="8021" end="8034" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="8042" end="8056" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="8069" end="8092" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059702" start="8164" end="8212" title="English claims to the French throne" label="claims of the English kings to the French throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="8299" end="8320" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738520" start="8469" end="8482" title="Owain Lawgoch" label="Owain Lawgoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543015" start="8508" end="8520" title="Free Company" label="Free Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q314905" start="8607" end="8627" title="Bertrand du Guesclin" label="Bertrand du Guesclin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313383" start="8637" end="8649" title="Mont Orgueil" label="Mont Orgueil"/>
<link wikidata="Q81000" start="8666" end="8687" title="Richard II of England" label="Richard II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q127751" start="9036" end="9056" title="The War of the Roses" label="The War of the Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="9108" end="9118" title="Papal bull" label="Papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="9320" end="9336" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="9351" end="9370" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300687" start="9611" end="9632" title="diocese of Winchester" label="diocese of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="9727" end="9736" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="9745" end="9755" title="episcopacy" label="episcopacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="9835" end="9841" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366336" start="10378" end="10386" title="seigneur" label="seigneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="10396" end="10418" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="10519" end="10545" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="10617" end="10641" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="10689" end="10701" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q155252" start="10769" end="10782" title="Castle Cornet" label="Castle Cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q48335" start="10972" end="10984" title="Newfoundland (island)" label="Newfoundland"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="11102" end="11112" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q339077" start="11118" end="11133" title="George Carteret" label="George Carteret"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="11229" end="11239" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q659069" start="11283" end="11300" title="Edmund Andros" label="Sir Edmund Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748571" start="11400" end="11423" title="Dominion of New England" label="Dominion of New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="11541" end="11558" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q174262" start="11662" end="11678" title="Saint Peter Port" label="Saint Peter Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="11809" end="11820" title="Wehrmacht" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11828" end="11840" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="11847" end="11865" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185641" start="11866" end="11879" title="Demilitarisation" label="demilitarised"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="12376" end="12383" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="12388" end="12396" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12462" end="12470" title="Alderney#History" label="Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558981" start="12538" end="12555" title="Alderney camps" label="four prison camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q256091" start="12807" end="12814" title="British Islands" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12900" end="12910" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273976" start="12911" end="12919" title="blockade" label="blockade"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="12979" end="12999" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="Invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246269" start="13048" end="13057" title="privation" label="privation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="13254" end="13263" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303970" start="13291" end="13307" title="Red Cross parcel" label="Red Cross parcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21995605" start="13328" end="13347" title="SS Vega (1913)" label="SS &amp;quot;Vega&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="13489" end="13508" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q212948" start="13510" end="13518" title="Partisan (military)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="13562" end="13575" title="collaborationism" label="collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="13653" end="13670" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="13709" end="13722" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="13732" end="13738" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="13745" end="13759" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="13788" end="13797" title="land mine" label="land mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="13869" end="13888" title="resistance movement" label="resistance movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="13936" end="13951" title="French Resistance" label="mainland France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094191" start="14177" end="14187" title="Resistance during World War II" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="14219" end="14226" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="14378" end="14384" title="VE-Day" label="VE-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="14540" end="14551" title="Nazi German" label="Nazi German"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="15140" end="15156" title="offshore finance" label="offshore finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="15229" end="15256" title="European Economic Community" label="European Economic Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439978" start="15473" end="15487" title="federacy" label="self-governing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996207" start="15488" end="15497" title="bailiwick" label="bailiwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q25230" start="15504" end="15525" title="Bailiwick of Guernsey" label="Bailiwick of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="15534" end="15553" title="Jersey" label="Bailiwick of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="15574" end="15581" title="British Empire" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="15582" end="15598" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q842091" start="15673" end="15690" title="Duchy of Normandy" label="Duchy of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="15719" end="15737" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q460244" start="15805" end="15821" title="Duke of Normandy" label="Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q394387" start="15848" end="15870" title="Treaty of Paris (1259)" label="Treaty of Paris (1259)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694454" start="16177" end="16188" title="Loyal toast" label="Loyal toast"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="16346" end="16357" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848433" start="16782" end="16789" title="Bailiff (Channel Islands)" label="Bailiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q105985" start="16881" end="16890" title="judiciary" label="judiciary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122261" start="17666" end="17682" title="Supreme Court of the United Kingdom" label="UK Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="17808" end="17814" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="17901" end="17907" title="Norman language" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q657326" start="17935" end="17942" title="Estates of the realm" label="estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q899485" start="18267" end="18283" title="Order in Council" label="Order in Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368324" start="18419" end="18437" title="States of Guernsey" label="States of Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q946944" start="18446" end="18462" title="States of Jersey" label="States of Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604031" start="18497" end="18515" title="States of Alderney" label="States of Alderney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="18564" end="18577" title="UK Parliament" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="18615" end="18627" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271068" start="18635" end="18650" title="King-in-Council" label="King-in-Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="18748" end="18762" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q21812812" start="18802" end="18812" title="2016 United Kingdom European Union membership referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="18820" end="18822" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q52847" start="18881" end="18899" title="European Community" label="European Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q18647563" start="18935" end="18959" title="Treaty on European Union" label="Treaty on European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655795" start="19263" end="19284" title="British–Irish Council" label="British–Irish Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="19290" end="19298" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56428" start="19303" end="19314" title="Guernésiais" label="Guernésiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q770220" start="19330" end="19347" title="regional language" label="regional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q839033" start="19502" end="19517" title="Clameur de haro" label="Clameur de haro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845763" start="19594" end="19601" title="Coutume" label="Coutume"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="19627" end="19637" title="Common Law" label="Common Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q256091" start="19937" end="19952" title="British Islands" label="British Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987239" start="20445" end="20468" title="Interpretation Act 1978" label="Interpretation Act 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="20564" end="20577" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925745" start="20603" end="20631" title="British Nationality Act 1981" label="British Nationality Act 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="20758" end="20769" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q205181" start="20935" end="20960" title="offshore financial centre" label="offshore financial centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q770899" start="21103" end="21117" title="light industry" label="light industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="22321" end="22331" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="22498" end="22509" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370074" start="22603" end="22621" title="UK postcodes" label="UK&amp;#x27;s postcode"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405693" start="23100" end="23104" title="Sark" label="Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="23352" end="23360" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q387034" start="23553" end="23567" title="Condor Ferries" label="Condor Ferries"/>
<link wikidata="Q203349" start="23666" end="23671" title="Poole" label="Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="23781" end="23791" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q163108" start="23918" end="23928" title="Saint-Malo" label="Saint-Malo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231265" start="24262" end="24281" title="Port of Southampton" label="Port of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="24298" end="24304" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706937" start="24330" end="24342" title="Alan J. H. Maclean" label="Alan Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809160" start="24596" end="24620" title="Associated British Ports" label="Associated British Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559952" start="24860" end="24876" title="Alderney Airport" label="Alderney Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8995" start="24878" end="24894" title="Guernsey Airport" label="Guernsey Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8991" start="24899" end="24913" title="Jersey Airport" label="Jersey Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q885738" start="24981" end="24993" title="Blue Islands" label="Blue Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q776145" start="24998" end="25005" title="Aurigny" label="Aurigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566688" start="25035" end="25050" title="List of Channel Islands railways" label="there have been"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476395" start="25256" end="25272" title="Alderney Railway" label="Alderney Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127942" start="25467" end="25495" title="Pallot Heritage Steam Museum" label="Pallot Heritage Steam Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378219" start="25579" end="25595" title="BBC Radio Jersey" label="BBC Radio Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q428735" start="25600" end="25618" title="BBC Radio Guernsey" label="BBC Radio Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5072255" start="25620" end="25631" title="Channel 103" label="Channel 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q6083122" start="25636" end="25645" title="Island FM" label="Island FM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25698" end="25717" title="Spotlight (BBC News)#BBC Channel Islands" label="BBC Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397234" start="25722" end="25744" title="ITV Channel Television" label="ITV Channel Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q109767364" start="25881" end="25893" title="Soleil Radio" label="Soleil Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035441" start="25921" end="25928" title="Capital (radio network)" label="Capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129015" start="25930" end="25935" title="Heart (radio network)" label="Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q85809763" start="25941" end="25952" title="Times Radio" label="Times Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506737" start="26012" end="26025" title="Frémont Point transmitting station" label="Frémont Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614907" start="26163" end="26177" title="Guernsey Press and Star" label="Guernsey Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177523" start="26186" end="26205" title="Jersey Evening Post" label="Jersey Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q848096" start="26430" end="26462" title="Telephone numbers in the United Kingdom" label="British telephone numbering plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529532" start="26468" end="26473" title="Ofcom" label="Ofcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="26938" end="26942" title="FTTH" label="FTTH"/>
<link wikidata="Q823923" start="27023" end="27027" title="VDSL" label="VDSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169186" start="27111" end="27115" title="Sure (company)" label="Sure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994286" start="27120" end="27122" title="Jersey Telecom" label="JT"/>
<link wikidata="Q41092" start="27181" end="27184" title=".GG" label=".GG"/>
<link wikidata="Q42662" start="27216" end="27219" title=".JE" label=".JE"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="27290" end="27305" title="Norman language" label="Norman language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085566" start="27535" end="27544" title="Auregnais" label="Auregnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56428" start="27592" end="27603" title="Guernésiais" label="Dgèrnésiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="27616" end="27624" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56429" start="27638" end="27648" title="Sercquiais" label="Sercquiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q535" start="27683" end="27694" title="Victor Hugo" label="Victor Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q180736" start="27784" end="27798" title="Les Misérables" label="Les Misérables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211109" start="27903" end="27921" title="Toilers of the Sea" label="Toilers of the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="27999" end="28014" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q174596" start="28028" end="28037" title="Moby-Dick" label="Moby-Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512678" start="28063" end="28070" title="Muratti" label="Muratti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="28095" end="28103" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="28317" end="28324" title="Cricket" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3590252" start="28364" end="28383" title="Jersey cricket team" label="Jersey cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614914" start="28392" end="28413" title="Guernsey cricket team" label="Guernsey cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q722694" start="28448" end="28477" title="International Cricket Council" label="International Cricket Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6044760" start="28519" end="28538" title="inter-insular match" label="inter-insular match"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997471" start="28613" end="28633" title="MCCA Knockout Trophy" label="MCCA Knockout Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869173" start="28665" end="28708" title="minor counties of English and Welsh cricket" label="minor counties of English and Welsh cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="28761" end="28779" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q845262" start="28871" end="28883" title="Island Games" label="Island Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q19707" start="29161" end="29167" title="donkey" label="donkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453151" start="29442" end="29446" title="toad" label="toad"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="29568" end="29572" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q56429" start="29583" end="29593" title="Sercquiais" label="Sercquiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56428" start="29595" end="29606" title="Dgèrnésiais" label="Dgèrnésiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q56430" start="29611" end="29619" title="Jèrriais" label="Jèrriais"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="29760" end="29766" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085566" start="29788" end="29797" title="Auregnais" label="Auregnais"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098286" start="29828" end="29834" title="warren (domestic)" label="warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="29856" end="29868" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401089" start="29975" end="29981" title="Helier" label="Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269091" start="29998" end="30011" title="Samson of Dol" label="Samson of Dol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="30116" end="30135" title="Celtic Christianity" label="Celtic Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="30144" end="30155" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30172" end="30180" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="30202" end="30211" title="Calvinism" label="Calvinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="30287" end="30293" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="30295" end="30306" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="30355" end="30368" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="30419" end="30428" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="30567" end="30575" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26253" start="30594" end="30601" title="Madeira" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="30710" end="30721" title="evangelical Christianity" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q272373" start="30993" end="30999" title="Île-de-Bréhat" label="Bréhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q421927" start="31001" end="31012" title="Île de Batz" label="Île de Batz"/>
<link wikidata="Q292600" start="31014" end="31021" title="Chausey" label="Chausey"/>
<link wikidata="Q845532" start="31023" end="31030" title="Tatihou" label="Tatihou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593548" start="31039" end="31057" title="Îles Saint-Marcouf" label="Îles Saint-Marcouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="31064" end="31077" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143832" start="31175" end="31181" title="Solent" label="Solent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541751" start="31184" end="31191" title="Hayling Island" label="Hayling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228829" start="31196" end="31203" title="Portsea Island" label="Portsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="31240" end="31250" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="31333" end="31373" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="German occupation of the Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q21995540" start="31375" end="31441" title="List of churches, chapels and meeting halls in the Channel Islands" label="List of churches, chapels and meeting halls in the Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739895" start="31443" end="31481" title="Places named after the Channel Islands" label="Places named after the Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="31530" end="31553" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5644" wikidata="Q157443" url="?curid=5644" title="Comedy film">
<text>The comedy film is a film genre that emphasizes humor. These films are designed to amuse audiences and make them laugh. Films in this genre typically have a happy ending, with dark comedy being an exception to this rule. Comedy is one of the oldest genres in film, and it is derived from classical comedy in theatre. Some of the earliest silent films were slapstick comedies, which often relied on visual depictions, such as sight gags and pratfalls, so they could be enjoyed without requiring sound. To provide drama and excitement to silent movies, live music was played in sync with the action on the screen, on pianos, organs, and other instruments. When sound films became more prevalent during the 1920s, comedy films grew in popularity, as laughter could result from both burlesque situations but also from humorous dialogue.

Comedy, compared with other film genres, places more focus on individual star actors, with many former stand-up comics transitioning to the film industry due to their popularity.

In &quot;The Screenwriters Taxonomy&quot; (2017), Eric R. Williams contends that film genres are fundamentally based upon a film&#x27;s atmosphere, character, and story, and therefore, the labels &quot;drama&quot; and &quot;comedy&quot; are too broad to be considered a genre. Instead, his taxonomy argues that comedy is a type of film that contains at least a dozen different sub-types. A number of hybrid genres have emerged, such as action comedy and romantic comedy.

==History==
===Silent film era===

The first comedy film was &quot;L&#x27;Arroseur Arrosé&quot; (1895), directed and produced by film pioneer Louis Lumière. Less than a minute long, it shows a boy playing a prank on a gardener. The most notable comedy actors of the silent film era (1895–1927) were Charlie Chaplin, Harold Lloyd, and Buster Keaton, though they were able to make the transition into &quot;talkies&quot; after the 1920s.

====Social commentary in comedy====
Film-makers in the 1960s skillfully employed the use of comedy film to make social statements by building their narratives around sensitive cultural, political or social issues. Such films include Dr Strangelove, or How I Learned to Love the Bomb, Guess Who&#x27;s Coming to Dinner? and The Graduate. 

====Camp and bawdy comedy====
In America, the sexual revolution drove an appetite for comedies that celebrated and parodied changing social morals, including Bob &amp; Carol &amp; Ted &amp; Alice and Fanny Hill. In Britain, a camp sensibility lay behind the successful Carry On films, while in America subversive independent film-maker John Waters made camp films for college audiences with his drag queen friends that eventually found a mainstream audience. The success of the American television show Saturday Night Live drove decades of cinema with racier content allowed on television drawing on the program&#x27;s stars and characters, with bigger successes including Wayne&#x27;s World, Mean Girls, Ghostbusters and Animal House.

===Present era===
Parody and joke-based films continue to find audiences.
== Reception ==
While comedic films are among the most popular with audiences at the box office, there is an &#x27;historical bias against a close and serious consideration of comedy&#x27; when it comes to critical reception and conferring of awards, such as at the Academy Awards. Film writer Cailian Savage observes &quot;Comedies have won Oscars, although they’ve usually been comedy-dramas, involved very depressing scenes, or appealed to stone-hearted drama lovers in some other way, such as &quot;Shakespeare in Love&quot;.&quot;

== Sub-types ==
* Anarchic comedy: The anarchic comedy film, as the name suggests, is a random or stream-of-consciousness type of humor that often lampoons a form of authority. The genre dates from the silent era. Notable examples of this type of film are those produced by Monty Python. Other examples include &quot;A Night at the Opera&quot; (1935) and &quot;Dirty Work&quot; (1998).
* Bathroom comedy (or gross-out comedy): Gross out films are aimed at the young adult market (age 18–24) and rely heavily on vulgar, sexual, or &quot;toilet&quot; humor. They often contain a large amount of profanity and nudity. Examples include &quot;Porky&#x27;s&quot; (1981) and &quot;There&#x27;s Something About Mary&quot; (1998).
* Black comedy: film deals with taboo subjectsincluding death, murder, crime, suicide, and warin a satirical manner. Examples include &quot;Do the Right Thing&quot; (1989) and &quot;In Bruges&quot; (2008).
* Comedy of ideas: This sub-type uses comedy to explore serious ideas such as religion, sex, or politics. Often, the characters represent particular divergent world views and are forced to interact for comedic effect and social commentary. Some examples include both &quot;Wag the Dog&quot; (1997) and &quot;The Invention of Lying&quot; (2009).
* Comedy of manners: satirizes the mores and affectations of a social class. The plot of a comedy of manners is often concerned with an illicit love affair or other scandals. Generally, the plot is less important for its comedic effect than its witty dialogue. This form of comedy has a long ancestry that dates back at least as far as &quot;Much Ado About Nothing&quot; created by William Shakespeare, published in 1623. Examples for comedy of manners films include &quot;Breakfast at Tiffany&#x27;s&quot; (1961) and &quot;Under the Tuscan Sun&quot; (2003).
* Farce: Farcical films exaggerate situations beyond the realm of possibilitythereby making them entertaining. Film examples include &quot;What&#x27;s Up, Doc?&quot; (1972).
* Mockumentary: comedies are fictional but use a doc-style that includes interviews and &quot;documentary&quot; footage, along with regular scenes. Examples include &quot;This Is Spinal Tap&quot; (1984) and &quot;I&#x27;m Still Here&quot; (2010).
* Musical comedy: a film genre has its roots in the 1920s, with Disney&#x27;s &quot;Steamboat Willie&quot; (1928) being the most popular of these early films. The subgenre resurged with popularity in the 1970s, with movies such as &quot;Bugsy Malone&quot; (1976) and &quot;Grease&quot; (1978) gaining status as cult classics.
* Observational comedy: films find humor in the common practices of everyday life. Some film examples of observational humor include &quot;Purely Belter&quot; (2000) and &quot;The Big Year&quot; (2011).
* Parody (or spoof): A parody or spoof film satirizes other film genres or classic films. Such films employ sarcasm, stereotyping, mockery of scenes from other films, and the obviousness of meaning in a character&#x27;s actions. Examples of this form include &quot;Young Frankenstein&quot; (1974) and &quot;Airplane!&quot; (1980).
* Sex comedy: The humor is primarily derived from sexual situations and desire, as in &quot;Animal House&quot; (1978) and &quot;How to Be a Latin Lover&quot; (2017).
* Sitcom: where humor comes from knowing a stock group of characters (or character types) and then exposing them to different situations to create humorous and ironic juxtaposition. Examples include &quot;After Hours&quot; (1985) and &quot;Hot Tub Time Machine&quot; (2010).
* Straight comedy: This broad sub-type applies to films that do not attempt a specific approach to comedy but, rather, use comedy for comedic sake. &quot;Anger Management&quot; (2003) and &quot;Bridesmaids&quot; (2011) are examples of straight comedy films.
* Slapstick film: involve exaggerated, boisterous physical action to create impossible and humorous situations. Because it relies predominantly on visual depictions of events, it does not require sound. Accordingly, the subgenre was ideal for silent movies and was prevalent during that era. Popular stars of the slapstick genre include Harold Lloyd, Roscoe Arbuckle, Charlie Chaplin, Peter Sellers and Norman Wisdom. Some of these stars, as well as acts such as Laurel and Hardy and the Three Stooges, also found success incorporating slapstick comedy into sound films. Modern examples of slapstick comedy include &quot;Mouse Hunt&quot; (1997) and &quot;Nacho Libre&quot; (2006).
* Surreal humor: Although not specifically linked to the history of surrealism, surreal comedies comedies include behavior and storytelling techniques that are illogicalincluding bizarre juxtapositions, absurd situations, and unpredictable reactions to normal situations. Some examples are &quot;Brazil&quot; (1985) and &quot;Barton Fink&quot; (1991).

== Hybrid sub-genres ==
According to Williams&#x27; taxonomy, all film descriptions should contain their type (comedy or drama) combined with one (or more) sub-genres. This combination does not create a separate genre, but rather, provides a better understanding of the film.

* Action comedy Films of this type blend comic antics and action where the stars combine one-liners with a thrilling plot and daring stunts. The genre became a specific draw in North America in the 1980s when comedians such as Eddie Murphy started taking more action-oriented roles, such as in &quot;48 Hrs.&quot; (1982) and &quot;Beverly Hills Cop&quot; (1984).
* Sub-genres of the action comedy (labeled macro-genres by Williams) include:
** Martial arts films Slapstick martial arts films became a mainstay of Hong Kong action cinema through the work of Jackie Chan among others, such as &quot;Who Am I?&quot; (1998). &quot;Kung Fu Panda&quot; is an action comedy that focuses on the martial art of kung fu.
** Superhero films Some action films focus on superheroes; for example, &quot;The Incredibles&quot;, &quot;Hancock&quot;, &quot;Kick-Ass&quot;, and &quot;Deadpool&quot;.
** Other categories of the action comedy include:
** Buddy films Films starring mismatched partners for comedic effects, such as in &quot;Midnight Run&quot;, &quot;Rush Hour&quot;, &quot;21 Jump Street&quot;, &quot;Bad Boys&quot;, &quot;Starsky and Hutch&quot;, &quot;Tango &amp; Cash&quot;, &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot;, and &quot;Stakeout&quot;.
* Comedy thriller: Comedy thriller is a type that combines elements of humor and suspense. Films such as &quot;Silver Streak&quot;, &quot;Charade&quot;, &quot;Kiss Kiss Bang Bang&quot;, &quot;American Psycho&quot;, &quot;Mr. and Mrs. Smith&quot;, &quot;Grosse Point Blank&quot;, &quot;The Thin Man&quot;, &quot;The Big Fix&quot;, and &quot;The Lady Vanishes&quot;.
* Comedy mystery: Comedy mystery is a film genre combining elements of comedy and mystery fiction. Though the genre arguably peaked in the 1930s and 1940s, comedy-mystery films have been continually produced since. Examples include the &quot;Pink Panther&quot; series,&quot;Scooby-Doo&quot; films, &quot;Clue&quot; (1985) and &quot;Knives Out&quot; (2019). See also List of comedy-mystery films
* Crime comedy: A hybrid mix of crime and comedy films, examples include &quot;Inspector Palmu&#x27;s Mistake&quot; (1960), &quot;Oh Brother Where Art Thou?&quot; (2000), &quot;Take the Money and Run&quot; (1969) and &quot;Who Framed Roger Rabbit&quot; (1988).
* Fantasy comedy: Fantasy comedy films use magic, supernatural or mythological figures for comedic purposes. Some fantasy comedy includes an element of parody, or satire, turning fantasy conventions on their head, such as the hero becoming a cowardly fool or the princess being a klutz. Examples of these films include &quot;Big&quot;, &quot;Being John Malkovich&quot;, &quot;Ted&quot;, &quot;Hook&quot;, &quot;Night at the Museum&quot;, &quot;Groundhog Day&quot;, &quot;Click&quot;, and &quot;A Thousand Words&quot;.
* Comedy horror: Comedy horror is a genre/type in which the usual dark themes and &quot;scare tactics&quot; attributed to horror films are treated with a humorous approach. These films either often goofy horror cliches, such as in &quot;Scream&quot;, &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot;, &quot;Little Shop of Horrors&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;Scary Movie&quot; where campy styles are favored. Some are much more subtle and do not parody horror, such as &quot;An American Werewolf in London&quot;. Another style of comedy horror can also rely on over-the-top violence and gore such as in &quot;The Evil Dead&quot; (1981), &quot;The Return of the Living Dead&quot; (1985), &quot;Braindead&quot; (1992), and &quot;Doghouse&quot; (2009) – such films are sometimes known as &quot;splatstick&quot;, a portmanteau of the words &quot;splatter&quot; and &quot;slapstick&quot;. It would be reasonable to put &quot;Ghostbusters&quot; in this category.
* Day-in-the-life comedy: Day-in-the-life films take small events in a person&#x27;s life and raise their level of importance. The &quot;small things in life&quot; feel as important to the protagonist (and the audience) as the climactic battle in an action film, or the final shootout in a western.Often, the protagonists deal with multiple, overlapping issues in the course of the film.  The day-in-the-life comedy often finds humor in commenting upon the absurdity or irony of daily life; for example &quot;The Terminal&quot; (2004) or &quot;Waitress&quot; (2007). Character humor is also used extensively in day-in-the-life comedies, as can be seen in &quot;American Splendor&quot; (2003).
* Romantic comedy: Romantic comedies are humorous films with central themes that reinforce societal beliefs about love (e.g., themes such as &quot;love at first sight&quot;, &quot;love conquers all&quot;, or &quot;there is someone out there for everyone&quot;); the story typically revolves around characters falling into (and out of, and back into) love. &quot;Amélie&quot; (2001), &quot;Annie Hall&quot; (1977), &quot;Charade&quot; (1963), &quot;City Lights&quot; (1931), &quot;Four Weddings and a Funeral&quot; (1994), &quot;It&quot; (1927), &quot;The Lobster&quot; (2015), &quot;My Wife, the Director General&quot; (1966), &quot;My Favorite Wife&quot; (1940), &quot;Pretty Woman&quot; (1990), &quot;Some Like It Hot&quot; (1959), &quot;Something&#x27;s Gotta Give&quot; (2003) and &quot;When Harry Met Sally...&quot; (1989) are examples of romantic comedies.
* Screwball comedy: A subgenre of the romantic comedy, screwball comedies appears to focus on the story of a central male character until a strong female character takes center stage; at this point, the man&#x27;s story becomes secondary to a new issue typically introduced by the woman; this story grows in significance and, as it does, the man&#x27;s masculinity is challenged by the sharp-witted woman, who is often his love interest. Typically it can include a romantic element, an interplay between people of different economic strata, quick and witty repartee, some form of role reversal, and a happy ending. Some examples of screwball comedy during its heyday include &quot;It Happened One Night&quot; (1934), &quot;Bringing Up Baby&quot; (1938), &quot;The Philadelphia Story&quot; (1940), &quot;His Girl Friday&quot; (1940), &quot;Mr. &amp; Mrs. Smith&quot; (1941); more recent examples include &quot;Continental Divide&quot; (1981), &quot;Rat Race&quot; (2001), and &quot;Our Idiot Brother&quot; (2011).
* Science fiction comedy: Science fiction comedy films often exaggerate the elements of traditional science fiction films to comic effect. Examples include &quot;Spaceballs&quot;, &quot;Coneheads&quot;, &quot;Galaxy Quest&quot;, &quot;Mars Attacks!&quot;, &quot;Men in Black&quot;, and many more.
* Sports comedy: Sports comedy combines the genre of comedy with that of the sports film genre. Thematically, the story is often one of &quot;Our Team&quot; versus &quot;Their Team&quot;; their team will always try to win, and our team will show the world that they deserve recognition or redemption; the story does not always have to involve a team. The story could also be about an individual athlete or the story could focus on an individual playing on a team. The comedic aspect of this super-genre often comes from physical humor (&quot;BASEketball -&quot; 1998), character humor (Space Jam &quot;-&quot; 1996), or the juxtaposition of bad athletes succeeding against the odds (&quot;The Benchwarmers&quot; - 2006).
* War comedy: War films typically tell the story of a small group of isolated individuals who – one by one – get killed (literally or metaphorically) by an outside force until there is a final fight to the death; the idea of the protagonists facing death is a central expectation in a war film. War comedies infuse this idea of confronting death with a morbid sense of humor. In a war film even though the enemy may out-number, or out-power, the hero, we assume that the enemy &quot;can&quot; be defeated if only the hero can figure out how. Often, this strategic sensibility provides humorous opportunities in a war comedy. Examples include &quot;Good Morning, Vietnam&quot;; &quot;M*A*S*H&quot;; Stripes and others.
* Western comedy: Films in the Western super-genre often take place in the American Southwest or Mexico, with a large number of scenes occurring outside so we can soak in nature&#x27;s rugged beauty. Visceral expectations for the audience include fistfights, gunplay, and chase scenes. There is also the expectation of spectacular panoramic images of the countryside including sunsets, wide open landscapes, and endless deserts and sky. Western comedies often find their humor in specific characters (&quot;Three Amigos&quot;, 1986), in interpersonal relationships (&quot;Lone Ranger&quot;, 2013) or in creating a parody of the western (&quot;Rango&quot;, 2011).

==See also==
*AFI&#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs (1924–1998, list made in 2000)
*American comedy films
*British comedy films
*Commedia all&#x27;italiana
*French comedy films
*List of Indian comedy films
*Television comedy

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Thomas W. Bohn and Richard L. Stromgren, &quot;Light and Shadows: A History of Motion Pictures&quot;, 1975, Mayfield Publishing.
* 
* 
*Williams, Eric R. (2017) The Screenwriters Taxonomy: A Roadmap to Creative Storytelling. New York, NY: Routledge Press, Studies in Media Theory and Practice. 

==External links==
* Comedy films at IMDB
* Top 100 Comedy movies from Rottentomatoes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="4" end="15" title="Comedy film" label="comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="21" end="31" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q35874" start="48" end="53" title="humor" label="humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q177576" start="157" end="169" title="happy ending" label="happy ending"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="176" end="187" title="black comedy" label="dark comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40831" start="298" end="304" title="comedy" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11635" start="308" end="315" title="theatre" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="338" end="349" title="silent film" label="silent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="356" end="374" title="slapstick comedy" label="slapstick comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217117" start="779" end="788" title="burlesque" label="burlesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q131395" start="823" end="831" title="dialogue" label="dialogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="862" end="872" title="film genre" label="film genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="937" end="952" title="stand-up comics" label="stand-up comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q110363150" start="1023" end="1049" title="Screenwriters Taxonomy" label="The Screenwriters Taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q99522934" start="1064" end="1080" title="Eric R. Williams" label="Eric R. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678111" start="1450" end="1463" title="action comedy" label="action comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="1468" end="1483" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198333" start="1553" end="1575" title="L&amp;#x27;Arroseur Arrosé" label="L&amp;#x27;Arroseur Arrosé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962284" start="1628" end="1641" title="Louis Lumière" label="Louis Lumière"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="1752" end="1767" title="silent film era" label="silent film era"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="1785" end="1800" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104340" start="1802" end="1814" title="Harold Lloyd" label="Harold Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q103949" start="1820" end="1833" title="Buster Keaton" label="Buster Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="1891" end="1898" title="Sound film" label="talkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q105702" start="2156" end="2205" title="Dr. Strangelove" label="Dr Strangelove, or How I Learned to Love the Bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q736969" start="2207" end="2241" title="Guess Who&amp;#x27;s Coming to Dinner" label="Guess Who&amp;#x27;s Coming to Dinner?"/>
<link wikidata="Q217627" start="2246" end="2258" title="The Graduate" label="The Graduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="2308" end="2325" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731768" start="2420" end="2457" title="Bob &amp;amp; Carol &amp;amp; Ted &amp;amp; Alice" label="Bob &amp;amp; Carol &amp;amp; Ted &amp;amp; Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q824818" start="2462" end="2472" title="Fanny Hill (1964 film)" label="Fanny Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="2488" end="2492" title="Camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q948916" start="2531" end="2545" title="Carry On (franchise)" label="Carry On films"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="2598" end="2609" title="John Waters" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="2657" end="2667" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="2765" end="2784" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146194" start="2935" end="2953" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World (film)" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q631103" start="2955" end="2965" title="Mean Girls" label="Mean Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q108745" start="2967" end="2979" title="Ghostbusters" label="Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q960125" start="2984" end="2996" title="Animal House" label="Animal House"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="3339" end="3353" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q182944" start="3576" end="3595" title="Shakespeare in Love" label="Shakespeare in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q3284176" start="3708" end="3731" title="Stream of consciousness" label="stream-of-consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q16402" start="3884" end="3896" title="Monty Python" label="Monty Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q943992" start="3927" end="3947" title="A Night at the Opera (film)" label="A Night at the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228304" start="3971" end="3981" title="Dirty Work (1998 film)" label="Dirty Work"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4037" end="4052" title="Gross out#Cinema" label="Gross out films"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284331" start="4140" end="4164" title="Toilet humour" label="&amp;quot;toilet&amp;quot; humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284961" start="4248" end="4260" title="Porky&amp;#x27;s" label="Porky&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q177374" start="4284" end="4317" title="There&amp;#x27;s Something About Mary" label="There&amp;#x27;s Something About Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="4334" end="4346" title="Black comedy" label="Black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="4364" end="4369" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141252" start="4472" end="4490" title="Do the Right Thing" label="Do the Right Thing"/>
<link wikidata="Q244931" start="4514" end="4523" title="In Bruges" label="In Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q623443" start="4811" end="4822" title="Wag the Dog" label="Wag the Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q178966" start="4846" end="4868" title="The Invention of Lying" label="The Invention of Lying"/>
<link wikidata="Q222926" start="4885" end="4902" title="Comedy of manners" label="Comedy of manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q130851" start="5225" end="5247" title="Much Ado About Nothing" label="Much Ado About Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="5265" end="5284" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q193066" start="5356" end="5383" title="Breakfast at Tiffany&amp;#x27;s (film)" label="Breakfast at Tiffany&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q41315" start="5407" end="5427" title="Under the Tuscan Sun (film)" label="Under the Tuscan Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q193979" start="5451" end="5459" title="Farce" label="Farcical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356241" start="5581" end="5601" title="What&amp;#x27;s Up, Doc? (1972 film)" label="What&amp;#x27;s Up, Doc?"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="5618" end="5630" title="Mockumentary" label="Mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810384" start="5787" end="5805" title="This Is Spinal Tap" label="This Is Spinal Tap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552765" start="5829" end="5848" title="I&amp;#x27;m Still Here (2010 film)" label="I&amp;#x27;m Still Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q816038" start="5947" end="5963" title="Steamboat Willie" label="Steamboat Willie"/>
<link wikidata="Q851611" start="6100" end="6112" title="Bugsy Malone" label="Bugsy Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="6136" end="6142" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="6174" end="6187" title="Cult film" label="cult classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209421" start="6191" end="6211" title="Observational comedy" label="Observational comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709771" start="6328" end="6341" title="Purely Belter" label="Purely Belter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304692" start="6365" end="6377" title="The Big Year" label="The Big Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q622548" start="6415" end="6435" title="Parody film" label="parody or spoof film"/>
<link wikidata="Q651923" start="6657" end="6675" title="Young Frankenstein" label="Young Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q497256" start="6699" end="6708" title="Airplane!" label="Airplane!"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991560" start="6725" end="6735" title="Sex comedy" label="Sex comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q960125" start="6815" end="6827" title="Animal House" label="Animal House"/>
<link wikidata="Q28101360" start="6851" end="6874" title="How to Be a Latin Lover" label="How to Be a Latin Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="6891" end="6897" title="Sitcom" label="Sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q846209" start="7094" end="7105" title="After Hours (film)" label="After Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q925072" start="7129" end="7149" title="Hot Tub Time Machine" label="Hot Tub Time Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q591556" start="7318" end="7334" title="Anger Management (film)" label="Anger Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q837264" start="7358" end="7369" title="Bridesmaids (2011 film)" label="Bridesmaids"/>
<link wikidata="Q17112331" start="7424" end="7438" title="Slapstick film" label="Slapstick film"/>
<link wikidata="Q104340" start="7759" end="7771" title="Harold Lloyd" label="Harold Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q315202" start="7773" end="7788" title="Roscoe Arbuckle" label="Roscoe Arbuckle"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="7790" end="7805" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q177984" start="7807" end="7820" title="Peter Sellers" label="Peter Sellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q349217" start="7825" end="7838" title="Norman Wisdom" label="Norman Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q33497" start="7885" end="7901" title="Laurel and Hardy" label="Laurel and Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q949161" start="7906" end="7923" title="the Three Stooges" label="the Three Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="7958" end="7974" title="slapstick comedy" label="slapstick comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q685163" start="8043" end="8053" title="Mouse Hunt" label="Mouse Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q909767" start="8077" end="8088" title="Nacho Libre" label="Nacho Libre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="8105" end="8118" title="Surreal humor" label="Surreal humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="8171" end="8181" title="surrealism" label="surrealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092460" start="8183" end="8199" title="Surreal humor" label="surreal comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393049" start="8290" end="8304" title="Juxtaposition" label="juxtapositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25057" start="8399" end="8405" title="Brazil (1985 film)" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q237215" start="8429" end="8440" title="Barton Fink" label="Barton Fink"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020949" start="8493" end="8516" title="Williams&amp;#x27; taxonomy" label="Williams&amp;#x27; taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678111" start="8735" end="8748" title="Action comedy" label="Action comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="8960" end="8972" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844887" start="9033" end="9040" title="48 Hrs." label="48 Hrs."/>
<link wikidata="Q722267" start="9064" end="9081" title="Beverly Hills Cop" label="Beverly Hills Cop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="9177" end="9195" title="Martial arts films" label="Martial arts films"/>
<link wikidata="Q624771" start="9196" end="9205" title="Slapstick" label="Slapstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033891" start="9206" end="9224" title="martial arts films" label="martial arts films"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="9246" end="9269" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q36970" start="9290" end="9301" title="Jackie Chan" label="Jackie Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q847530" start="9330" end="9339" title="Who Am I? (1998 film)" label="Who Am I?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081372" start="9360" end="9373" title="Kung Fu Panda (franchise)" label="Kung Fu Panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="9435" end="9442" title="Chinese martial arts" label="kung fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535153" start="9447" end="9462" title="Superhero films" label="Superhero films"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="9490" end="9499" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q213326" start="9522" end="9537" title="The Incredibles" label="The Incredibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q220376" start="9551" end="9558" title="Hancock (film)" label="Hancock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201" start="9572" end="9580" title="Kick-Ass (film)" label="Kick-Ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q19347291" start="9598" end="9606" title="Deadpool (film)" label="Deadpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q663106" start="9667" end="9678" title="Buddy film" label="Buddy films"/>
<link wikidata="Q847802" start="9752" end="9764" title="Midnight Run" label="Midnight Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q255342" start="9778" end="9787" title="Rush Hour (1998 film)" label="Rush Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q214014" start="9801" end="9815" title="21 Jump Street (film)" label="21 Jump Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q460379" start="9829" end="9837" title="Bad Boys (1995 film)" label="Bad Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q847646" start="9851" end="9868" title="Starsky and Hutch (film)" label="Starsky and Hutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q571197" start="9882" end="9898" title="Tango &amp;amp; Cash" label="Tango &amp;amp; Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q462447" start="9912" end="9925" title="Lethal Weapon" label="Lethal Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047663" start="9943" end="9951" title="Stakeout (1987 film)" label="Stakeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950433" start="9961" end="9976" title="Comedy thriller" label="Comedy thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q501374" start="10070" end="10083" title="Silver Streak (film)" label="Silver Streak"/>
<link wikidata="Q496266" start="10097" end="10104" title="Charade (1963 film)" label="Charade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423695" start="10118" end="10137" title="Kiss Kiss Bang Bang" label="Kiss Kiss Bang Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405126" start="10151" end="10166" title="American Psycho (film)" label="American Psycho"/>
<link wikidata="Q191040" start="10180" end="10198" title="Mr. &amp;amp; Mrs. Smith (2005 film)" label="Mr. and Mrs. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q288355" start="10212" end="10230" title="Grosse Point Blank" label="Grosse Point Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198497" start="10244" end="10256" title="The Thin Man (film)" label="The Thin Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717634" start="10270" end="10281" title="The Big Fix (1978 film)" label="The Big Fix"/>
<link wikidata="Q500044" start="10299" end="10316" title="The Lady Vanishes (1938 film)" label="The Lady Vanishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="10326" end="10340" title="Comedy mystery" label="Comedy mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143846" start="10566" end="10578" title="Pink Panther" label="Pink Panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q7434359" start="10598" end="10608" title="Scooby-Doo in film" label="Scooby-Doo"/>
<link wikidata="Q558795" start="10628" end="10632" title="Clue (film)" label="Clue"/>
<link wikidata="Q57982486" start="10656" end="10666" title="Knives Out" label="Knives Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q6611877" start="10690" end="10718" title="List of comedy-mystery films" label="List of comedy-mystery films"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="10721" end="10733" title="Crime comedy" label="Crime comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3838039" start="10798" end="10828" title="Inspector Palmu&amp;#x27;s Mistake (film)" label="Inspector Palmu&amp;#x27;s Mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q501874" start="10849" end="10875" title="O Brother, Where Art Thou?" label="Oh Brother Where Art Thou?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146315" start="10896" end="10918" title="Take the Money and Run (film)" label="Take the Money and Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q379873" start="10942" end="10965" title="Who Framed Roger Rabbit" label="Who Framed Roger Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637212" start="10982" end="10996" title="Fantasy comedy" label="Fantasy comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064192" start="11023" end="11028" title="Magic (fantasy)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q80837" start="11030" end="11042" title="supernatural" label="supernatural"/>
<link wikidata="Q858467" start="11305" end="11308" title="Big (film)" label="Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q649165" start="11322" end="11342" title="Being John Malkovich" label="Being John Malkovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q641760" start="11356" end="11359" title="Ted (film)" label="Ted"/>
<link wikidata="Q646389" start="11373" end="11377" title="Hook (film)" label="Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q387601" start="11391" end="11410" title="Night at the Museum" label="Night at the Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q488655" start="11424" end="11437" title="Groundhog Day (film)" label="Groundhog Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q496654" start="11451" end="11456" title="Click (2006 film)" label="Click"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103569" start="11474" end="11490" title="A Thousand Words (film)" label="A Thousand Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q224700" start="11500" end="11513" title="Comedy horror" label="Comedy horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q388659" start="11735" end="11741" title="Scream (franchise)" label="Scream"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="11755" end="11784" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199259" start="11798" end="11820" title="Little Shop of Horrors (1986 film)" label="Little Shop of Horrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q219424" start="11852" end="11863" title="Scary Movie" label="Scary Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q467290" start="11968" end="11998" title="An American Werewolf in London" label="An American Werewolf in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q327604" start="12102" end="12115" title="The Evil Dead" label="The Evil Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475119" start="12136" end="12165" title="The Return of the Living Dead" label="The Return of the Living Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q897429" start="12186" end="12195" title="Braindead (film)" label="Braindead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234728" start="12220" end="12228" title="Doghouse (film)" label="Doghouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q108745" start="12413" end="12425" title="Ghostbusters" label="Ghostbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609186" start="12452" end="12467" title="Day in the life" label="Day-in-the-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="12759" end="12771" title="Protagonist" label="protagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q318766" start="12959" end="12971" title="The Terminal" label="The Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380376" start="12994" end="13002" title="Waitress (2007 film)" label="Waitress"/>
<link wikidata="Q466961" start="13111" end="13128" title="American Splendor (film)" label="American Splendor"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="13145" end="13160" title="Romantic comedy" label="Romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526635" start="13290" end="13309" title="love at first sight" label="love at first sight"/>
<link wikidata="Q484048" start="13505" end="13511" title="Amélie" label="Amélie"/>
<link wikidata="Q233464" start="13532" end="13542" title="Annie Hall" label="Annie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q496266" start="13563" end="13570" title="Charade (1963 film)" label="Charade"/>
<link wikidata="Q238211" start="13591" end="13602" title="City Lights" label="City Lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q901213" start="13623" end="13650" title="Four Weddings and a Funeral" label="Four Weddings and a Funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439201" start="13671" end="13673" title="It (1927 film)" label="It"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996794" start="13694" end="13705" title="The Lobster" label="The Lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241952" start="13726" end="13755" title="My Wife, the Director General" label="My Wife, the Director General"/>
<link wikidata="Q589729" start="13776" end="13792" title="My Favorite Wife" label="My Favorite Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q207954" start="13813" end="13825" title="Pretty Woman" label="Pretty Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q190086" start="13846" end="13862" title="Some Like It Hot" label="Some Like It Hot"/>
<link wikidata="Q584766" start="13883" end="13910" title="Something&amp;#x27;s Gotta Give (film)" label="Something&amp;#x27;s Gotta Give"/>
<link wikidata="Q471169" start="13934" end="13957" title="When Harry Met Sally..." label="When Harry Met Sally..."/>
<link wikidata="Q248583" start="14008" end="14024" title="Screwball comedy" label="Screwball comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q248583" start="14061" end="14079" title="Screwball comedy" label="screwball comedies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238195" start="14563" end="14571" title="repartee" label="repartee"/>
<link wikidata="Q208632" start="14687" end="14708" title="It Happened One Night" label="It Happened One Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q179743" start="14729" end="14745" title="Bringing Up Baby" label="Bringing Up Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q498822" start="14766" end="14788" title="The Philadelphia Story (film)" label="The Philadelphia Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066714" start="14809" end="14824" title="His Girl Friday" label="His Girl Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q318651" start="14845" end="14865" title="Mr. &amp;amp; Mrs. Smith (1941 film)" label="Mr. &amp;amp; Mrs. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q232250" start="14915" end="14933" title="Continental Divide (film)" label="Continental Divide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140605" start="14948" end="14968" title="Rat Race (film)" label="&amp;quot;Rat Race&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372081" start="14987" end="15004" title="Our Idiot Brother" label="Our Idiot Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q761469" start="15021" end="15043" title="Science fiction comedy" label="Science fiction comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="15119" end="15139" title="science fiction film" label="science fiction film"/>
<link wikidata="Q498442" start="15181" end="15191" title="Spaceballs" label="Spaceballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211928" start="15205" end="15214" title="Coneheads (film)" label="Coneheads"/>
<link wikidata="Q502067" start="15228" end="15240" title="Galaxy Quest" label="Galaxy Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q271690" start="15254" end="15267" title="Mars Attacks!" label="Mars Attacks!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816260" start="15281" end="15293" title="Men in Black (series)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339864" start="15318" end="15331" title="Sports comedy" label="Sports comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339864" start="15393" end="15404" title="sports film" label="sports film"/>
<link wikidata="Q266027" start="15858" end="15869" title="BASEketball" label="BASEketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q207659" start="15902" end="15911" title="Space Jam" label="Space Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q998219" start="16005" end="16021" title="The Benchwarmers" label="The Benchwarmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="16039" end="16049" title="War comedy" label="War comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q741878" start="16685" end="16706" title="Good Morning, Vietnam" label="Good Morning, Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471116" start="16720" end="16727" title="M*A*S*H" label="M*A*S*H"/>
<link wikidata="Q174153" start="16735" end="16742" title="Stripes (film)" label="Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q115775801" start="16757" end="16771" title="Western comedy" label="Western comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q249288" start="17262" end="17274" title="Three Amigos" label="Three Amigos"/>
<link wikidata="Q548919" start="17327" end="17338" title="The Lone Ranger (2013 film)" label="Lone Ranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q275432" start="17398" end="17403" title="Rango (2011 film)" label="Rango"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767226" start="17433" end="17466" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs" label="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19952560" start="17499" end="17520" title="American comedy films" label="American comedy films"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971312" start="17522" end="17542" title="British comedy films" label="British comedy films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115187" start="17544" end="17570" title="Commedia all&amp;#x27;italiana" label="Commedia all&amp;#x27;italiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331260" start="17572" end="17591" title="French comedy films" label="French comedy films"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573981" start="17593" end="17620" title="List of Indian comedy films" label="List of Indian comedy films"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696995" start="17622" end="17639" title="Television comedy" label="Television comedy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5645" wikidata="Q219557" url="?curid=5645" title="Cult film">
<text>A cult film or cult movie, also commonly referred to as a cult classic, is a film that has acquired a cult following. Cult films are known for their dedicated, passionate fanbase, which forms an elaborate subculture, members of which engage in repeated viewings, dialogue-quoting, and audience participation. Inclusive definitions allow for major studio productions, especially box-office bombs, while exclusive definitions focus more on obscure, transgressive films shunned by the mainstream. The difficulty in defining the term and subjectivity of what qualifies as a cult film mirror classificatory disputes about art. The term &quot;cult film&quot; itself was first used in the 1970s to describe the culture that surrounded underground films and midnight movies, though &quot;cult&quot; was in common use in film analysis for decades prior to that.

Cult films trace their origin back to controversial and suppressed films kept alive by dedicated fans. In some cases, reclaimed or rediscovered films have acquired cult followings decades after their original release, occasionally for their camp value. Other cult films have since become well-respected or reassessed as classics; there is debate as to whether these popular and accepted films are still cult films. After failing at the cinema, some cult films have become regular fixtures on cable television or profitable sellers on home video. Others have inspired their own film festivals. Cult films can both appeal to specific subcultures and form their own subcultures. Other media that reference cult films can easily identify which demographics they desire to attract and offer savvy fans an opportunity to demonstrate their knowledge.

Cult films frequently break cultural taboos, and many feature excessive displays of violence, gore, sexuality, profanity, or combinations thereof. This can lead to controversy, censorship, and outright bans; less transgressive films may attract similar amounts of controversy when critics call them frivolous or incompetent. Films that fail to attract requisite amounts of controversy may face resistance when labeled as cult films. Mainstream films and big budget blockbusters have attracted cult followings similar to more underground and lesser known films; fans of these films often emphasize the films&#x27; niche appeal and reject the more popular aspects. Fans who like the films for the wrong reasons, such as perceived elements that represent mainstream appeal and marketing, will often be ostracized or ridiculed. Likewise, fans who stray from accepted subcultural scripts may experience similar rejection.

Since the late 1970s, cult films have become increasingly popular. Films that once would have been limited to obscure cult followings are now capable of breaking into the mainstream, and showings of cult films have proved to be a profitable business venture. Overly broad usage of the term has resulted in controversy, as purists state it has become a meaningless descriptor applied to any film that is the slightest bit weird or unconventional; others accuse Hollywood studios of trying to artificially create cult films or use the term as a marketing tactic. Modern films are frequently stated to be an &quot;instant cult classic&quot;, occasionally before they are released. Some films have acquired massive, quick cult followings, owing to advertisements and posts made by fans spreading virally through social media. Easy access to cult films via video on demand and peer-to-peer file sharing has led some critics to pronounce the death of cult films.

==Definition==

A cult film is any film that has a cult following, although the term is not easily defined and can be applied to a wide variety of films. Some definitions exclude films that have been released by major studios or have big budgets, that try specifically to become cult films, or become accepted by mainstream audiences and critics. Cult films are defined by audience reaction as much as by their content. This may take the form of elaborate and ritualized audience participation, film festivals, or cosplay. Over time, the definition has become more vague and inclusive as it drifts away from earlier, stricter views. Increasing use of the term by mainstream publications has resulted in controversy, as cinephiles argue that the term has become meaningless or &quot;elastic, a catchall for anything slightly maverick or strange&quot;. Academic Mark Shiel has criticized the term itself as being a weak concept, reliant on subjectivity; different groups can interpret films in their own terms. According to feminist scholar Joanne Hollows, this subjectivity causes films with large female cult followings to be perceived as too mainstream and not transgressive enough to qualify as a cult film. Academic Mike Chopra‑Gant says that cult films become decontextualized when studied as a group, and Shiel criticizes this recontextualization as cultural commodification.

In 2008, &quot;Cineaste&quot; asked a range of academics for their definition of a cult film. Several people defined cult films primarily in terms of their opposition to mainstream films and conformism, explicitly requiring a transgressive element, though others disputed the transgressive potential, given the demographic appeal to conventional moviegoers and mainstreaming of cult films. Jeffrey Andrew Weinstock instead called them mainstream films with transgressive elements. Most definitions also required a strong community aspect, such as obsessed fans or ritualistic behavior. Citing misuse of the term, Mikel J. Koven took a self-described hard-line stance that rejected definitions that use any other criteria. Matt Hills instead stressed the need for an open-ended definition rooted in structuration, where the film and the audience reaction are interrelated and neither is prioritized. Ernest Mathijs focused on the accidental nature of cult followings, arguing that cult film fans consider themselves too savvy to be marketed to, while Jonathan Rosenbaum rejected the continued existence of cult films and called the term a marketing buzzword. Mathijs suggests that cult films help to understand ambiguity and incompleteness in life given the difficulty in even defining the term. That cult films can have opposing qualities – such as good and bad, failure and success, innovative and retro – helps to illustrate that art is subjective and never self-evident. This ambiguity leads critics of postmodernism to accuse cult films of being beyond criticism, as the emphasis is now on personal interpretation rather than critical analysis or metanarratives. These inherent dichotomies can lead audiences to be split between ironic and earnest fans.

Writing in &quot;Defining Cult Movies&quot;, Jancovich et al. quote academic Jeffrey Sconce, who defines cult films in terms of paracinema, marginal films that exist outside critical and cultural acceptance: everything from exploitation to beach party musicals to softcore pornography. However, they reject cult films as having a single unifying feature; instead, they state that cult films are united in their &quot;subcultural ideology&quot; and opposition to mainstream tastes, itself a vague and undefinable term. Cult followings themselves can range from adoration to contempt, and they have little in common except for their celebration of nonconformity – even the bad films ridiculed by fans are artistically nonconformist, albeit unintentionally. At the same time, they state that bourgeois, masculine tastes are frequently reinforced, which makes cult films more of an internal conflict within the bourgeoisie, rather than a rebellion against it. This results in an anti-academic bias despite the use of formal methodologies, such as defamiliarization. This contradiction exists in many subcultures, especially those dependent on defining themselves in terms of opposition to the mainstream. This nonconformity is eventually co-opted by the dominant forces, such as Hollywood, and marketed to the mainstream. Academic Xavier Mendik proposes that films can become cult by virtue of their genre or content, especially if it is transgressive. Due to their rejection of mainstream appeal, Mendik says cult films can be more creative and political; times of relative political instability produce more interesting films.

==General overview==
Cult films have existed since the early days of cinema. Film critic Harry Alan Potamkin traces them back to 1910s France and the reception of Pearl White, William S. Hart, and Charlie Chaplin, which he described as &quot;a dissent from the popular ritual&quot;. &quot;Nosferatu&quot; (1922) was an unauthorized adaptation of Bram Stoker&#x27;s &quot;Dracula&quot;. Stoker&#x27;s widow sued the production company and drove it to bankruptcy. All known copies of the film were destroyed, and &quot;Nosferatu&quot; become an early cult film, kept alive by a cult following that circulated illegal bootlegs. Academic Chuck Kleinhans identifies the Marx Brothers as making other early cult films. On their original release, some highly regarded classics from the Golden Age of Hollywood were panned by critics and audiences, relegated to cult status. &quot;The Night of the Hunter&quot; (1955) was a cult film for years, quoted often and championed by fans, before it was reassessed as an important and influential classic. During this time, American exploitation films and imported European art films were marketed similarly. Although critics Pauline Kael and Arthur Knight argued against arbitrary divisions into high and low culture, American films settled into rigid genres; European art films continued to push the boundaries of simple definitions, and these exploitative art films and artistic exploitation films would go on to influence American cult films. Much like later cult films, these early exploitation films encouraged audience participation, influenced by live theater and vaudeville.

Modern cult films grew from 1960s counterculture and underground films, popular among those who rejected mainstream Hollywood films. These underground film festivals led to the creation of midnight movies, which attracted cult followings. The term &quot;cult film&quot; itself was an outgrowth of this movement and was first used in the 1970s, though &quot;cult&quot; had been in use for decades in film analysis with both positive and negative connotations. These films were more concerned with cultural significance than the social justice sought by earlier avant-garde films. Midnight movies became more popular and mainstream by the 1970s, peaking with the release of &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; (1975), which finally found its audience several years after its release. Eventually, the rise of home video would marginalize midnight movies once again, after which many directors joined the burgeoning independent film scene or went back underground. Home video would give a second life to box-office flops, as positive word-of-mouth or excessive replay on cable television led these films to develop an appreciative audience, as well as obsessive replay and study. For example, &quot;The Beastmaster&quot; (1982), despite its failure at the box office, became one of the most played movies on American cable television and developed into a cult film. Home video and television broadcasts of cult films were initially greeted with hostility. Joanne Hollows states that they were seen as turning cult films mainstream – in effect, feminizing them by opening them to distracted, passive audiences.

Releases from major studios , such as &quot;The Big Lebowski&quot; (1998), which was distributed by Universal Studios , can become cult films when they fail at the box office and develop a cult following through reissues, such as midnight movies, festivals, and home video. Hollywood films, due to their nature, are more likely to attract this kind of attention, which leads to a mainstreaming effect of cult culture. With major studios behind them, even financially unsuccessful films can be re-released multiple times, which plays into a trend to capture audiences through repetitious reissues. The constant use of profanity and drugs in otherwise mainstream, Hollywood films, such as &quot;The Big Lebowski&quot;, can alienate critics and audiences yet lead to a large cult following among more open-minded demographics not often associated with cult films, such as Wall Street bankers and professional soldiers. Thus, even comparatively mainstream films can satisfy the traditional demands of a cult film, perceived by fans as transgressive, niche, and uncommercial. Discussing his reputation for making cult films, Bollywood director Anurag Kashyap said, &quot;I didn&#x27;t set out to make cult films. I wanted to make box-office hits.&quot; Writing in &quot;Cult Cinema&quot;, academics Ernest Mathijs and Jamie Sexton state that this acceptance of mainstream culture and commercialism is not out of character, as cult audiences have a more complex relationship to these concepts: they are more opposed to mainstream values and excessive commercialism than they are anything else.

In a global context, popularity can vary widely by territory, especially with regard to limited releases. &quot;Mad Max&quot; (1979) was an international hit , except in America where it became an obscure cult favorite, ignored by critics and available for years only in a dubbed version though it earned over $100M internationally. Foreign cinema can put a different spin on popular genres, such as Japanese horror, which was initially a cult favorite in America. Asian imports to the West are often marketed as exotic cult films and of interchangeable national identity, which academic Chi-Yun Shin criticizes as reductive. Foreign influence can affect fan response, especially on genres tied to a national identity; when they become more global in scope, questions of authenticity may arise. Filmmakers and films ignored in their own country can become the objects of cult adoration in another, producing perplexed reactions in their native country. Cult films can also establish an early viability for more mainstream films, both for filmmakers and national cinema. The early cult horror films of Peter Jackson were so strongly associated with his homeland that they affected the international reputation of New Zealand and its cinema. As more artistic films emerged, New Zealand was perceived as a legitimate competitor to Hollywood, which mirrored Jackson&#x27;s career trajectory. &quot;Heavenly Creatures&quot; (1994) acquired its own cult following, became a part of New Zealand&#x27;s national identity, and paved the way for big-budget, Hollywood-style epics, such as Jackson&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; trilogy.

Mathijs states that cult films and fandom frequently involve nontraditional elements of time and time management. Fans will often watch films obsessively, an activity that is viewed by the mainstream as wasting time yet can be seen as resisting the commodification of leisure time. They may also watch films idiosyncratically: sped up, slowed down, frequently paused, or at odd hours. Cult films themselves subvert traditional views of time – time travel, non-linear narratives, and ambiguous establishments of time are all popular. Mathijs also identifies specific cult film viewing habits, such as viewing horror films on Halloween, sentimental melodrama on Christmas, and romantic films on Valentine&#x27;s Day. These films are often viewed as marathons where fans can gorge themselves on their favorites. Mathijs states that cult films broadcast on Christmas have a nostalgic factor. These films, ritually watched every season, give a sense of community and shared nostalgia to viewers. New films often have trouble making inroads against the institutions of &quot;It&#x27;s a Wonderful Life&quot; (1946) and &quot;Miracle on 34th Street&quot; (1947). These films provide mild criticism of consumerism while encouraging family values. Halloween, on the other hand, allows for flaunting society&#x27;s taboos and testing one&#x27;s fears. Horror films have appropriated the holiday, and many horror films debut on Halloween. Mathijs criticizes the over-cultified, commercialized nature of Halloween and horror films, which, he states feed into each other so much that Halloween has turned into an image or product with no real community. Mathijs states that Halloween horror conventions can provide the missing community aspect.

Despite their oppositional nature, cult films can produce celebrities. Like cult films themselves, authenticity is an important aspect of their popularity. Actors can become typecast as they become strongly associated with such iconic roles. Tim Curry, despite his acknowledged range as an actor, found casting difficult after he achieved fame in &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot;. Even when discussing unrelated projects, interviewers frequently bring up the role, which causes him to tire of discussing it. Mary Woronov, known for her transgressive roles in cult films, eventually transitioned to mainstream films. She was expected to recreate the transgressive elements of her cult films within the confines of mainstream cinema. Instead of the complex gender deconstructions of her Andy Warhol films, she became typecast as a lesbian or domineering woman. Sylvia Kristel, after starring in &quot;Emmanuelle&quot; (1974), found herself highly associated with the film and the sexual liberation of the 1970s. Caught between the transgressive elements of her cult film and the mainstream appeal of soft-core pornography, she was unable to work in anything but exploitation films and &quot;Emmanuelle&quot; sequels. Despite her immense popularity and cult following, she would rate only a footnote in most histories of European cinema if she was even mentioned. Similarly, Chloë Sevigny has struggled with her reputation as a cult independent film star famous for her daring roles in transgressive films. Cult films can also trap directors. Leonard Kastle, who directed &quot;The Honeymoon Killers&quot; (1969), never directed another film again. Despite his cult following, which included François Truffaut, he was unable to find financing for any of his other screenplays. Qualities that bring cult films to prominence – such as an uncompromising, unorthodox vision – caused Alejandro Jodorowsky to languish in obscurity for years.

==Transgression and censorship==
Transgressive films as a distinct artistic movement began in the 1970s. Unconcerned with genre distinctions, they drew inspiration equally from the nonconformity of European art cinema and experimental film, the gritty subject matter of Italian neorealism, and the shocking images of 1960s exploitation. Some used hardcore pornography and horror, occasionally at the same time. In the 1980s, filmmaker Nick Zedd identified this movement as the Cinema of Transgression and later wrote a manifesto. Popular in midnight showings, they were mainly limited to large urban areas, which led academic Joan Hawkins to label them as &quot;downtown culture&quot;. These films acquired a legendary reputation as they were discussed and debated in alternative weeklies, such as &quot;The Village Voice&quot;. Home video would finally allow general audiences to see them, which gave many people their first taste of underground film. Ernest Mathijs says that cult films often disrupt viewer expectations, such as giving characters transgressive motivations or focusing attention on elements outside the film. Cult films can also transgress national stereotypes and genre conventions, such as &quot;Battle Royale&quot; (2000), which broke many rules of teenage slasher films. The reverse – when films based on cult properties lose their transgressive edge – can result in derision and rejection by fans. Audience participation itself can be transgressive, such as breaking long-standing taboos against talking during films and throwing things at the screen.

According to Mathijs, critical reception is important to a film&#x27;s perception as cult, through topicality and controversy. Topicality, which can be regional (such as objection to government funding of the film) or critical (such as philosophical objections to the themes), enables attention and a contextual response. Cultural topics make the film relevant and can lead to controversy, such as a moral panic, which provides opposition. Cultural values transgressed in the film, such as sexual promiscuity, can be attacked by proxy, through attacks on the film. These concerns can vary from culture to culture, and they need not be at all similar. However, Mathijs says the film must invoke metacommentary for it to be more than simply culturally important. While referencing previous arguments, critics may attack its choice of genre or its very right to exist. By taking stances on these varied issues, critics assure their own relevance while helping to elevate the film to cult status. Perceived racist and reductive remarks by critics can rally fans and raise the profile of cult films, an example of which would be Rex Reed&#x27;s comments about Korean culture in his review of &quot;Oldboy&quot; (2003). Critics can also polarize audiences and lead debates, such as how Joe Bob Briggs and Roger Ebert dueled over &quot;I Spit On Your Grave&quot; (1978). Briggs would later contribute a commentary track to the DVD release in which he describes it as a feminist film. Films which do not attract enough controversy may be ridiculed and rejected when suggested as cult films.

Academic Peter Hutchings, noting the many definitions of a cult film that require transgressive elements, states that cult films are known in part for their excesses. Both subject matter and its depiction are portrayed in extreme ways that break taboos of good taste and aesthetic norms. Violence, gore, sexual perversity, and even the music can be pushed to stylistic excess far beyond that allowed by mainstream cinema. Film censorship can make these films obscure and make it difficult to find common criteria used to define cult films. Despite this, these films remain well-known and prized among collectors. Fans will occasionally express frustration with dismissive critics and conventional analysis, which they believe marginalizes and misinterprets paracinema. In marketing these films, young men are predominantly targeted. Horror films in particular can draw fans who seek the most extreme films. Audiences can also ironically latch on to offensive themes, such as misogyny, using these films as catharsis for the things that they hate most in life. Exploitative, transgressive elements can be pushed to excessive extremes for both humor and satire. Frank Henenlotter faced censorship and ridicule, but he found acceptance among audiences receptive to themes that Hollywood was reluctant to touch, such as violence, drug addiction, and misogyny. Lloyd Kaufman sees his films&#x27; political statements as more populist and authentic than the hypocrisy of mainstream films and celebrities. Despite featuring an abundance of fake blood, vomit, and diarrhea, Kaufman&#x27;s films have attracted positive attention from critics and academics. Excess can also exist in films that highlight the excesses of 1980s fashion and commercialism.

Films that are influenced by unpopular styles or genres can become cult films. Director Jean Rollin worked within &quot;cinéma fantastique&quot;, an unpopular genre in modern France. Influenced by American films and early French fantasists, he drifted between art, exploitation, and pornography. His films were reviled by critics, but he retained a cult following drawn by the nudity and eroticism. Similarly, Jess Franco chafed under fascist censorship in Spain but became influential in Spain&#x27;s horror boom of the 1960s. These transgressive films that straddle the line between art and horror may have overlapping cult followings, each with their own interpretation and reasons for appreciating it. The films that followed Jess Franco were unique in their rejection of mainstream art. Popular among fans of European horror for their subversiveness and obscurity, these later Spanish films allowed political dissidents to criticize the fascist regime within the cloak of exploitation and horror. Unlike most exploitation directors, they were not trying to establish a reputation. They were already established in the art-house world and intentionally chose to work within paracinema as a reaction against the New Spanish Cinema, an artistic revival supported by the fascists. As late as the 1980s, critics still cited Pedro Almodóvar&#x27;s anti-macho iconoclasm as a rebellion against fascist mores, as he grew from countercultural rebel to mainstream respectability. Transgressive elements that limit a director&#x27;s appeal in one country can be celebrated or highlighted in another. Takashi Miike has been marketed in the West as a shocking and avant-garde filmmaker despite his many family-friendly comedies, which have not been imported.

The transgressive nature of cult films can lead to their censorship. During the 1970s and early 1980s, a wave of explicit, graphic exploitation films caused controversy. Called &quot;video nasties&quot; within the UK, they ignited calls for censorship and stricter laws on home video releases, which were largely unregulated. Consequently, the British Board of Film Classification banned many popular cult films due to issues of sex, violence, and incitement to crime. Released during the cannibal boom, &quot;Cannibal Holocaust&quot; (1980) was banned in dozens of countries and caused the director to be briefly jailed over fears that it was a real snuff film. Although opposed to censorship, director Ruggero Deodato would later agree with cuts made by the BBFC that removed unsimulated animal killings, which limited the film&#x27;s distribution. Frequently banned films may introduce questions of authenticity as fans question whether they have seen a truly uncensored cut. Cult films have been falsely claimed to have been banned to increase their transgressive reputation and explain their lack of mainstream penetration. Marketing campaigns have also used such claims to raise interest among curious audiences. Home video has allowed cult film fans to import rare or banned films, finally giving them a chance to complete their collection with imports and bootlegs. Cult films previously banned are sometimes released with much fanfare, and the fans assumed to be already familiar with the controversy. Personal responsibility is often highlighted, and a strong anti-censorship message may be present. Previously lost scenes cut by studios can be re-added and restore a director&#x27;s original vision, which draws similar fanfare and acclaim from fans. Imports are sometimes censored to remove elements that would be controversial, such as references to Islamic spirituality in Indonesian cult films.

Academics have written of how transgressive themes in cult films can be regressive. David Church and Chuck Kleinhans describe an uncritical celebration of transgressive themes in cult films, including misogyny and racism. Church has also criticized gendered descriptions of transgressive content that celebrate masculinity. Joanne Hollows further identifies a gendered component to the celebration of transgressive themes in cult films, where male terms are used to describe films outside the mainstream while female terms are used to describe mainstream, conformist cinema. Jacinda Read&#x27;s expansion states that cult films, despite their potential for empowerment of the marginalized, are more often used by politically incorrect males. Knowledgeable about feminism and multiculturalism, they seek a refuge from the academic acceptance of these progressive ideals. Their playful and ironic acceptance of regressive lad culture invites, and even dares, condemnation from academics and the uncool. Thus, cult films become a tool to reinforce mainstream values through transgressive content; Rebecca Feasy states that cultural hierarchies can also be reaffirmed through mockery of films perceived to be lacking masculinity. However, the sexploitation films of Doris Wishman took a feminist approach which avoids and subverts the male gaze and traditional goal-oriented methods. Wishman&#x27;s subject matter, though exploitative and transgressive, was always framed in terms of female empowerment and the feminine spectator. Her use of common cult film motifs – female nudity and ambiguous gender – were repurposed to comment on feminist topics. Similarly, the films of Russ Meyer were a complicated combination of transgressive, mainstream, progressive, and regressive elements. They attracted both acclaim and denouncement from critics and progressives. Transgressive films imported from cultures that are recognizably different yet still relatable can be used to progressively examine issues in another culture.

==Subcultural appeal and fandom==
Cult films can be used to help define or create groups as a form of subcultural capital; knowledge of cult films proves that one is &quot;authentic&quot; or &quot;non-mainstream&quot;. They can be used to provoke an outraged response from the mainstream, which further defines the subculture, as only members could possibly tolerate such deviant entertainment. More accessible films have less subcultural capital; among extremists, banned films will have the most. By referencing cult films, media can identify desired demographics, strengthen bonds with specific subcultures, and stand out among those who understand the intertextuality. Popular films from previous eras may be reclaimed by genre fans long after they have been forgotten by the original audiences. This can be done for authenticity, such as horror fans who seek out now-obscure titles from the 1950s instead of the modern, well-known remakes. Authenticity may also drive fans to deny genre categorization to films perceived as too mainstream or accessible. Authenticity in performance and expertise can drive fan acclaim. Authenticity can also drive fans to decry the mainstream in the form of hostile critics and censors. Especially when promoted by enthusiastic and knowledgeable programmers, choice of venue can be an important part of expressing individuality. Besides creating new communities, cult films can link formerly disparate groups, such as fans and critics. As these groups intermix, they can influence each other, though this may be resisted by older fans, unfamiliar with these new references. In extreme cases, cult films can lead to the creation of religions, such as Dudeism. For their avoidance of mainstream culture and audiences, enjoyment of irony, and celebration of obscure subcultures, academic Martin Roberts compares cult film fans to hipsters.

A film can become the object of a cult following within a particular region or culture if it has unusual significance. For example, Norman Wisdom&#x27;s films, friendly to Marxist interpretation, amassed a cult following in Albania, as they were among the few Western films allowed by the country&#x27;s Communist rulers. &quot;The Wizard of Oz&quot; (1939) and its star, Judy Garland, hold special significance to American and British gay culture, although it is a widely viewed and historically important film in greater American culture. Similarly, James Dean and his brief film career have become icons of alienated youth. Cult films can have such niche appeal that they are only popular within certain subcultures, such as &quot;Reefer Madness&quot; (1936) and &quot;Hemp for Victory&quot; (1942) among the stoner subculture. Beach party musicals, popular among American surfers, failed to find an equivalent audience when imported to the United Kingdom. When films target subcultures like this, they may seem unintelligible without the proper cultural capital. Films which appeal to teenagers may offer subcultural identities that are easily recognized and differentiate various subcultural groups. Films which appeal to stereotypical male activities, such as sports, can easily gain strong male cult followings. Sports metaphors are often used in the marketing of cult films to males, such as emphasizing the &quot;extreme&quot; nature of the film, which increases the appeal to youth subcultures fond of extreme sports.
Matt Hills&#x27; concept of the &quot;cult blockbuster&quot; involves cult followings inside larger, mainstream films. Although these are big budget, mainstream films, they still attract cult followings. The cult fans differentiate themselves from ordinary fans in several ways: longstanding devotion to the film, distinctive interpretations, and fan works. Hills identifies three different cult followings for &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot;, each with their own fandom separate from the mainstream. Academic Emma Pett identifies &quot;Back to the Future&quot; (1985) as another example of a cult blockbuster. Although the film was an instant hit when released, it has also developed a nostalgic cult following over the years. The hammy acting by Christopher Lloyd and quotable dialogue have drawn a cult following, as they mimic traditional cult films. Blockbuster science fiction films that include philosophical subtexts, such as &quot;The Matrix&quot;, allow cult film fans to enjoy them on a higher level than the mainstream. &quot;Star Wars&quot;, with its large cult following in geek subculture, has been cited as both a cult blockbuster and a cult film. Although a mainstream epic, &quot;Star Wars&quot; has provided its fans with a spirituality and culture outside of the mainstream.

Fans, in response to the popularity of these blockbusters, will claim elements for themselves while rejecting others. For example, in the &quot;Star Wars&quot; film series, mainstream criticism of Jar Jar Binks focused on racial stereotyping; although cult film fans will use that to bolster their arguments, he is rejected because he represents mainstream appeal and marketing. Also, instead of valuing textual rarity, fans of cult blockbusters will value repeat viewings. They may also engage in behaviors more traditional for fans of cult television and other serial media, as cult blockbusters are often franchised, preconceived as a film series, or both. To reduce mainstream accessibility, a film series can be self-reflexive and full of in-jokes that only longtime fans can understand. Mainstream critics may ridicule commercially successful directors of cult blockbusters, such as James Cameron, Michael Bay, and Luc Besson, whose films have been called simplistic. This critical backlash may serve to embellish the filmmakers&#x27; reception as cult auteurs. In the same way, critics may ridicule fans of cult blockbusters as immature or shallow.

Cult films can create their own subculture. &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;, originally made to exploit the popularity of glam subculture, became what academic Gina Marchetti called a &quot;sub-subculture&quot;, a variant that outlived its parent subculture. Although often described as primarily composed of obsessed fans, cult film fandom can include many newer, less experienced members. Familiar with the film&#x27;s reputation and having watched clips on YouTube, these fans may take the next step and enter the film&#x27;s fandom. If they are the majority, they may alter or ignore long-standing traditions, such as audience participation rituals; rituals which lack perceived authenticity may be criticized, but accepted rituals bring subcultural capital to veteran fans who introduce them to the newer members. Fans who flaunt their knowledge receive negative reactions. Newer fans may cite the film itself as their reason for attending a showing, but longtime fans often cite the community. Organized fandoms may spread and become popular as a way of introducing new people to the film, as well as theatrical screenings being privileged by the media and fandom itself. Fandom can also be used as a process of legitimation. Fans of cult films, as in media fandom, are frequently producers instead of mere consumers. Unconcerned with traditional views on intellectual property, these fan works are often unsanctioned, transformative, and ignore fictional canon.

Like cult films themselves, magazines and websites dedicated to cult films revel in their self-conscious offensiveness. They maintain a sense of exclusivity by offending mainstream audiences with misogyny, gore, and racism. Obsessive trivia can be used to bore mainstream audiences while building up subcultural capital. Specialist stores on the fringes of society (or websites which prominently partner with hardcore pornographic sites) can be used to reinforce the outsider nature of cult film fandom, especially when they use erotic or gory imagery. By assuming a preexisting knowledge of trivia, non-fans can be excluded. Previous articles and controversies can also be alluded to without explanation. Casual readers and non-fans will thus be left out of discussions and debates, as they lack enough information to meaningfully contribute. When fans like a cult film for the wrong reasons, such as casting or characters aimed at mainstream appeal, they may be ridiculed. Thus, fandom can keep the mainstream at bay while defining themselves in terms of the &quot;Other&quot;, a philosophical construct divergent from social norms. Commercial aspects of fandom (such as magazines or books) can also be defined in terms of &quot;otherness&quot; and thus valid to consume: consumers purchasing independent or niche publications are discerning consumers, but the mainstream is denigrated. Irony or self-deprecating humor can also be used. In online communities, different subcultures attracted to transgressive films can clash over values and criteria for subcultural capital. Even within subcultures, fans who break subcultural scripts, such as denying the affectivity of a disturbing film, will be ridiculed for their lack of authenticity.

==Types==
===&quot;So bad it&#x27;s good&quot;===
The critic Michael Medved characterized examples of the &quot;so bad it&#x27;s good&quot; class of low-budget cult film through books such as &quot;The Golden Turkey Awards.&quot; These films include financially fruitless and critically scorned films that have become inadvertent comedies to film buffs, such as &quot;Plan 9 from Outer Space&quot; (1957), &quot;Mommie Dearest&quot; (1981), &quot;The Room&quot; (2003), and the Ugandan action comedy film &quot;Who Killed Captain Alex?&quot; (2010). Similarly, Paul Verhoeven&#x27;s &quot;Showgirls&quot; (1995) bombed in theaters but developed a cult following on video. Catching on, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer capitalized on the film&#x27;s ironic appeal and marketed it as a cult film. Sometimes, fans will impose their own interpretation of films which have attracted derision, such as reinterpreting an earnest melodrama as a comedy. Jacob deNobel of the &quot;Carroll County Times&quot; states that films can be perceived as nonsensical or inept when audiences misunderstand avant-garde filmmaking or misinterpret parody. Films such as &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; can be misinterpreted as &quot;weird for weirdness&#x27; sake&quot; by people unfamiliar with the cult films that they parody. deNobel ultimately rejects the use of the label &quot;so bad it&#x27;s good&quot; as mean-spirited and often misapplied. Alamo Drafthouse programmer Zack Carlson has further said that any film which succeeds in entertaining an audience is good, regardless of irony. In francophone culture, &quot;so bad it&#x27;s good&quot; films, known as , have given rise to a subculture with dedicated websites such as &quot;Nanarland&quot;, film festivals and viewings in theaters, as well as various books analyzing the phenomenon. The rise of the Internet and on-demand films has led critics to question whether &quot;so bad it&#x27;s good&quot; films have a future now that people have such diverse options in both availability and catalog, though fans eager to experience the worst films ever made can lead to lucrative showings for local theaters and merchandisers.

===Camp and guilty pleasures===
Chuck Kleinhans states that the difference between a guilty pleasure and a cult film can be as simple as the number of fans; David Church raises the question of how many people it takes to form a cult following, especially now that home video makes fans difficult to count. As these cult films become more popular, they can bring varied responses from fans that depend on different interpretations, such as camp, irony, genuine affection, or combinations thereof. Earnest fans, who recognize and accept the film&#x27;s faults, can make minor celebrities of the film&#x27;s cast, though the benefits are not always clear. Cult film stars known for their camp can inject subtle parody or signal when films should not be taken seriously. Campy actors can also provide comic book supervillains for serious, artistic-minded films. This can draw fan acclaim and obsession more readily than subtle, method-inspired acting. Mark Chalon Smith of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; says technical faults may be forgiven if a film makes up for them in other areas, such as camp or transgressive content. Smith states that the early films of John Waters are amateurish and less influential than claimed, but Waters&#x27; outrageous vision cements his place in cult cinema. Films such as &quot;Myra Breckinridge&quot; (1970) and &quot;Beyond the Valley of the Dolls&quot; (1970) can experience critical reappraisal later, once their camp excess and avant-garde filmmaking are better accepted, and films that are initially dismissed as frivolous are often reassessed as campy. Films that intentionally try to appeal to fans of camp may end up alienating them, as the films become perceived as trying too hard or not authentic.

===Nostalgia===
According to academic Brigid Cherry, nostalgia &quot;is a strong element of certain kinds of cult appeal.&quot; When Veoh added many cult films to their site, they cited nostalgia as a factor for their popularity. Academic I. Q. Hunter describes cult films as &quot;New Hollywood &quot;in extremis&quot;&quot; and a form of nostalgia for that period. Ernest Mathijs instead states that cult films use nostalgia as a form of resistance against progress and capitalistic ideas of a time-based economy. By virtue of the time travel plot, &quot;Back to the Future&quot; permits nostalgia for both the 1950s and 1980s. Many members of its nostalgic cult following are too young to have been alive during those periods, which Emma Pett interprets as fondness for retro aesthetics, nostalgia for when they saw the film rather than when it was released, and looking to the past to find a better time period. Similarly, films directed by John Hughes have taken hold in midnight movie venues, trading off of nostalgia for the 1980s and an ironic appreciation for their optimism. Mathijs and Sexton describe &quot;Grease&quot; (1978) as a film nostalgic about an imagined past that has acquired a nostalgic cult following. Other cult films, such as &quot;Streets of Fire&quot; (1984), create a new fictional world based on nostalgic views of the past. In martial arts movies, there is the movie &quot;Bloodsport&quot; (1988) with Jean-Claude Van Damme as well as &quot;Road House&quot; (1989) with Patrick Swayze. Cult films may also subvert nostalgia, such as &quot;The Big Lebowski&quot;, which introduces many nostalgic elements and then reveals them as fake and hollow. &quot;Scott Pilgrim vs. the World&quot; (2010) is another example, containing extensive nostalgia for the music and video gaming culture of the 2000s. Nathan Lee of the &quot;New York Sun&quot; identifies the retro aesthetic and nostalgic pastiche in films such as &quot;Donnie Darko&quot; as factors in its popularity among midnight movie crowds.

===Midnight movies===
Author Tomas Crowder-Taraborrelli describes midnight movies as a reaction against the political and cultural conservatism in America, and Joan Hawkins identifies the movement as running the gamut from anarchist to libertarian, united in their anti-establishment attitude and punk aesthetic. These films are resistant to simple categorization and are defined by the fanaticism and ritualistic behaviors of their audiences. Midnight movies require a night life and an audience willing to invest themselves actively. Hawkins states that these films took a rather bleak point of view due to the living conditions of the artists and the economic prospects of the 1970s. Like the surrealists and dadaists, they not only satirically attacked society but also the very structure of film – a counter-cinema that deconstructs narrative and traditional processes. In the late 1980s and 1990s, midnight movies transitioned from underground showings to home video viewings; eventually, a desire for community brought a resurgence, and &quot;The Big Lebowski&quot; kick-started a new generation. Demographics shifted, and more hip and mainstream audiences were drawn to them. Although studios expressed skepticism, large audiences were drawn to box-office flops, such as &quot;The Warriors&quot; (1979) gang movie from Walter Hill, &quot;Office Space&quot; (1999) and &quot;Donnie Darko&quot; (2001). Modern midnight movies retain their popularity and have been strongly diverging from mainstream films shown at midnight. Mainstream cinemas, eager to disassociate themselves from negative associations and increase profits, have begun abandoning midnight screenings. Although classic midnight movies have dropped off in popularity, they still bring reliable crowds.

===Art and exploitation===
Although seemingly at odds with each other, art and exploitation films are frequently treated as equal and interchangeable in cult fandom, listed alongside each other and described in similar terms: their ability to provoke a response. The most exploitative aspects of art films are thus played up and their academic recognition ignored. This flattening of culture follows the popularity of post-structuralism, which rejects a hierarchy of artistic merit and equates exploitation and art. Mathijs and Sexton state that although cult films are not synonymous with exploitation, as is occasionally assumed, this is a key component; they write that exploitation, which exists on the fringes of the mainstream and deals with taboo subjects, is well-suited for cult followings. Academic David Andrews writes that cult softcore films are &quot;the most masculinized, youth-oriented, populist, and openly pornographic softcore area.&quot; The sexploitation films of Russ Meyer were among the first to abandon all hypocritical pretenses of morality and were technically proficient enough to gain a cult following. His persistent vision saw him received as an auteur worthy of academic study; director John Waters attributes this to Meyer&#x27;s ability to create complicated, sexually charged films without resorting to explicit sex. Myrna Oliver described Doris Wishman&#x27;s exploitation films as &quot;crass, coarse, and camp ... perfect fodder for a cult following.&quot; &quot;Sick films&quot;, the most disturbing and graphically transgressive films, have their own distinct cult following; these films transcend their roots in exploitation, horror, and art films. In 1960s and 1970s America, exploitation and art films shared audiences and marketing, especially in New York City&#x27;s grindhouse cinemas.

===B and genre films===
Mathijs and Sexton state that genre is an important part of cult films; cult films will often mix, mock, or exaggerate the tropes associated with traditional genres. Science fiction, fantasy, and horror are known for their large and dedicated cult followings; as science fiction films become more popular, fans emphasize non-mainstream and less commercial aspects of it. B films, which are often conflated with exploitation, are as important to cult films as exploitation. Teodor Reljic of &quot;Malta Today&quot; states that cult B films are a realistic goal for Malta&#x27;s burgeoning film industry. Genre films, B films that strictly adhere to genre limitations, can appeal to cult film fans: given their transgressive excesses, horror films are likely to become to cult films; films like &quot;Galaxy Quest&quot; (1999) highlight the importance of cult followings and fandom to science fiction; and authentic martial arts skills in Hong Kong action films can drive them to become cult favorites. Cult musicals can range from the traditional, such as &quot;Singin&#x27; in the Rain&quot; (1952), which appeal to cult audiences through nostalgia, camp, and spectacle, to the more non-traditional, such as &quot;Cry-Baby&quot; (1990), which parodies musicals, and &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;, which uses a rock soundtrack. Romantic fairy tale &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; (1987) failed to attract audiences in its original release, as the studio did not know how to market it. The freedom and excitement associated with cars can be an important part of drawing cult film fans to genre films, and they can signify action and danger with more ambiguity than a gun. &quot;Ad Week&quot; writes that cult B films, when released on home video, market themselves and need only enough advertising to raise curiosity or nostalgia.

===Animation===
Animation can provide wide open vistas for stories. The French film &quot;Fantastic Planet&quot; (1973) explored ideas beyond the limits of traditional, live-action science fiction films. Ralph Bakshi&#x27;s career has been marked with controversy: &quot;Fritz the Cat&quot; (1972), the first animated film to be rated &quot;X&quot; by the MPAA, provoked outrage for its racial caricatures and graphic depictions of sex, and &quot;Coonskin&quot; (1975) was decried as racist. Bakshi recalls that older animators had tired of &quot;kid stuff&quot; and desired edgier work, whereas younger animators hated his work for &quot;destroying the Disney images&quot;. Eventually, his work would be reassessed and cult followings, which include Quentin Tarantino and Robert Rodriguez, developed around several of his films. &quot;Heavy Metal&quot; (1981) faced similar denunciations from critics. Donald Liebenson of the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; cites the violence and sexual imagery as alienating critics, who did not know what to make of the film. It would go on to become a popular midnight movie and frequently bootlegged by fans, as licensing issues kept it from being released on video for many years.

Phil Hoad of &quot;The Guardian&quot; identifies &quot;Akira&quot; (1988) as introducing violent, adult Japanese animation (known as anime) to the West and paving the way for later works. Anime, according to academic Brian Ruh, is not a cult genre, but the lack of individual fandoms inside anime fandom itself lends itself to a bleeding over of cult attention and can help spread works internationally. Anime, which is frequently presented as a series (with movies either rising from existing series, or spinning off series based on the film), provides its fans with alternative fictional canons and points of view that can drive fan activity. The &quot;Ghost in the Shell&quot; films, for example, provided Japanese fans with enough bonus material and spinoffs that it encouraged cult tendencies. Markets that did not support the sale of these materials saw less cult activity. The claymation film &quot;&quot; (1995), which made only $57,100 at the box office against its $2.8 million budget but sold a million copies on VHS alone, was subsequently released on DVD and remastered in high definition for Blu-ray due to its strong cult following. Like many cult films, RiffTrax made their own humorous audio commentary for &quot;Gumby: The Movie&quot; in 2021.

===Nonfiction===
Sensationalistic documentaries called mondo films replicate the most shocking and transgressive elements of exploitation films. They are usually modeled after &quot;sick films&quot; and cover similar subject matter. In &quot;The Cult Film Reader&quot;, academics Mathijs and Mendik write that these documentaries often present non-Western societies as &quot;stereotypically mysterious, seductive, immoral, deceptive, barbaric or savage&quot;. Though they can be interpreted as racist, Mathijs and Mendik state that they also &quot;exhibit a liberal attitude towards the breaking of cultural taboos&quot;. Mondo films like &quot;Faces of Death&quot; mix real and fake footage freely, and they gain their cult following through the outrage and debate over authenticity that results. Like &quot;so bad it&#x27;s good&quot; cult films, old propaganda and government hygiene films may be enjoyed ironically by more modern audiences for the camp value of the outdated themes and outlandish claims made about perceived social threats, such as drug use. Academic Barry K. Grant states that Frank Capra&#x27;s &quot;Why We Fight&quot; World War II propaganda films are explicitly not cult, because they are &quot;slickly made and have proven their ability to persuade an audience.&quot; The sponsored film &quot;Mr. B Natural&quot; became a cult hit when it was broadcast on the satirical television show &quot;Mystery Science Theater 3000&quot;; cast member Trace Beaulieu cited these educational shorts as his favorite to mock on the show. Mark Jancovich states that cult audiences are drawn to these films because of their &quot;very banality or incoherence of their political positions&quot;, unlike traditional cult films, which achieve popularity through auteurist radicalism.

==Mainstream popularity==
Mark Shiel explains the rising popularity of cult films as an attempt by cinephiles and scholars to escape the oppressive conformity and mainstream appeal of even independent film, as well as a lack of condescension in both critics and the films; Academic Donna de Ville says it is a chance to subvert the dominance of academics and cinephiles. According to Xavier Mendik, &quot;academics have been really interested in cult movies for quite a while now.&quot; Mendik has sought to bring together academic interest and fandom through Cine-Excess, a film festival. I. Q. Hunter states that &quot;it&#x27;s much easier to be a cultist now, but it is also rather more inconsequential.&quot; Citing the mainstream availability of &quot;Cannibal Holocaust&quot;, Jeffrey Sconce rejects definitions of cult films based on controversy and excess, as they&#x27;ve now become meaningless. Cult films have influenced such diverse industries as cosmetics, music videos, and fashion. Cult films have shown up in less expected places; as a sign of his popularity, a bronze statue of Ed Wood has been proposed in his hometown, and &quot;L&#x27;Osservatore Romano&quot;, the official newspaper of the Holy See, has courted controversy for its endorsement of cult films and pop culture. When cities attempt to renovate neighborhoods, fans have called attempts to demolish iconic settings from cult films &quot;cultural vandalism&quot;. Cult films can also drive tourism, even when it is unwanted. From Latin America, Alejandro Jodorowsky&#x27;s film &quot;El Topo&quot; (1970) has attracted attention of rock musicians such as John Lennon, Mick Jagger, and Bob Dylan.

As far back as the 1970s, &quot;Attack of the Killer Tomatoes&quot; (1978) was designed specifically to be a cult film, and &quot;The Rocky Horror Picture Show&quot; was produced by 20th Century Fox, a major Hollywood studio. Over its decades-long release, &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; became the seventh highest grossing R-rated film when adjusted for inflation; journalist Matt Singer has questioned whether &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;″s popularity invalidates its cult status. Founded in 1974, Troma Entertainment, an independent studio, would become known for both its cult following and cult films. In the 1980s, Danny Peary&#x27;s &quot;Cult Movies&quot; (1981) would influence director Edgar Wright and film critic Scott Tobias of &quot;The A.V. Club&quot;. The rise of home video would have a mainstreaming effect on cult films and cultish behavior, though some collectors would be unlikely to self-identify as cult film fans. Film critic Joe Bob Briggs began reviewing drive-in theater and cult films, though he faced much criticism as an early advocate of exploitation and cult films. Briggs highlights the mainstreaming of cult films by pointing out the respectful obituaries that cult directors have received from formerly hostile publications and acceptance of politically incorrect films at mainstream film festivals. This acceptance is not universal, though, and some critics have resisted this mainstreaming of paracinema. Beginning in the 1990s, director Quentin Tarantino would have the greatest success in turning cult films mainstream. Tarantino later used his fame to champion obscure cult films that had influenced him and set up the short-lived Rolling Thunder Pictures, which distributed several of his favorite cult films. Tarantino&#x27;s clout led Phil Hoad of &quot;The Guardian&quot; to call Tarantino the world&#x27;s most influential director.

As major Hollywood studios and audiences both become savvy to cult films, productions once limited to cult appeal have instead become popular hits, and cult directors have become hot properties known for more mainstream and accessible films. Remarking on the popular trend of remaking cult films, Claude Brodesser-Akner of &quot;New York&quot; magazine states that Hollywood studios have been superstitiously hoping to recreate past successes rather than trading on nostalgia. Their popularity would bring some critics to proclaim the death of cult films now that they have finally become successful and mainstream, are too slick to attract a proper cult following, lack context, or are too easily found online. In response, David Church says that cult film fans have retreated to more obscure and difficult to find films, often using illegal distribution methods, which preserves the outlaw status of cult films. Virtual spaces, such as online forums and fan sites, replace the traditional fanzines and newsletters. Cult film fans consider themselves collectors, rather than consumers, as they associate consumers with mainstream, Hollywood audiences. This collecting can take the place of fetishization of a single film. Addressing concerns that DVDs have revoked the cult status of films like &quot;Rocky Horror&quot;, academic Mikel J. Koven states that small scale screenings with friends and family can replace midnight showings. Koven also identifies television shows, such as &quot;Twin Peaks&quot;, as retaining more traditional cult activities inside popular culture. David Lynch himself has not ruled out another television series, as studios have become reluctant to take chances on non-mainstream ideas. Despite this, the Alamo Drafthouse has capitalized on cult films and the surrounding culture through inspiration drawn from &quot;Rocky Horror&quot; and retro promotional gimmickry. They sell out their shows regularly and have acquired a cult following of their own.

Academic Bob Batchelor, writing in &quot;Cult Pop Culture&quot;, states that the internet has democratized cult culture and destroyed the line between cult and mainstream. Fans of even the most obscure films can communicate online with each other in vibrant communities. Although known for their big-budget blockbusters, Steven Spielberg and George Lucas have criticized the current Hollywood system of gambling everything on the opening weekend of these productions. Geoffrey Macnab of &quot;The Independent&quot; instead suggests that Hollywood look to capitalize on cult films, which have exploded in popularity on the internet. The rise of social media has been a boon to cult films. Sites such as Twitter have displaced traditional venues for fandom and courted controversy from cultural critics who are unamused by campy cult films. After a clip from one of his films went viral, director-producer Roger Corman made a distribution deal with YouTube. Found footage which had originally been distributed as cult VHS collections eventually went viral on YouTube, which opened them to new generations of fans. Films such as &quot;&quot; (2008) and &quot;The Room&quot; (2003) gained quick, massive popularity, as prominent members of social networking sites discussed them. Their rise as &quot;instant cult classics&quot; bypasses the years of obscurity that most cult films labor under. In response, critics have described the use of viral marketing as astroturfing and an attempt to manufacture cult films.

I. Q. Hunter identifies a prefabricated cult film style which includes &quot;deliberately, insulting bad films&quot;, &quot;slick exercises in dysfunction and alienation&quot;, and mainstream films &quot;that sell themselves as worth obsessing over&quot;. Writing for NPR, Scott Tobias states that Don Coscarelli, whose previous films effortlessly attracted cult followings, has drifted into this realm. Tobias criticizes Coscarelli as trying too hard to appeal to cult audiences and sacrificing internal consistency for calculated quirkiness. Influenced by the successful online hype of &quot;The Blair Witch Project&quot; (1999), other films have attempted to draw online cult fandom with the use of prefabricated cult appeal. &quot;Snakes on a Plane&quot; (2006) is an example that attracted massive attention from curious fans. Uniquely, its cult following preceded the film&#x27;s release and included speculative parodies of what fans imagined the film might be. This reached the point of convergence culture when fan speculation began to impact on the film&#x27;s production. Although it was proclaimed a cult film and major game-changer before it was released, it failed to win either mainstream audiences or maintain its cult following. In retrospect, critic Spencer Kornhaber would call it a serendipitous novelty and a footnote to a &quot;more naive era of the Internet&quot;. However, it became influential in both marketing and titling. This trend of &quot;instant cult classics&quot; which are hailed yet fail to attain a lasting following is described by Matt Singer, who states that the phrase is an oxymoron.

Cult films are often approached in terms of auteur theory, which states that the director&#x27;s creative vision drives a film. This has fallen out of favor in academia, creating a disconnect between cult film fans and critics. Matt Hills states that auteur theory can help to create cult films; fans that see a film as continuing a director&#x27;s creative vision are likely to accept it as cult. According to academic Greg Taylor, auteur theory also helped to popularize cult films when middlebrow audiences found an accessible way to approach avant-garde film criticism. Auteur theory provided an alternative culture for cult film fans while carrying the weight of scholarship. By requiring repeated viewings and extensive knowledge of details, auteur theory naturally appealed to cult film fans. Taylor further states that this was instrumental in allowing cult films to break through to the mainstream. Academic Joe Tompkins states that this auteurism is often highlighted when mainstream success occurs. This may take the place of – and even ignore – political readings of the director. Cult films and directors may be celebrated for their transgressive content, daring, and independence, but Tompkins argues that mainstream recognition requires they be palatable to corporate interests who stand to gain much from the mainstreaming of cult film culture. While critics may champion revolutionary aspects of filmmaking and political interpretation, Hollywood studios and other corporate interests will instead highlight only the aspects that they wish to legitimize in their own films, such as sensational exploitation. Someone like George A. Romero, whose films are both transgressive and subversive, will have the transgressive aspects highlighted while the subversive aspects are ignored.

== See also ==

*B movie
*Cult video game
*List of cult films
*Mockbuster
*Sleeper hit

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="2" end="11" title="Cult film" label="cult film"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="15" end="25" title="Cult film" label="cult movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q219557" start="58" end="70" title="Cult film" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="77" end="81" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="102" end="116" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="171" end="178" title="Fandom" label="fanbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q211198" start="285" end="307" title="audience participation" label="audience participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165644" start="378" end="393" title="box office bomb" label="box-office bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864753" start="447" end="460" title="transgressive art" label="transgressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976552" start="587" end="620" title="classificatory disputes about art" label="classificatory disputes about art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007999" start="728" end="744" title="underground film" label="underground film"/>
<link wikidata="Q638364" start="750" end="764" title="midnight movie" label="midnight movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q449150" start="910" end="926" title="film censorship" label="suppressed films"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="1095" end="1099" title="camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q220505" start="1431" end="1444" title="film festival" label="film festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537117" start="3077" end="3094" title="Hollywood studio" label="Hollywood studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q204255" start="3409" end="3416" title="viral marketing" label="virally"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="3425" end="3437" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q723685" start="3469" end="3484" title="video on demand" label="video on demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373485" start="3489" end="3514" title="peer-to-peer file sharing" label="peer-to-peer file sharing"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="3626" end="3640" title="cult following" label="cult following"/>
<link wikidata="Q211198" start="4046" end="4068" title="audience participation" label="audience participation"/>
<link wikidata="Q220505" start="4070" end="4083" title="film festival" label="film festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q142554" start="4089" end="4096" title="cosplay" label="cosplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092380" start="4294" end="4303" title="cinephile" label="cinephile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302801" start="4907" end="4926" title="recontextualization" label="recontextualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780322" start="4930" end="4954" title="cultural commodification" label="cultural commodification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972772" start="4972" end="4980" title="Cineaste (magazine)" label="Cineaste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864753" start="5183" end="5196" title="transgressive art" label="transgressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768288" start="5755" end="5768" title="structuration" label="structuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285562" start="5856" end="5870" title="Ernest Mathijs" label="Ernest Mathijs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343526" start="6007" end="6025" title="Jonathan Rosenbaum" label="Jonathan Rosenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="6463" end="6476" title="postmodernism" label="postmodernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359754" start="6608" end="6621" title="metanarrative" label="metanarrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7133952" start="6844" end="6854" title="paracinema" label="paracinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336124" start="7759" end="7776" title="defamiliarization" label="defamiliarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285577" start="8043" end="8056" title="Xavier Mendik" label="Xavier Mendik"/>
<link wikidata="Q109856293" start="8431" end="8450" title="Harry Alan Potamkin" label="Harry Alan Potamkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q271575" start="8505" end="8516" title="Pearl White" label="Pearl White"/>
<link wikidata="Q636680" start="8518" end="8533" title="William S. Hart" label="William S. Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="8539" end="8554" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151895" start="8631" end="8640" title="Nosferatu" label="Nosferatu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="8688" end="8699" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="8713" end="8720" title="Dracula (novel)" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="9007" end="9020" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166646" start="9121" end="9144" title="Golden Age of Hollywood" label="Golden Age of Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132629" start="9215" end="9238" title="The Night of the Hunter (film)" label="The Night of the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067324" start="9409" end="9426" title="exploitation film" label="exploitation film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="9450" end="9458" title="art film" label="art film"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="9502" end="9514" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624287" start="9519" end="9532" title="Arthur Knight (film critic)" label="Arthur Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479257" start="9573" end="9577" title="high culture" label="high"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630264" start="9582" end="9593" title="low culture" label="low culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188976" start="9995" end="10009" title="counterculture" label="counterculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007999" start="10014" end="10030" title="underground film" label="underground film"/>
<link wikidata="Q638364" start="10150" end="10164" title="midnight movie" label="midnight movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="10521" end="10537" title="avant-garde film" label="avant-garde film"/>
<link wikidata="Q751921" start="10639" end="10668" title="The Rocky Horror Picture Show" label="The Rocky Horror Picture Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="10879" end="10895" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q15737157" start="10997" end="11010" title="word-of-mouth" label="word-of-mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q813050" start="11162" end="11177" title="The Beastmaster" label="The Beastmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q337078" start="11618" end="11634" title="The Big Lebowski" label="The Big Lebowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="11674" end="11691" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="12694" end="12703" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839609" start="12713" end="12727" title="Anurag Kashyap" label="Anurag Kashyap"/>
<link wikidata="Q248775" start="13275" end="13282" title="Mad Max (film)" label="Mad Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q2584671" start="13563" end="13578" title="Japanese horror" label="Japanese horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="14264" end="14277" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973208" start="14391" end="14401" title="Cinema of New Zealand" label="its cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q322206" start="14557" end="14575" title="Heavenly Creatures" label="Heavenly Creatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="14757" end="14798" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="&amp;quot;The Lord of the Rings&amp;quot; trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q204191" start="15870" end="15896" title="It&amp;#x27;s A Wonderful Life" label="It&amp;#x27;s a Wonderful Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467214" start="15920" end="15942" title="Miracle on 34th Street" label="Miracle on 34th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q52392" start="16776" end="16785" title="Tim Curry" label="Tim Curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q452400" start="17051" end="17063" title="Mary Woronov" label="Mary Woronov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="17328" end="17339" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q207592" start="17402" end="17416" title="Sylvia Kristel" label="Sylvia Kristel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313289" start="17442" end="17452" title="Emmanuelle (1974 film)" label="Emmanuelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q235870" start="17915" end="17928" title="Chloë Sevigny" label="Chloë Sevigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216885" start="18083" end="18097" title="Leonard Kastle" label="Leonard Kastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626875" start="18118" end="18139" title="The Honeymoon Killers" label="The Honeymoon Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="18232" end="18249" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="18419" end="18439" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413472" start="18675" end="18694" title="European art cinema" label="European art cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q790192" start="18699" end="18716" title="experimental film" label="experimental film"/>
<link wikidata="Q167776" start="18747" end="18765" title="Italian neorealism" label="Italian neorealism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251513" start="18912" end="18921" title="Nick Zedd" label="Nick Zedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092461" start="18954" end="18977" title="Cinema of Transgression" label="Cinema of Transgression"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="19281" end="19298" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q864592" start="19694" end="19707" title="Battle Royale (film)" label="Battle Royale"/>
<link wikidata="Q853630" start="19756" end="19768" title="slasher film" label="slasher film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="20454" end="20465" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21194" end="21223" title="Rex Reed#Offensive comments in reviews" label="comments about Korean culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q475693" start="21247" end="21253" title="Oldboy (2003 film)" label="Oldboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="21353" end="21364" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537077" start="21383" end="21403" title="I Spit On Your Grave" label="I Spit On Your Grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q449150" start="22060" end="22075" title="Film censorship" label="Film censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q723745" start="22798" end="22815" title="Frank Henenlotter" label="Frank Henenlotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q308857" start="22984" end="22992" title="misogyny" label="misogyny"/>
<link wikidata="Q183347" start="22994" end="23007" title="Lloyd Kaufman" label="Lloyd Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q579712" start="23471" end="23482" title="Jean Rollin" label="Jean Rollin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23503" end="23521" title="fantastique#Cinéma Fantastique" label="cinéma fantastique"/>
<link wikidata="Q353758" start="23793" end="23804" title="Jess Franco" label="Jess Franco"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24598" end="24616" title="Cinema of Spain#The new Spanish cinema" label="New Spanish Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q55171" start="24707" end="24722" title="Pedro Almodóvar" label="Pedro Almodóvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q185421" start="24977" end="24990" title="Takashi Miike" label="Takashi Miike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028529" start="25318" end="25331" title="video nasty" label="video nasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q861670" start="25479" end="25515" title="British Board of Film Classification" label="British Board of Film Classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723850" start="25624" end="25637" title="cannibal boom" label="cannibal boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q832093" start="25645" end="25663" title="Cannibal Holocaust" label="Cannibal Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q644437" start="25786" end="25796" title="snuff film" label="snuff film"/>
<link wikidata="Q456946" start="25839" end="25854" title="Ruggero Deodato" label="Ruggero Deodato"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469208" start="27966" end="27977" title="lad culture" label="lad culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292320" start="28285" end="28298" title="sexploitation" label="sexploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439029" start="28308" end="28321" title="Doris Wishman" label="Doris Wishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15930278" start="28377" end="28386" title="male gaze" label="male gaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q315325" start="28718" end="28728" title="Russ Meyer" label="Russ Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="29166" end="29185" title="subcultural capital" label="subcultural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q667404" start="29720" end="29735" title="intertextuality" label="intertextuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671570" start="30752" end="30759" title="Dudeism" label="Dudeism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040465" start="30929" end="30937" title="Hipster (contemporary subculture)" label="hipsters"/>
<link wikidata="Q349217" start="31072" end="31085" title="Norman Wisdom" label="Norman Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q193695" start="31268" end="31284" title="The Wizard of Oz (1939 film)" label="The Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q11637" start="31312" end="31324" title="Judy Garland" label="Judy Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075748" start="31331" end="31351" title="Judy Garland as gay icon" label="special significance"/>
<link wikidata="Q83359" start="31492" end="31502" title="James Dean" label="James Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547202" start="31674" end="31688" title="Reefer Madness" label="Reefer Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549904" start="31712" end="31728" title="Hemp for Victory" label="Hemp for Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q21021849" start="31752" end="31769" title="Cannabis culture" label="stoner subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q918002" start="31989" end="32005" title="cultural capital" label="cultural capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433601" start="32815" end="32823" title="fan work" label="fan work"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="32885" end="32906" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q91540" start="33007" end="33025" title="Back to the Future" label="Back to the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="33218" end="33235" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="33410" end="33420" title="The Matrix" label="The Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="33508" end="33517" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33950" end="33976" title="Jar Jar Binks#Allegations of racial caricature" label="criticism of Jar Jar Binks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="34655" end="34668" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q59259" start="34670" end="34681" title="Michael Bay" label="Michael Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q484779" start="34687" end="34697" title="Luc Besson" label="Luc Besson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="35038" end="35053" title="glam rock" label="glam subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="36174" end="36186" title="media fandom" label="media fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q53815" start="36368" end="36383" title="Canon (fiction)" label="fictional canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433373" start="37453" end="37458" title="Other (philosophy)" label="Other"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="37507" end="37519" title="Norm (social)" label="social norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832789" start="38190" end="38204" title="Michael Medved" label="Michael Medved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488261" start="38327" end="38351" title="The Golden Turkey Awards" label="The Golden Turkey Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q257515" start="38497" end="38520" title="Plan 9 from Outer Space" label="Plan 9 from Outer Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q282827" start="38541" end="38555" title="Mommie Dearest (film)" label="Mommie Dearest"/>
<link wikidata="Q533383" start="38576" end="38584" title="The Room" label="The Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997286" start="38640" end="38664" title="Who Killed Captain Alex?" label="Who Killed Captain Alex?"/>
<link wikidata="Q129079" start="38690" end="38704" title="Paul Verhoeven" label="Paul Verhoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q532264" start="38718" end="38727" title="Showgirls" label="Showgirls"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="38814" end="38833" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046549" start="39088" end="39108" title="Carroll County Times" label="Carroll County Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705954" start="39537" end="39553" title="Alamo Drafthouse Cinema" label="Alamo Drafthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003588" start="39685" end="39696" title="francophone" label="francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="39779" end="39789" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="40715" end="40719" title="camp (style)" label="camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q560589" start="41200" end="41206" title="method acting" label="method"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="41255" end="41272" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="41437" end="41448" title="John Waters (director born 1946)" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753143" start="41588" end="41605" title="Myra Breckinridge (film)" label="Myra Breckinridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q886194" start="41629" end="41659" title="Beyond the Valley of the Dolls" label="Beyond the Valley of the Dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q12151852" start="42074" end="42083" title="nostalgia" label="nostalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087787" start="42154" end="42158" title="Veoh" label="Veoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q311263" start="42966" end="42977" title="John Hughes (filmmaker)" label="John Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456047" start="43035" end="43058" title="1980s nostalgia" label="nostalgia for the 1980s"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="43140" end="43146" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275068" start="43281" end="43296" title="Streets of Fire" label="Streets of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q724960" start="43427" end="43437" title="Bloodsport (film)" label="Bloodsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q308840" start="43456" end="43477" title="Jean-Claude Van Damme" label="Jean-Claude Van Damme"/>
<link wikidata="Q963351" start="43495" end="43505" title="Road House (1989 film)" label="Road House"/>
<link wikidata="Q49004" start="43524" end="43538" title="Patrick Swayze" label="Patrick Swayze"/>
<link wikidata="Q337078" start="43593" end="43609" title="The Big Lebowski" label="The Big Lebowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q753899" start="43706" end="43733" title="Scott Pilgrim vs. the World" label="Scott Pilgrim vs. the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519334" start="43875" end="43887" title="New York Sun" label="New York Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q426828" start="43971" end="43983" title="Donnie Darko" label="Donnie Darko"/>
<link wikidata="Q638364" start="44115" end="44129" title="midnight movie" label="midnight movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="44285" end="44296" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122971" start="45334" end="45346" title="The Warriors (film)" label="The Warriors"/>
<link wikidata="Q350422" start="45376" end="45387" title="Walter Hill" label="Walter Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044523" start="45395" end="45407" title="Office Space" label="Office Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q426828" start="45431" end="45443" title="Donnie Darko" label="Donnie Darko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="45895" end="45898" title="art film" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067324" start="45903" end="45920" title="exploitation film" label="exploitation film"/>
<link wikidata="Q267932" start="46242" end="46260" title="post-structuralism" label="post-structuralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="46572" end="46577" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q315325" start="46810" end="46820" title="Russ Meyer" label="Russ Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439029" start="47200" end="47213" title="Doris Wishman" label="Doris Wishman"/>
<link wikidata="Q654526" start="47637" end="47647" title="grindhouse" label="grindhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q201658" start="47712" end="47717" title="film genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="48053" end="48059" title="B film" label="B film"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009339" start="48178" end="48189" title="Malta Today" label="Malta Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q502067" start="48481" end="48493" title="Galaxy Quest" label="Galaxy Quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q845641" start="48619" end="48641" title="Hong Kong action cinema" label="Hong Kong action films"/>
<link wikidata="Q309153" start="48743" end="48767" title="Singin&amp;#x27; in the Rain" label="Singin&amp;#x27; in the Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179746" start="48896" end="48904" title="Cry-Baby" label="Cry-Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="49030" end="49048" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134747" start="49352" end="49359" title="Ad Week" label="Ad Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q11425" start="49522" end="49531" title="Animation" label="Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q477687" start="49596" end="49612" title="Fantastic Planet" label="Fantastic Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q315441" start="49710" end="49722" title="Ralph Bakshi" label="Ralph Bakshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418615" start="49777" end="49790" title="Fritz the Cat (film)" label="Fritz the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49835" end="49866" title="MPAA film rating system#X replaced by NC-17" label="rated &amp;quot;X&amp;quot; by the MPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q254671" start="49953" end="49961" title="Coonskin (film)" label="Coonskin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="50257" end="50274" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q47284" start="50279" end="50295" title="Robert Rodriguez" label="Robert Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471965" start="50342" end="50353" title="Heavy Metal (film)" label="Heavy Metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="50745" end="50757" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905968" start="50781" end="50786" title="Akira (1988 film)" label="Akira"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="50859" end="50864" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765168" start="51017" end="51029" title="anime fandom" label="anime fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q92580" start="51381" end="51399" title="Ghost in the Shell" label="Ghost in the Shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q870889" start="51610" end="51620" title="Clay animation" label="claymation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="51750" end="51753" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985929" start="51896" end="51904" title="RiffTrax" label="RiffTrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474387" start="52044" end="52054" title="mondo film" label="mondo film"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206310" start="52231" end="52251" title="The Cult Film Reader" label="The Cult Film Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q466204" start="52634" end="52648" title="Faces of Death" label="Faces of Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q51492" start="53088" end="53099" title="Frank Capra" label="Frank Capra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771928" start="53113" end="53125" title="Why We Fight" label="Why We Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579035" start="53288" end="53302" title="sponsored film" label="sponsored film"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928393" start="53309" end="53322" title="Mr. B Natural" label="Mr. B Natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894972" start="53408" end="53436" title="Mystery Science Theater 3000" label="Mystery Science Theater 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793721" start="53456" end="53470" title="Trace Beaulieu" label="Trace Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q17509658" start="54341" end="54352" title="Cine-Excess" label="Cine-Excess"/>
<link wikidata="Q221843" start="54877" end="54884" title="Ed Wood" label="Ed Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q746112" start="54930" end="54955" title="L&amp;#x27;Osservatore Romano" label="L&amp;#x27;Osservatore Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="54993" end="55001" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q263730" start="55308" end="55328" title="Alejandro Jodorowsky" label="Alejandro Jodorowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q477782" start="55347" end="55354" title="El Topo" label="El Topo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="55418" end="55429" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="55431" end="55442" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="55448" end="55457" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q543365" start="55492" end="55521" title="Attack of the Killer Tomatoes" label="Attack of the Killer Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q434841" start="55642" end="55658" title="20th Century Fox" label="20th Century Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q640786" start="55950" end="55969" title="Troma Entertainment" label="Troma Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220732" start="56071" end="56082" title="Danny Peary" label="Danny Peary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193131" start="56096" end="56107" title="Cult Movies (book)" label="Cult Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q522057" start="56146" end="56158" title="Edgar Wright" label="Edgar Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="56197" end="56210" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q9294355" start="56400" end="56414" title="Joe Bob Briggs" label="Joe Bob Briggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q786922" start="56431" end="56447" title="drive-in theater" label="drive-in theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067324" start="56519" end="56531" title="exploitation film" label="exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772" start="56925" end="56942" title="Quentin Tarantino" label="Quentin Tarantino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164205" start="57121" end="57145" title="Rolling Thunder Pictures" label="Rolling Thunder Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="57247" end="57259" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="57658" end="57666" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="58320" end="58327" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085" start="58819" end="58829" title="Twin Peaks" label="Twin Peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071" start="58907" end="58918" title="David Lynch" label="David Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705954" start="59064" end="59080" title="Alamo Drafthouse" label="Alamo Drafthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="59621" end="59633" title="blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="59635" end="59651" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="59656" end="59668" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="59807" end="59822" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="59958" end="59970" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="60016" end="60023" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030329" start="60193" end="60198" title="viral video" label="viral"/>
<link wikidata="Q318292" start="60218" end="60230" title="Roger Corman" label="Roger Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="60261" end="60268" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640035" start="60270" end="60283" title="Found footage (appropriation)" label="Found footage"/>
<link wikidata="Q533383" start="60470" end="60478" title="The Room (2003 film)" label="The Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q204255" start="60751" end="60766" title="viral marketing" label="viral marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q752177" start="60770" end="60782" title="astroturfing" label="astroturfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="61094" end="61097" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q720360" start="61124" end="61138" title="Don Coscarelli" label="Don Coscarelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q644554" start="61420" end="61443" title="The Blair Witch Project" label="The Blair Witch Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q822660" start="61561" end="61578" title="Snakes on a Plane" label="Snakes on a Plane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61821" end="61840" title="technological convergence#Convergence culture" label="convergence culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q788514" start="62497" end="62510" title="auteur theory" label="auteur theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q51511" start="64091" end="64107" title="George A. Romero" label="George A. Romero"/>
<link wikidata="Q223770" start="64268" end="64275" title="B movie" label="B movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="64277" end="64292" title="Cult video game" label="Cult video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614871" start="64294" end="64312" title="List of cult films" label="List of cult films"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941707" start="64314" end="64324" title="Mockbuster" label="Mockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539815" start="64326" end="64337" title="Sleeper hit" label="Sleeper hit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5646" wikidata="Q16869" url="?curid=5646" title="Constantinople">
<text>Constantinople (see other names) was a historical city located on the Bosporus that served as the capital of the Roman, Byzantine, Latin, and Ottoman empires between its consecration in 330 until 1930, when it was renamed to Istanbul. Initially as New Rome, Constantinople was founded in 324 during the reign of Constantine the Great on the site of the existing settlement of Byzantium, and shortly thereafter in 330 became the capital of the Roman Empire. Following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire in the late 5th century, Constantinople remained the capital of the Eastern Roman Empire (also known as the Byzantine Empire; 330–1204 and 1261–1453), the Latin Empire (1204–1261), and the Ottoman Empire (1453–1922). Following the Turkish War of Independence, the Turkish capital then moved to Ankara. Although the city had been known as Istanbul since 1453, it was officially renamed as Istanbul on 28th of March 1930, the city is today the largest city in Europe, straddling the Bosporus strait and lying in both Europe and Asia, and the financial center of Turkey.

In 324, following the reunification of the Eastern and Western Roman Empires, the ancient city of Byzantium was selected to serve as the new capital of the Roman Empire, and the city was renamed Nova Roma, or &#x27;New Rome&#x27;, by Emperor Constantine the Great. On 11 May 330, it was renamed Constantinople and dedicated to Constantine. Constantinople is generally considered to be the center and the &quot;cradle of Orthodox Christian civilization&quot;. From the mid-5th century to the early 13th century, Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest city in Europe. The city became famous for its architectural masterpieces, such as Hagia Sophia, the cathedral of the Eastern Orthodox Church, which served as the seat of the Ecumenical Patriarchate; the sacred Imperial Palace, where the emperors lived; the Hippodrome; the Golden Gate of the Land Walls; and opulent aristocratic palaces. The University of Constantinople was founded in the 5th century and contained artistic and literary treasures before it was sacked in 1204 and 1453, including its vast Imperial Library which contained the remnants of the Library of Alexandria and had 100,000 volumes. The city was the home of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople and guardian of Christendom&#x27;s holiest relics, such as the Crown of Thorns and the True Cross.
Constantinople was famous for its massive and complex fortifications, which ranked among the most sophisticated defensive architectures of antiquity. The Theodosian Walls consisted of a double wall lying about to the west of the first wall and a moat with palisades in front. Constantinople&#x27;s location between the Golden Horn and the Sea of Marmara reduced the land area that needed defensive walls. The city was built intentionally to rival Rome, and it was claimed that several elevations within its walls matched Rome&#x27;s &#x27;seven hills&#x27;. The impenetrable defenses enclosed magnificent palaces, domes, and towers, the result of prosperity Constantinople achieved as the gateway between two continents (Europe and Asia) and two seas (the Mediterranean and the Black Sea). Although besieged on numerous occasions by various armies, the defenses of Constantinople proved impenetrable for nearly nine hundred years.

In 1204, however, the armies of the Fourth Crusade took and devastated the city, and for six decades, its inhabitants resided under Latin occupation in a dwindling and depopulated city. In 1261, the Byzantine Emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos liberated the city, and after the restoration under the Palaiologos dynasty, it enjoyed a partial recovery. With the advent of the Ottoman Empire in 1299, the Byzantine Empire began to lose territories, and the city began to lose population. By the early 15th century, the Byzantine Empire was reduced to just Constantinople and its environs, along with the territories of the despotate of Morea, in Peloponnese, Greece, making it an enclave inside the Ottoman Empire. The city was finally besieged and conquered by the Ottoman Empire in 1453, remaining under its control until the early 20th century, after which it was renamed Istanbul under the Empire&#x27;s successor state, Turkey.

== Names ==
=== Before Constantinople ===
According to Pliny the Elder in his &quot;Natural History&quot;, the first known name of a settlement on the site of Constantinople was &quot;Lygos&quot;, a settlement likely of Thracian origin founded between the 13th and 11th centuries BC. The site, according to the founding myth of the city, was abandoned by the time Greek settlers from the city-state of Megara founded &quot;Byzantium&quot; (, &quot;Byzántion&quot;) in around 657 BC, across from the town of Chalcedon on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus.

The origins of the name of &quot;Byzantion&quot;, more commonly known by the later Latin &quot;Byzantium&quot;, are not entirely clear, though some suggest it is of Thracian origin. The founding myth of the city has it told that the settlement was named after the leader of the Megarian colonists, Byzas. The later Byzantines of Constantinople themselves would maintain that the city was named in honor of two men, Byzas and Antes, though this was more likely just a play on the word Byzantion.

The city was briefly renamed &quot;Augusta Antonina&quot; in the early 3rd century AD by the Emperor Septimius Severus (193–211), who razed the city to the ground in 196 for supporting a rival contender in the civil war and had it rebuilt in honor of his son Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (who succeeded him as Emperor), popularly known as Caracalla. The name appears to have been quickly forgotten and abandoned, and the city reverted to Byzantium/Byzantion after either the assassination of Caracalla in 217 or, at the latest, the fall of the Severan dynasty in 235.

=== Names of Constantinople ===


Byzantium took on the name of Constantinople (Greek: Κωνσταντινούπολις, romanized: &quot;Kōnstantinoupolis;&quot; &quot;city of Constantine&quot;) after its refoundation under Roman emperor Constantine I, who transferred the capital of the Roman Empire to Byzantium in 330 and designated his new capital officially as &quot;Nova Roma&quot; () &#x27;New Rome&#x27;. During this time, the city was also called &#x27;Second Rome&#x27;, &#x27;Eastern Rome&#x27;, and &quot;Roma Constantinopolitana&quot; (Latin for &#x27;Constantinopolitan Rome&#x27;). As the city became the sole remaining capital of the Roman Empire after the fall of the West, and its wealth, population, and influence grew, the city also came to have a multitude of nicknames.
As the largest and wealthiest city in Europe during the 4th–13th centuries and a center of culture and education of the Mediterranean basin, Constantinople came to be known by prestigious titles such as &quot;Basileuousa&quot; (Queen of Cities) and &quot;Megalopolis&quot; (the Great City) and was, in colloquial speech, commonly referred to as just &quot;Polis&quot; () &#x27;the City&#x27; by Constantinopolitans and provincial Byzantines alike.

In the language of other peoples, Constantinople was referred to just as reverently. The medieval Vikings, who had contacts with the empire through their expansion in eastern Europe (Varangians), used the Old Norse name &quot;Miklagarðr&quot; (from &quot;mikill&quot; &#x27;big&#x27; and &quot;garðr&quot; &#x27;city&#x27;), and later &quot;Miklagard&quot; and &quot;Miklagarth&quot;. In Arabic, the city was sometimes called &quot;Rūmiyyat al-Kubra&quot; (Great City of the Romans) and in Persian as &quot;Takht-e Rum&quot; (Throne of the Romans).

In East and South Slavic languages, including in Kievan Rus&#x27;, Constantinople has been referred to as &quot;Tsargrad&quot; (&quot;Царьград&quot;) or &quot;Carigrad&quot;, &#x27;City of the Caesar (Emperor)&#x27;, from the Slavonic words &quot;tsar&quot; (&#x27;Caesar&#x27; or &#x27;King&#x27;) and &quot;grad&quot; (&#x27;city&#x27;). This was presumably a calque on a Greek phrase such as (&quot;Vasileos Polis&quot;), &#x27;the city of the emperor [king]&#x27;.

In Persian the city was also called &quot;Asitane&quot; (the Threshold of the State), and in Armenian, it was called &quot;Gosdantnubolis&quot; (City of Constantine).

=== Modern names of the city ===
The modern Turkish name for the city, &quot;İstanbul&quot;, derives from the Greek phrase &quot;eis tin Polin&quot; (), meaning &#x27;(in)to the city&#x27;. This name was used in colloquial speech in Turkish alongside &quot;Kostantiniyye&quot;, the more formal adaptation of the original &quot;Constantinople&quot;, during the period of Ottoman rule, while western languages mostly continued to refer to the city as Constantinople until the early 20th century. In 1928, the Turkish alphabet was changed from Arabic script to Latin script. After that, as part of the Turkification movement, Turkey started to urge other countries to use Turkish names for Turkish cities, instead of other transliterations to Latin script that had been used in Ottoman times and the city came to be known as Istanbul and its variations in most world languages.

The name &quot;Constantinople&quot; is still used by members of the Eastern Orthodox Church in the title of one of their most important leaders, the Orthodox patriarch based in the city, referred to as &quot;His Most Divine All-Holiness the Archbishop of Constantinople New Rome and Ecumenical Patriarch&quot;. In Greece today, the city is still called &quot;Konstantinoúpoli(s)&quot; () or simply just &quot;the City&quot; ().

==History==

=== Foundation of Byzantium ===

Constantinople was founded by the Roman emperor Constantine I (272–337) in 324 on the site of an already-existing city, Byzantium, which was settled in the early days of Greek colonial expansion, in around 657 BC, by colonists of the city-state of Megara. This is the first major settlement that would develop on the site of later Constantinople, but the first known settlement was that of &quot;Lygos&quot;, referred to in Pliny&#x27;s Natural Histories. Apart from this, little is known about this initial settlement. The site, according to the founding myth of the city, was abandoned by the time Greek settlers from the city-state of Megara founded Byzantium () in around 657  BC, across from the town of Chalcedon on the Asiatic side of the Bosphorus.

Hesychius of Miletus wrote that some &quot;claim that people from Megara, who derived their descent from Nisos, sailed to this place under their leader Byzas, and invent the fable that his name was attached to the city&quot;. Some versions of the founding myth say Byzas was the son of a local nymph, while others say he was conceived by one of Zeus&#x27; daughters and Poseidon. Hesychius also gives alternate versions of the city&#x27;s founding legend, which he attributed to old poets and writers:
&lt;poem&gt;It is said that the first Argives, after having received this prophecy from Pythia,
 Blessed are those who will inhabit that holy city,
 a narrow strip of the Thracian shore at the mouth of the Pontos,
 where two pups drink of the gray sea,
 where fish and stag graze on the same pasture,
set up their dwellings at the place where the rivers Kydaros and Barbyses have their estuaries, one flowing from the north, the other from the west, and merging with the sea at the altar of the nymph called Semestre&quot;&lt;/poem&gt;

The city maintained independence as a city-state until it was annexed by Darius I in 512 BC into the Persian Empire, who saw the site as the optimal location to construct a pontoon bridge crossing into Europe as Byzantium was situated at the narrowest point in the Bosphorus strait. Persian rule lasted until 478 BC when as part of the Greek counterattack to the Second Persian invasion of Greece, a Greek army led by the Spartan general Pausanias captured the city which remained an independent, yet subordinate, city under the Athenians, and later to the Spartans after 411 BC. A farsighted treaty with the emergent power of Rome in which stipulated tribute in exchange for independent status allowed it to enter Roman rule unscathed. This treaty would pay dividends retrospectively as Byzantium would maintain this independent status, and prosper under peace and stability in the Pax Romana, for nearly three centuries until the late 2nd century AD.

Byzantium was never a major influential city-state like Athens, Corinth or Sparta, but the city enjoyed relative peace and steady growth as a prosperous trading city because of its fortunate location. The site lay astride the land route from Europe to Asia and the seaway from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean, and had in the Golden Horn an excellent and spacious harbor. Already then, in Greek and early Roman times, Byzantium was famous for the strategic geographic position that made it difficult to besiege and capture, and its position at the crossroads of the Asiatic-European trade route over land and as the gateway between the Mediterranean and Black Seas made it too valuable a settlement to abandon, as Emperor Septimius Severus later realized when he razed the city to the ground for supporting Pescennius Niger&#x27;s claimancy. It was a move greatly criticized by the contemporary consul and historian Cassius Dio who said that Severus had destroyed &quot;a strong Roman outpost and a base of operations against the barbarians from Pontus and Asia&quot;. He would later rebuild Byzantium towards the end of his reign, in which it would be briefly renamed &quot;Augusta Antonina&quot;, fortifying it with a new city wall in his name, the Severan Wall.

=== 324–337: The refoundation as Constantinople ===


Constantine had altogether more colourful plans. Having restored the unity of the Empire, and, being in the course of major governmental reforms as well as of sponsoring the consolidation of the Christian church, he was well aware that Rome was an unsatisfactory capital. Rome was too far from the frontiers, and hence from the armies and the imperial courts, and it offered an undesirable playground for disaffected politicians. Yet it had been the capital of the state for over a thousand years, and it might have seemed unthinkable to suggest that the capital be moved to a different location. Nevertheless, Constantine identified the site of Byzantium as the right place: a place where an emperor could sit, readily defended, with easy access to the Danube or the Euphrates frontiers, his court supplied from the rich gardens and sophisticated workshops of Roman Asia, his treasuries filled by the wealthiest provinces of the Empire.

Constantinople was built over six years, and consecrated on 11 May 330. Constantine divided the expanded city, like Rome, into 14 regions, and ornamented it with public works worthy of an imperial metropolis. Yet, at first, Constantine&#x27;s new Rome did not have all the dignities of old Rome. It possessed a proconsul, rather than an urban prefect. It had no praetors, tribunes, or quaestors. Although it did have senators, they held the title &quot;clarus&quot;, not &quot;clarissimus&quot;, like those of Rome. It also lacked the panoply of other administrative offices regulating the food supply, police, statues, temples, sewers, aqueducts, or other public works. The new programme of building was carried out in great haste: columns, marbles, doors, and tiles were taken wholesale from the temples of the empire and moved to the new city. In similar fashion, many of the greatest works of Greek and Roman art were soon to be seen in its squares and streets. The emperor stimulated private building by promising householders gifts of land from the imperial estates in Asiana and Pontica and on 18 May 332 he announced that, as in Rome, free distributions of food would be made to the citizens. At the time, the amount is said to have been 80,000 rations a day, doled out from 117 distribution points around the city.
Constantine laid out a new square at the centre of old Byzantium, naming it the Augustaeum. The new senate-house (or Curia) was housed in a basilica on the east side. On the south side of the great square was erected the Great Palace of the Emperor with its imposing entrance, the Chalke, and its ceremonial suite known as the Palace of Daphne. Nearby was the vast Hippodrome for chariot-races, seating over 80,000 spectators, and the famed Baths of Zeuxippus. At the western entrance to the Augustaeum was the Milion, a vaulted monument from which distances were measured across the Eastern Roman Empire.

From the Augustaeum led a great street, the Mese, lined with colonnades. As it descended the First Hill of the city and climbed the Second Hill, it passed on the left the Praetorium or law-court. Then it passed through the oval Forum of Constantine where there was a second Senate-house and a high column with a statue of Constantine himself in the guise of Helios, crowned with a halo of seven rays and looking toward the rising sun. From there, the Mese passed on and through the Forum Tauri and then the Forum Bovis, and finally up the Seventh Hill (or Xerolophus) and through to the Golden Gate in the Constantinian Wall. After the construction of the Theodosian Walls in the early 5th century, it was extended to the new Golden Gate, reaching a total length of seven Roman miles. After the construction of the Theodosian Walls, Constantinople consisted of an area approximately the size of Old Rome within the Aurelian walls, or some 1,400 ha.

=== 337–529: Constantinople during the Barbarian Invasions and the fall of the West ===


The importance of Constantinople increased, but it was gradual. From the death of Constantine in 337 to the accession of Theodosius I, emperors had been resident only in the years 337–338, 347–351, 358–361, 368–369. Its status as a capital was recognized by the appointment of the first known Urban Prefect of the City Honoratus, who held office from 11 December 359 until 361. The urban prefects had concurrent jurisdiction over three provinces each in the adjacent dioceses of Thrace (in which the city was located), Pontus and Asia comparable to the 100-mile extraordinary jurisdiction of the prefect of Rome. The emperor Valens, who hated the city and spent only one year there, nevertheless built the Palace of Hebdomon on the shore of the Propontis near the Golden Gate, probably for use when reviewing troops. All the emperors up to Zeno and Basiliscus were crowned and acclaimed at the Hebdomon. Theodosius I founded the Church of John the Baptist to house the skull of the saint (today preserved at the Topkapı Palace), put up a memorial pillar to himself in the Forum of Taurus, and turned the ruined temple of Aphrodite into a coach house for the Praetorian Prefect; Arcadius built a new forum named after himself on the Mese, near the walls of Constantine.

After the shock of the Battle of Adrianople in 378, in which Valens and the flower of the Roman armies were destroyed by the Visigoths within a few days&#x27; march, the city looked to its defences, and in 413–414 Theodosius II built the 18-metre (60-foot)-tall triple-wall fortifications, which were not to be breached until the coming of gunpowder. Theodosius also founded a University near the Forum of Taurus, on 27 February 425.

Uldin, a prince of the Huns, appeared on the Danube about this time and advanced into Thrace, but he was deserted by many of his followers, who joined with the Romans in driving their king back north of the river. Subsequent to this, new walls were built to defend the city and the fleet on the Danube improved.
After the barbarians overran the Western Roman Empire, Constantinople became the indisputable capital city of the Roman Empire. Emperors were no longer peripatetic between various court capitals and palaces. They remained in their palace in the Great City and sent generals to command their armies. The wealth of the eastern Mediterranean and western Asia flowed into Constantinople.

=== 527–565: Constantinople in the Age of Justinian ===
The emperor Justinian I (527–565) was known for his successes in war, for his legal reforms and for his public works. It was from Constantinople that his expedition for the reconquest of the former Diocese of Africa set sail on or about 21 June 533. Before their departure, the ship of the commander Belisarius was anchored in front of the Imperial palace, and the Patriarch offered prayers for the success of the enterprise. After the victory, in 534, the Temple treasure of Jerusalem, looted by the Romans in AD 70 and taken to Carthage by the Vandals after their sack of Rome in 455, was brought to Constantinople and deposited for a time, perhaps in the Church of St Polyeuctus, before being returned to Jerusalem in either the Church of the Resurrection or the New Church.

Chariot-racing had been important in Rome for centuries. In Constantinople, the hippodrome became over time increasingly a place of political significance. It was where (as a shadow of the popular elections of old Rome) the people by acclamation showed their approval of a new emperor, and also where they openly criticized the government, or clamoured for the removal of unpopular ministers. It played a crucial role during the riots and in times of political unrest. The Hippodrome provided a space for a crowd to be responded to positively or where the acclamations of a crowd were subverted, resorting to the riots that would ensue in coming years. In the time of Justinian, public order in Constantinople became a critical political issue.

Throughout the late Roman and early Byzantine periods, Christianity was resolving fundamental questions of identity, and the dispute between the orthodox and the monophysites became the cause of serious disorder, expressed through allegiance to the chariot-racing parties of the Blues and the Greens. The partisans of the Blues and the Greens were said to affect untrimmed facial hair, head hair shaved at the front and grown long at the back, and wide-sleeved tunics tight at the wrist; and to form gangs to engage in night-time muggings and street violence. At last these disorders took the form of a major rebellion of 532, known as the &quot;Nika&quot; riots (from the battle-cry of &quot;Conquer!&quot; of those involved). The Nika Riots began in the Hippodrome and finished there with the onslaught of over 30,000 people according to Procopius, those in the blue and green factions, innocent and guilty. This came full circle on the relationship within the Hippodrome between the power and the people during the time of Justinian.

Fires started by the Nika rioters consumed the Theodosian basilica of Hagia Sophia (Holy Wisdom), the city&#x27;s cathedral, which lay to the north of the Augustaeum and had itself replaced the Constantinian basilica founded by Constantius II to replace the first Byzantine cathedral, Hagia Irene (Holy Peace). Justinian commissioned Anthemius of Tralles and Isidore of Miletus to replace it with a new and incomparable Hagia Sophia. This was the great cathedral of the city, whose dome was said to be held aloft by God alone, and which was directly connected to the palace so that the imperial family could attend services without passing through the streets. &quot;The architectural form of the building was meant to reflect Justinian programmatic harmony: the circular dome (a symbol of secular authority in classical Roman architecture) would be harmoniously combined with the rectangular form (typical for Christian and pre-Christian temples).&quot; The dedication took place on 26 December 537 in the presence of the emperor, who was later reported to have exclaimed, &quot;O Solomon, I have outdone thee!&quot; Hagia Sophia was served by 600 people including 80 priests, and cost 20,000 pounds of gold to build.

Justinian also had Anthemius and Isidore demolish and replace the original Church of the Holy Apostles and Hagia Irene built by Constantine with new churches under the same dedication. The Justinianic Church of the Holy Apostles was designed in the form of an equal-armed cross with five domes, and ornamented with beautiful mosaics. This church was to remain the burial place of the emperors from Constantine himself until the 11th century. When the city fell to the Turks in 1453, the church was demolished to make room for the tomb of Mehmet II the Conqueror. Justinian was also concerned with other aspects of the city&#x27;s built environment, legislating against the abuse of laws prohibiting building within of the sea front, in order to protect the view.

During Justinian I&#x27;s reign, the city&#x27;s population reached about 500,000 people. However, the social fabric of Constantinople was also damaged by the onset of the Plague of Justinian between 541 and 542 AD, It killed perhaps 40% of the city&#x27;s inhabitants. Lasting two months, the plague is noted to have caused widespread civil disruption, including the inability of the population to bury the dead and attend relatives funerals.

=== Survival, 565–717: Constantinople during the Byzantine Dark Ages ===
In the early 7th century, the Avars and later the Bulgars overwhelmed much of the Balkans, threatening Constantinople with attack from the west. Simultaneously, the Persian Sassanids overwhelmed the Prefecture of the East and penetrated deep into Anatolia. Heraclius, son of the exarch of Africa, set sail for the city and assumed the throne. He found the military situation so dire that he is said to have contemplated withdrawing the imperial capital to Carthage, but relented after the people of Constantinople begged him to stay. The citizens lost their right to free grain in 618 when Heraclius realized that the city could no longer be supplied from Egypt as a result of the Persian wars: the population fell substantially as a result.
While the city withstood a siege by the Sassanids and Avars in 626, Heraclius campaigned deep into Persian territory and briefly restored the &quot;status quo&quot; in 628, when the Persians surrendered all their conquests. However, further sieges followed the Arab conquests, first from 674 to 678 and then in 717 to 718. The Theodosian Walls kept the city impenetrable from the land, while a newly discovered incendiary substance known as Greek fire allowed the Byzantine navy to destroy the Arab fleets and keep the city supplied. In the second siege, the second ruler of Bulgaria, Khan Tervel, rendered decisive help. He was called &quot;Saviour of Europe&quot;.

=== 717–1025: Constantinople during the Macedonian Renaissance ===

In the 730s Leo III carried out extensive repairs of the Theodosian walls, which had been damaged by frequent and violent attacks; this work was financed by a special tax on all the subjects of the Empire.

Theodora, widow of the Emperor Theophilus (died 842), acted as regent during the minority of her son Michael III, who was said to have been introduced to dissolute habits by her brother Bardas. When Michael assumed power in 856, he became known for excessive drunkenness, appeared in the hippodrome as a charioteer and burlesqued the religious processions of the clergy. He removed Theodora from the Great Palace to the Carian Palace and later to the monastery of Gastria, but, after the death of Bardas, she was released to live in the palace of St Mamas; she also had a rural residence at the Anthemian Palace, where Michael was assassinated in 867.

In 860, an attack was made on the city by a new principality set up a few years earlier at Kiev by Askold and Dir, two Varangian chiefs: Two hundred small vessels passed through the Bosporus and plundered the monasteries and other properties on the suburban Princes&#x27; Islands. Oryphas, the admiral of the Byzantine fleet, alerted the emperor Michael, who promptly put the invaders to flight; but the suddenness and savagery of the onslaught made a deep impression on the citizens.

In 980, the emperor Basil II received an unusual gift from Prince Vladimir of Kiev: 6,000 Varangian warriors, which Basil formed into a new bodyguard known as the Varangian Guard. They were known for their ferocity, honour, and loyalty. It is said that, in 1038, they were dispersed in winter quarters in the Thracesian Theme when one of their number attempted to violate a countrywoman, but in the struggle she seized his sword and killed him; instead of taking revenge, however, his comrades applauded her conduct, compensated her with all his possessions, and exposed his body without burial as if he had committed suicide. However, following the death of an Emperor, they became known also for plunder in the Imperial palaces. Later in the 11th century the Varangian Guard became dominated by Anglo-Saxons who preferred this way of life to subjugation by the new Norman kings of England.

The &quot;Book of the Eparch&quot;, which dates to the 10th century, gives a detailed picture of the city&#x27;s commercial life and its organization at that time. The corporations in which the tradesmen of Constantinople were organised were supervised by the Eparch, who regulated such matters as production, prices, import, and export. Each guild had its own monopoly, and tradesmen might not belong to more than one. It is an impressive testament to the strength of tradition how little these arrangements had changed since the office, then known by the Latin version of its title, had been set up in 330 to mirror the urban prefecture of Rome.

In the 9th and 10th centuries, Constantinople had a population of between 500,000 and 800,000.
==== Iconoclast controversy in Constantinople ====
In the 8th and 9th centuries, the iconoclast movement caused serious political unrest throughout the Empire. The emperor Leo III issued a decree in 726 against images, and ordered the destruction of a statue of Christ over one of the doors of the Chalke, an act that was fiercely resisted by the citizens. Constantine V convoked a church council in 754, which condemned the worship of images, after which many treasures were broken, burned, or painted over with depictions of trees, birds or animals: One source refers to the church of the Holy Virgin at Blachernae as having been transformed into a &quot;fruit store and aviary&quot;. Following the death of her husband Leo IV in 780, the empress Irene restored the veneration of images through the agency of the Second Council of Nicaea in 787.

The iconoclast controversy returned in the early 9th century, only to be resolved once more in 843 during the regency of Empress Theodora, who restored the icons. These controversies contributed to the deterioration of relations between the Western and the Eastern Churches.

=== 1025–1081: Constantinople after Basil II ===
In the late 11th century catastrophe struck with the unexpected and calamitous defeat of the imperial armies at the Battle of Manzikert in Armenia in 1071. The Emperor Romanus Diogenes was captured. The peace terms demanded by Alp Arslan, sultan of the Seljuk Turks, were not excessive, and Romanus accepted them. On his release, however, Romanus found that enemies had placed their own candidate on the throne in his absence; he surrendered to them and suffered death by torture, and the new ruler, Michael VII Ducas, refused to honour the treaty. In response, the Turks began to move into Anatolia in 1073. The collapse of the old defensive system meant that they met no opposition, and the empire&#x27;s resources were distracted and squandered in a series of civil wars. Thousands of Turkoman tribesmen crossed the unguarded frontier and moved into Anatolia. By 1080, a huge area had been lost to the Empire, and the Turks were within striking distance of Constantinople.

=== 1081–1185: Constantinople under the Komneni ===


Under the Komnenian dynasty (1081–1185), Byzantium staged a remarkable recovery. In 1090–91, the nomadic Pechenegs reached the walls of Constantinople, where Emperor Alexius I with the aid of the Kipchaks annihilated their army. In response to a call for aid from Alexius, the First Crusade assembled at Constantinople in 1096, but declining to put itself under Byzantine command set out for Jerusalem on its own account. John II built the monastery of the Pantocrator (Almighty) with a hospital for the poor of 50 beds.

With the restoration of firm central government, the empire became fabulously wealthy. The population was rising (estimates for Constantinople in the 12th century vary from some 100,000 to 500,000), and towns and cities across the realm flourished. Meanwhile, the volume of money in circulation dramatically increased. This was reflected in Constantinople by the construction of the Blachernae palace, the creation of brilliant new works of art, and general prosperity at this time: an increase in trade, made possible by the growth of the Italian city-states, may have helped the growth of the economy. It is certain that the Venetians and others were active traders in Constantinople, making a living out of shipping goods between the Crusader Kingdoms of Outremer and the West, while also trading extensively with Byzantium and Egypt. The Venetians had factories on the north side of the Golden Horn, and large numbers of westerners were present in the city throughout the 12th century. Toward the end of Manuel I Komnenos&#x27;s reign, the number of foreigners in the city reached about 60,000–80,000 people out of a total population of about 400,000 people. In 1171, Constantinople also contained a small community of 2,500 Jews. In 1182, most Latin (Western European) inhabitants of Constantinople were massacred.

In artistic terms, the 12th century was a very productive period. There was a revival in the mosaic art, for example: Mosaics became more realistic and vivid, with an increased emphasis on depicting three-dimensional forms. There was an increased demand for art, with more people having access to the necessary wealth to commission and pay for such work.

=== 1185–1261: Constantinople during the Imperial Exile ===


On 25 July 1197, Constantinople was struck by a severe fire which burned the Latin Quarter and the area around the Gate of the Droungarios () on the Golden Horn. Nevertheless, the destruction wrought by the 1197 fire paled in comparison with that brought by the Crusaders. In the course of a plot between Philip of Swabia, Boniface of Montferrat and the Doge of Venice, the Fourth Crusade was, despite papal excommunication, diverted in 1203 against Constantinople, ostensibly promoting the claims of Alexios IV Angelos brother-in-law of Philip, son of the deposed emperor Isaac II Angelos. The reigning emperor Alexios III Angelos had made no preparation. The Crusaders occupied Galata, broke the defensive chain protecting the Golden Horn, and entered the harbour, where on 27 July they breached the sea walls: Alexios III fled. But the new Alexios IV Angelos found the Treasury inadequate, and was unable to make good the rewards he had promised to his western allies. Tension between the citizens and the Latin soldiers increased. In January 1204, the &quot;protovestiarius&quot; Alexios Murzuphlos provoked a riot, it is presumed, to intimidate Alexios IV, but whose only result was the destruction of the great statue of Athena Promachos, the work of Phidias, which stood in the principal forum facing west.

In February 1204, the people rose again: Alexios IV was imprisoned and executed, and Murzuphlos took the purple as Alexios V Doukas. He made some attempt to repair the walls and organise the citizenry, but there had been no opportunity to bring in troops from the provinces and the guards were demoralised by the revolution. An attack by the Crusaders on 6 April failed, but a second from the Golden Horn on 12 April succeeded, and the invaders poured in. Alexios V fled. The Senate met in Hagia Sophia and offered the crown to Theodore Lascaris, who had married into the Angelos dynasty, but it was too late. He came out with the Patriarch to the Golden Milestone before the Great Palace and addressed the Varangian Guard. Then the two of them slipped away with many of the nobility and embarked for Asia. By the next day the Doge and the leading Franks were installed in the Great Palace, and the city was given over to pillage for three days.

Sir Steven Runciman, historian of the Crusades, wrote that the sack of Constantinople is &quot;unparalleled in history&quot;.

For the next half-century, Constantinople was the seat of the Latin Empire. Under the rulers of the Latin Empire, the city declined, both in population and the condition of its buildings. Alice-Mary Talbot cites an estimated population for Constantinople of 400,000 inhabitants; after the destruction wrought by the Crusaders on the city, about one third were homeless, and numerous courtiers, nobility, and higher clergy, followed various leading personages into exile. &quot;As a result Constantinople became seriously depopulated,&quot; Talbot concludes.
The Latins took over at least 20 churches and 13 monasteries, most prominently the Hagia Sophia, which became the cathedral of the Latin Patriarch of Constantinople. It is to these that E.H. Swift attributed the construction of a series of flying buttresses to shore up the walls of the church, which had been weakened over the centuries by earthquake tremors. However, this act of maintenance is an exception: for the most part, the Latin occupiers were too few to maintain all of the buildings, either secular and sacred, and many became targets for vandalism or dismantling. Bronze and lead were removed from the roofs of abandoned buildings and melted down and sold to provide money to the chronically under-funded Empire for defense and to support the court; Deno John Geanokoplos writes that &quot;it may well be that a division is suggested here: Latin laymen stripped secular buildings, ecclesiastics, the churches.&quot; Buildings were not the only targets of officials looking to raise funds for the impoverished Latin Empire: the monumental sculptures which adorned the Hippodrome and fora of the city were pulled down and melted for coinage. &quot;Among the masterpieces destroyed, writes Talbot, &quot;were a Herakles attributed to the fourth-century B.C. sculptor Lysippos, and monumental figures of Hera, Paris, and Helen.&quot;

The Nicaean emperor John III Vatatzes reportedly saved several churches from being dismantled for their valuable building materials; by sending money to the Latins &quot;to buy them off&quot; (&quot;exonesamenos&quot;), he prevented the destruction of several churches. According to Talbot, these included the churches of Blachernae, Rouphinianai, and St. Michael at Anaplous. He also granted funds for the restoration of the Church of the Holy Apostles, which had been seriously damaged in an earthquake.
The Byzantine nobility scattered, many going to Nicaea, where Theodore Lascaris set up an imperial court, or to Epirus, where Theodore Angelus did the same; others fled to Trebizond, where one of the Comneni had already with Georgian support established an independent seat of empire. Nicaea and Epirus both vied for the imperial title, and tried to recover Constantinople. In 1261, Constantinople was captured from its last Latin ruler, Baldwin II, by the forces of the Nicaean emperor Michael VIII Palaiologos under the command of Caesar Alexios Strategopoulos.

=== 1261–1453: Palaiologan Era and the Fall of Constantinople ===
Although Constantinople was retaken by Michael VIII Palaiologos, the Empire had lost many of its key economic resources, and struggled to survive. The palace of Blachernae in the north-west of the city became the main Imperial residence, with the old Great Palace on the shores of the Bosporus going into decline. When Michael VIII captured the city, its population was 35,000 people, but, by the end of his reign, he had succeeded in increasing the population to about 70,000 people. The Emperor achieved this by summoning former residents who had fled the city when the crusaders captured it, and by relocating Greeks from the recently reconquered Peloponnese to the capital. Military defeats, civil wars, earthquakes and natural disasters were joined by the Black Death, which in 1347 spread to Constantinople, exacerbated the people&#x27;s sense that they were doomed by God.

Castilian traveler and writer Ruy González de Clavijo, who saw Constantinople in 1403, wrote that the area within the city walls included small neighborhoods separated by orchards and fields. The ruins of palaces and churches could be seen everywhere. The aqueducts and the most densely inhabited neighborhoods were along the coast of the Marmara Sea and Golden Horn. Only the coastal areas, in particular the commercial areas facing the Golden Horn, had a dense population. Although the Genoese colony in Galata was small, it was overcrowded and had magnificent mansions.

By May 1453, the city no longer possessed the treasure troves of Aladdin that the Ottoman troops longingly imagined as they stared up at the walls. Gennadios Scholarios, Patriarch of Constantinople from 1454 to 1464, was saying that the capital of the Empire, that was once the &quot;city of wisdom&quot;, became &quot;the city of ruins&quot;.

When the Ottoman Turks captured the city (1453) it contained approximately 50,000 people. Tedaldi of Florence estimated the population at 30,000 to 36,000, while in Chronica Vicentina, the Italian Andrei di Arnaldo estimated it at 50,000. The plague epidemic of 1435 must have caused the population to drop.

The population decline also had a huge impact upon the Constantinople&#x27;s defense capabilities. At the end of March 1453, emperor Constantine XI ordered a census of districts to record how many able-bodied men were in the city and whatever weapons each possessed for defense. George Sphrantzes, the faithful chancellor of the last emperor, recorded that &quot;in spite of the great size of our city, our defenders amounted to 4,773 Greeks, as well as just 200 foreigners&quot;. In addition there were volunteers from outside, the &quot;Genoese, Venetians and those who came secretly from Galata to help the defense&quot;, who numbered &quot;hardly as many as three thousand&quot;, amounting to something under 8,000 men in total to defend a perimeter wall of twelve miles.

Constantinople was conquered by the Ottoman Empire on 29 May 1453. Mehmed II intended to complete his father&#x27;s mission and conquer Constantinople for the Ottomans. In 1452 he reached peace treaties with Hungary and Venice. He also began the construction of the Boğazkesen (later called the Rumelihisarı), a fortress at the narrowest point of the Bosphorus Strait, in order to restrict passage between the Black and Mediterranean seas. Mehmed then tasked the Hungarian gunsmith Urban with both arming Rumelihisarı and building cannon powerful enough to bring down the walls of Constantinople. By March 1453 Urban&#x27;s cannon had been transported from the Ottoman capital of Edirne to the outskirts of Constantinople. In April, having quickly seized Byzantine coastal settlements along the Black Sea and Sea of Marmara, Ottoman troops in Rumelia and Anatolia assembled outside the Byzantine capital. Their fleet moved from Gallipoli to nearby Diplokionion, and the sultan himself set out to meet his army.
The Ottomans were commanded by 21-year-old Ottoman Sultan Mehmed II. The conquest of Constantinople followed a seven-week siege which had begun on 6 April 1453. The Empire fell on 29 May 1453.

The number of people captured by the Ottomans after the fall of the city was around 33,000. The small number of people left in the city indicates that there could not have been many residents there. The primary concern of Mehmed II in the early years of his reign was the construction and settlement of the city. However, since an insufficient number of Muslims accepted his invitation, the settlement of 30 abandoned neighborhoods with the inhabitants of formerly conquered areas became necessary.

=== 1453–1930: Ottoman and Republican Kostantiniyye ===

The Christian Orthodox city of Constantinople was now under Ottoman control. As tradition followed for the region, Ottoman soldiers had three days to pillage the city. When Mehmed II on the second day entered Constantinople through the Gate of Charisius (today known as Edirnekapı or Adrianople Gate), it is said that first thing he did was ride his horse to Hagia Sophia, which was not in good shape even though it was avoided in the pillage by strict orders. Displeased by the pillaging, Mehmed II ordered it to end, for it will be the capital of his empire. He then ordered that an imam meet him in Hagia Sophia in order to chant the adhan thus transforming the Orthodox cathedral into a Muslim mosque, solidifying Islamic rule in Constantinople.

Mehmed&#x27;s main concern with Constantinople had to do with consolidating control over the city and rebuilding its defenses. After 45,000 captives were marched from the city, building projects were commenced immediately after the conquest, which included the repair of the walls, construction of the citadel, and building a new palace. Mehmed issued orders across his empire that Muslims, Christians, and Jews should resettle the city, with Christians and Jews required to pay &quot;jizya&quot; and Muslims pay Zakat; he demanded that five thousand households needed to be transferred to Constantinople by September. From all over the Islamic empire, prisoners of war and deported people were sent to the city: these people were called &quot;Sürgün&quot; in Turkish (). Two centuries later, Ottoman traveler Evliya Çelebi gave a list of groups introduced into the city with their respective origins. Even today, many quarters of Istanbul, such as Aksaray, Çarşamba, bear the names of the places of origin of their inhabitants. However, many people escaped again from the city, and there were several outbreaks of plague, so that in 1459 Mehmed allowed the deported Greeks to come back to the city.

== Culture ==
Constantinople was the largest and richest urban center in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea during the late Eastern Roman Empire, mostly as a result of its strategic position commanding the trade routes between the Aegean Sea and the Black Sea. It would remain the capital of the eastern, Greek-speaking empire for over a thousand years and in some ways is the nexus of Byzantine art production. At its peak, roughly corresponding to the Middle Ages, it was one of the richest and largest cities in Europe. It exerted a powerful cultural pull and dominated much of the economic life in the Mediterranean. Visitors and merchants were especially struck by the beautiful monasteries and churches of the city, in particular the Hagia Sophia, or the Church of Holy Wisdom. According to Russian 14th-century traveler Stephen of Novgorod: &quot;There is much that amazes one there, which the human mind cannot express&quot;.

It was especially important for preserving in its libraries manuscripts of Greek and Latin authors throughout a period when instability and disorder caused their mass-destruction in western Europe and north Africa: On the city&#x27;s fall, thousands of these were brought by refugees to Italy, and played a key part in stimulating the Renaissance, and the transition to the modern world. The cumulative influence of the city on the west, over the many centuries of its existence, is incalculable. In terms of technology, art and culture, as well as sheer size, Constantinople was without parallel anywhere in Europe for a thousand years. Many languages were spoken in Constantinople. A 16th century Chinese geographical treatise specifically recorded that there were translators living in the city, indicating it was multilingual, multicultural, and cosmopolitan. 
===Women in literature===

Constantinople was home to the first known Western Armenian journal published and edited by a woman (Elpis Kesaratsian). Entering circulation in 1862, &quot;Kit&#x27;arr&quot; or &quot;Guitar&quot; stayed in print for only seven months. Female writers who openly expressed their desires were viewed as immodest, but this changed slowly as journals began to publish more &quot;women&#x27;s sections&quot;. In the 1880s, Matteos Mamurian invited Srpouhi Dussap to submit essays for &quot;Arevelian Mamal&quot;. According to Zaruhi Galemkearian&#x27;s autobiography, she was told to write about women&#x27;s place in the family and home after she published two volumes of poetry in the 1890s. By 1900, several Armenian journals had started to include works by female contributors including the Constantinople-based &quot;Tsaghik&quot;.

===Markets===

Even before Constantinople was founded, the markets of Byzantion were mentioned first by Xenophon and then by Theopompus who wrote that Byzantians &quot;spent their time at the market and the harbour&quot;. In Justinian&#x27;s age the &quot;Mese&quot; street running across the city from east to west was a daily market. Procopius claimed &quot;more than 500 prostitutes&quot; did business along the market street. Ibn Batutta who traveled to the city in 1325 wrote of the bazaars &quot;Astanbul&quot; in which the &quot;majority of the artisans and salespeople in them are women&quot;.

=== Architecture and coinage ===
The Byzantine Empire used Roman and Greek architectural models and styles to create its own unique type of architecture. The influence of Byzantine architecture and art can be seen in the copies taken from it throughout Europe. Particular examples include St Mark&#x27;s Basilica in Venice, the basilicas of Ravenna, and many churches throughout the Slavic East. Also, alone in Europe until the 13th-century Italian florin, the Empire continued to produce sound gold coinage, the solidus of Diocletian becoming the bezant prized throughout the Middle Ages. Its city walls were much imitated (for example, see Caernarfon Castle) and its urban infrastructure was moreover a marvel throughout the Middle Ages, keeping alive the art, skill and technical expertise of the Roman Empire. In the Ottoman period Islamic architecture and symbolism were used. 
Great bathhouses were built in Byzantine centers such as Constantinople and Antioch.

=== Religion ===
Constantine&#x27;s foundation gave prestige to the Bishop of Constantinople, who eventually came to be known as the Ecumenical Patriarch, and made it a prime center of Christianity alongside Rome. This contributed to cultural and theological differences between Eastern and Western Christianity eventually leading to the Great Schism that divided Western Catholicism from Eastern Orthodoxy from 1054 onwards. Constantinople is also of great religious importance to Islam, as the conquest of Constantinople is one of the signs of the End time in Islam.

=== Education ===
There were many institutions in ancient Constantinople such as the Imperial University of Constantinople, sometimes known as the University of the Palace Hall of Magnaura (), an Eastern Roman educational institution that could trace its corporate origins to 425 AD, when the emperor Theodosius II founded the Pandidacterium ().

=== Media ===

==== Film ====
The first film shown in Constantinople (and the Ottoman Empire) was, &quot;L&#x27;Arrivée d&#x27;un train en gare de La Ciotat&quot;, by the Lumière Brothers in 1896.

The first film made in Constantinople (and the Ottoman Empire) was, &quot;Ayastefanos&#x27;taki Rus Abidesinin Yıkılışı,&quot; by Fuat Uzkınay in 1914.

==== Newspaper ====
In the past the Bulgarian newspapers in the late Ottoman period were &quot;Makedoniya&quot;, &quot;Napredŭk&quot;, and &quot;Pravo&quot;.

Between 1908 (after the Young Turk Revolution) and 1914 (start of World War I) the &quot;&quot;Kurdistan&quot; Newspaper&quot; was published in Constantinople by Mikdad Midhad Bedir Khan, before that it was published in exile in Cairo, Egypt.

== International status ==

The city acted as a defence for the eastern provinces of the old Roman Empire against the barbarian invasions of the 5th century. The 18-meter-tall walls built by Theodosius II were, in essence, impregnable to the barbarians coming from south of the Danube river, who found easier targets to the west rather than the richer provinces to the east in Asia. From the 5th century, the city was also protected by the Anastasian Wall, a 60-kilometer chain of walls across the Thracian peninsula. Many scholars argue that these sophisticated fortifications allowed the east to develop relatively unmolested while Ancient Rome and the west collapsed.

Constantinople&#x27;s fame was such that it was described even in contemporary Chinese histories, the &quot;Old&quot; and &quot;New Book of Tang&quot;, which mentioned its massive walls and gates as well as a purported clepsydra mounted with a golden statue of a man. The Chinese histories even related how the city had been besieged in the 7th century by Mu&#x27;awiya I and how he exacted tribute in a peace settlement.

== See also ==

=== People from Constantinople ===
*List of people from Constantinople

=== Secular buildings and monuments ===

*Augustaion
**Column of Justinian
*Basilica Cistern
*Column of Marcian
*Bucoleon Palace
*Horses of Saint Mark
*Obelisk of Theodosius
*Serpent Column
*Walled Obelisk
*Palace of Lausus
*Cistern of Philoxenos
*Palace of the Porphyrogenitus
*Prison of Anemas
*Valens Aqueduct
=== Churches, monasteries and mosques ===

*Church of Saint Thekla of the Palace of Blachernae
*Church of Myrelaion
*Chora Church
*Church of Saints Sergius and Bacchus
*Church of the Holy Apostles
*Church of St. Polyeuctus
*Monastery of Christ Pantepoptes
*Lips Monastery
*Monastery of the Christ the Benefactor
*Hagia Irene
*Saint John the Forerunner by-the-Dome
*Church of Theotokos Kyriotissa
*Church of Saint Andrew in Krisei
*Nea Ekklesia
*Pammakaristos Church
*Stoudios Monastery
*Toklu Dede Mosque
*Church of Saint Theodore
*Monastery of the Pantokrator
*Unnamed Mosque established during Byzantine times for visiting Muslim dignitaries
=== Miscellaneous ===

*Ahmed Bican Yazıcıoğlu
*Byzantine calendar
*Byzantine silk
*Eparch of Constantinople (List of eparchs)
*Sieges of Constantinople
*Third Rome
*Thracia
*Timeline of Istanbul history
== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==

*Ball, Warwick (2016). &quot;Rome in the East: Transformation of an Empire&quot;, 2nd edition. London &amp; New York: Routledge. .
*
*Emerson, Charles. &quot;1913: In Search of the World Before the Great War&quot; (2013) compares Constantinople to 20 major world cities; pp 358–80.
*
*
*
* online review 
*
*Ibrahim, Raymond (2018). &quot;Sword and Scimitar&quot;, 1st edition. New York. .
*Klein, Konstantin M.: Wienand, Johannes (2022) (eds.): &quot;City of Caesar, City of God: Constantinople and Jerusalem in Late Antiquity.&quot; De Gruyter, Berlin 2022, ISBN 978-3-11-071720-4. doi: City of Caesar, City of God.
*Korolija Fontana-Giusti, Gordana &#x27;The Urban Language of Early Constantinople: The Changing Roles of the Arts and Architecture in the Formation of the New Capital and the New Consciousness&#x27; in &quot;Intercultural Transmission in the Medieval Mediterranean&quot;, (2012), Stephanie L. Hathaway and David W. Kim (eds), London: Continuum, pp 164–202. .
*
*
*
*Yule, Henry (1915). Henri Cordier (ed.), &quot;Cathay and the Way Thither: Being a Collection of Medieval Notices of China, Vol I: Preliminary Essay on the Intercourse Between China and the Western Nations Previous to the Discovery of the Cape Route&quot;. London: Hakluyt Society. Accessed 21 September 2016.
== External links ==
*Constantinople, from &quot;History of the Later Roman Empire&quot;, by J. B. Bury
*History of Constantinople from the &quot;New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;.
*1453, the fall of Constantinople: the end of one empire and the beginning of another - Very detailed article about the last days of Constantinople during the Ottoman siege.
*Monuments of Byzantium – Pantokrator Monastery of Constantinople
*Constantinoupolis on the web Select internet resources on the history and culture
*Info on the name change from the Foundation for the Advancement of Sephardic Studies and Culture
*, documenting the monuments of Byzantine Constantinople
*Byzantium 1200, a project aimed at creating computer reconstructions of the Byzantine monuments located in Istanbul in 1200 AD.
*Constantine and Constantinople How and why Constantinople was founded
*Hagia Sophia Mosaics The Deesis and other Mosaics of Hagia Sophia in Constantinople</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="0" end="14" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16" end="31" title="#Names of Constantinople" label="see other names"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="70" end="78" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="113" end="118" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="120" end="129" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="131" end="136" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="142" end="149" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="225" end="233" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q13089982" start="248" end="256" title="New Rome" label="New Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="312" end="333" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="376" end="385" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="487" end="507" title="Western Roman Empire" label="Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="616" end="632" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="663" end="675" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="697" end="711" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q234738" start="739" end="766" title="Turkish War of Independence" label="Turkish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640" start="802" end="808" title="Ankara" label="Ankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="896" end="904" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q993032" start="950" end="972" title="List of European cities by population within city limits" label="largest city in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="989" end="1004" title="Bosporus strait" label="Bosporus strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="1068" end="1074" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="1175" end="1184" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="1319" end="1340" title="Constantine the Great" label="Constantine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243324" start="1506" end="1528" title="Christian civilization" label="Christian civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="1717" end="1729" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="1752" end="1775" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="1809" end="1832" title="Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q475338" start="1845" end="1860" title="Great Palace of Constantinople" label="Imperial Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q387548" start="1892" end="1902" title="Hippodrome of Constantinople" label="Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="1908" end="1919" title="Golden Gate (Constantinople)" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q850247" start="1977" end="2005" title="University of Constantinople" label="University of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704902" start="2141" end="2157" title="Imperial Library of Constantinople" label="Imperial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q435" start="2194" end="2215" title="Library of Alexandria" label="Library of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="2270" end="2308" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="2325" end="2336" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127583" start="2372" end="2387" title="Crown of Thorns" label="Crown of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q380356" start="2396" end="2406" title="True Cross" label="True Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="2547" end="2556" title="Classical antiquity" label="antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="2562" end="2578" title="Theodosian Walls" label="Theodosian Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="2727" end="2738" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="2747" end="2761" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="2855" end="2859" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="3129" end="3135" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="3140" end="3144" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="3376" end="3390" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197995" start="3472" end="3488" title="Latin occupation" label="Latin occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="3557" end="3581" title="Michael VIII Palaiologos" label="Michael VIII Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q207585" start="3638" end="3649" title="Palaiologos" label="Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196055" start="3972" end="3977" title="Morea" label="Morea"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="3982" end="3993" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="4072" end="4094" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="besieged and conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054283" start="4244" end="4259" title="successor state" label="successor state"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="4325" end="4340" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="4354" end="4369" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="4490" end="4498" title="Thracian" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="4672" end="4678" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="4693" end="4702" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q337381" start="4777" end="4786" title="Chalcedon" label="Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="4859" end="4868" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantion"/>
<link wikidata="Q36793" start="4991" end="4999" title="Thracian language" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q863859" start="5124" end="5129" title="Byzas" label="Byzas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="5310" end="5319" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="5423" end="5440" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201053" start="5509" end="5524" title="Pescennius Niger" label="rival contender"/>
<link wikidata="Q243721" start="5532" end="5541" title="Year of the Five Emperors" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1446" start="5658" end="5667" title="Caracalla" label="Caracalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q321219" start="5863" end="5878" title="Severan dynasty" label="Severan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="5968" end="5973" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="5994" end="6003" title="Romanization" label="romanized"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="6098" end="6111" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="6112" end="6125" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6162" end="6174" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q13089982" start="6246" end="6255" title="New Rome" label="Nova Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6423" end="6428" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="7298" end="7308" title="Varangians" label="Varangians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="7714" end="7730" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258133" start="7777" end="7785" title="Tsargrad" label="Tsargrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="8027" end="8033" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="8138" end="8145" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="8228" end="8236" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="8380" end="8388" title="Istanbul" label="İstanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="8413" end="8418" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="8536" end="8543" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8673" end="8680" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q637405" start="8806" end="8838" title="Turkish Language Commission" label="the Turkish alphabet was changed"/>
<link wikidata="Q756921" start="8902" end="8915" title="Turkification" label="Turkification"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411706" start="8972" end="9004" title="Geographical name changes in Turkey" label="Turkish names for Turkish cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="9247" end="9270" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="9337" end="9346" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="9702" end="9715" title="Constantine I" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="9774" end="9783" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q828047" start="9824" end="9848" title="Greek colonies" label="Greek colonial expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184864" start="9902" end="9908" title="Megara" label="Megara"/>
<link wikidata="Q703544" start="10412" end="10432" title="Hesychius of Miletus" label="Hesychius of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q373916" start="10706" end="10711" title="nymph" label="nymph"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="10782" end="10790" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44387" start="11524" end="11532" title="Darius I" label="Darius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="11552" end="11566" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2104072" start="11624" end="11638" title="pontoon bridge" label="pontoon bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122337" start="11814" end="11847" title="Second Persian invasion of Greece" label="Second Persian invasion of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q314518" start="11889" end="11898" title="Pausanias (general)" label="Pausanias"/>
<link wikidata="Q75207" start="12334" end="12344" title="Pax Romana" label="Pax Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="12461" end="12467" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="12469" end="12476" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5690" start="12480" end="12486" title="Sparta" label="Sparta"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="12647" end="12653" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="12657" end="12661" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051401" start="12670" end="12676" title="Turkish Straits" label="seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="12686" end="12695" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="12703" end="12716" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="12733" end="12744" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442" start="13129" end="13146" title="Septimius Severus" label="Septimius Severus"/>
<link wikidata="Q201053" start="13214" end="13230" title="Pescennius Niger" label="Pescennius Niger"/>
<link wikidata="Q243721" start="13238" end="13247" title="Year of the Five Emperors" label="claimancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="13323" end="13334" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568524" start="13886" end="13938" title="Constantine I and Christianity" label="sponsoring the consolidation of the Christian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="14481" end="14487" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="14495" end="14504" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="14977" end="14986" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="15003" end="15016" title="urban prefect" label="urban prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="15028" end="15036" title="praetors" label="praetors"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="15038" end="15046" title="tribunes" label="tribunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="15051" end="15060" title="quaestors" label="quaestors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164254" start="15143" end="15154" title="clarissimus" label="clarissimus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223088" start="15741" end="15747" title="Diocese of Asia" label="Asiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329856" start="15752" end="15759" title="Diocese of Pontus" label="Pontica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187380" start="16070" end="16080" title="Augustaion" label="Augustaeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q475338" start="16211" end="16223" title="Great Palace of Constantinople" label="Great Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724254" start="16271" end="16277" title="Chalke" label="Chalke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152384" start="16317" end="16333" title="Daphne Palace" label="Palace of Daphne"/>
<link wikidata="Q387548" start="16355" end="16365" title="Hippodrome of Constantinople" label="Hippodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756200" start="16431" end="16449" title="Baths of Zeuxippus" label="Baths of Zeuxippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187329" start="16501" end="16507" title="Milion" label="Milion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247312" start="16641" end="16645" title="Mese (Constantinople)" label="Mese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309666" start="16768" end="16778" title="Praetorium" label="Praetorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231380" start="16825" end="16845" title="Forum of Constantine" label="Forum of Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247287" start="16890" end="16901" title="Column of Constantine" label="high column"/>
<link wikidata="Q134270" start="16955" end="16961" title="Helios" label="Helios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247291" start="17079" end="17090" title="Forum Tauri" label="Forum Tauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845769" start="17104" end="17115" title="Forum Bovis" label="Forum Bovis"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="17203" end="17221" title="Wall of Constantine (Constantinople)" label="Constantinian Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="17253" end="17269" title="Theodosian Walls" label="Theodosian Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="17323" end="17334" title="Golden Gate (Constantinople)" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q253276" start="17369" end="17379" title="Roman mile" label="Roman mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="17758" end="17770" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q172471" start="18262" end="18268" title="Valens" label="Valens"/>
<link wikidata="Q752528" start="18353" end="18361" title="Hebdomon" label="Hebdomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="18382" end="18391" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Propontis"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="18401" end="18412" title="Golden Gate (Constantinople)" label="Golden Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183452" start="18477" end="18481" title="Zeno (emperor)" label="Zeno"/>
<link wikidata="Q193056" start="18486" end="18496" title="Basiliscus" label="Basiliscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551419" start="18566" end="18592" title="Studion" label="Church of John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q170495" start="18649" end="18663" title="Topkapı Palace" label="Topkapı Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q35500" start="18758" end="18767" title="Aphrodite" label="Aphrodite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230348" start="18795" end="18813" title="Praetorian prefecture of the East" label="Praetorian Prefect"/>
<link wikidata="Q159369" start="18815" end="18823" title="Arcadius" label="Arcadius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192473" start="18930" end="18950" title="Battle of Adrianople" label="Battle of Adrianople"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="19032" end="19041" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="19121" end="19134" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="19169" end="19195" title="Walls of Constantinople" label="triple-wall fortifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q850247" start="19284" end="19294" title="University of Constantinople" label="University"/>
<link wikidata="Q353054" start="19342" end="19347" title="Uldin" label="Uldin"/>
<link wikidata="Q45813" start="19365" end="19369" title="Huns" label="Huns"/>
<link wikidata="Q134313" start="19664" end="19673" title="barbarian" label="barbarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="20107" end="20118" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q174943" start="20395" end="20405" title="Belisarius" label="Belisarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="20552" end="20580" title="Herod&amp;#x27;s Temple" label="Temple treasure of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="20606" end="20611" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70)" label="AD 70"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="20625" end="20633" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="20641" end="20648" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578614" start="20753" end="20776" title="Church of St Polyeuctus" label="Church of St Polyeuctus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185216" start="20803" end="20812" title="Jerusalem in Christianity" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q187702" start="20827" end="20853" title="Church of the Holy Sepulchre" label="Church of the Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711500" start="21765" end="21773" title="Chalcedonian Orthodoxy" label="orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q183091" start="21782" end="21794" title="monophysites" label="monophysites"/>
<link wikidata="Q162665" start="22260" end="22282" title="Nika riots" label="&amp;quot;Nika&amp;quot; riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q162665" start="22352" end="22362" title="Nika Riots" label="Nika Riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q736676" start="22943" end="22954" title="Hagia Irene" label="Hagia Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q298226" start="22992" end="23012" title="Anthemius of Tralles" label="Anthemius of Tralles"/>
<link wikidata="Q310028" start="23017" end="23035" title="Isidore of Miletus" label="Isidore of Miletus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="23078" end="23090" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223644" start="23740" end="23747" title="Solomon&amp;#x27;s Temple" label="Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q586568" start="23953" end="23980" title="Church of the Holy Apostles" label="Church of the Holy Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="24416" end="24425" title="Mehmet II" label="Mehmet II"/>
<link wikidata="Q821711" start="24814" end="24833" title="Plague of Justinian" label="Plague of Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q68962" start="25190" end="25195" title="Avars (Carpathians)" label="Avars"/>
<link wikidata="Q110117" start="25210" end="25217" title="Bulgars" label="Bulgars"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="25242" end="25249" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="25325" end="25331" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="25333" end="25341" title="Sassanid" label="Sassanid"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="25407" end="25415" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41852" start="25417" end="25426" title="Heraclius" label="Heraclius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144428" start="25439" end="25445" title="exarch" label="exarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q312268" start="25929" end="25934" title="Siege of Constantinople (626)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q29100" start="26163" end="26177" title="Byzantine–Arab Wars" label="Arab conquests"/>
<link wikidata="Q399482" start="26190" end="26200" title="Siege of Constantinople (674–678)" label="674 to 678"/>
<link wikidata="Q27900" start="26213" end="26223" title="Siege of Constantinople (717–718)" label="717 to 718"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="26229" end="26245" title="Theodosian Walls" label="Theodosian Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q179537" start="26343" end="26353" title="Greek fire" label="Greek fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018759" start="26366" end="26380" title="Byzantine navy" label="Byzantine navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="26477" end="26485" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q311506" start="26487" end="26498" title="Tervel of Bulgaria" label="Khan Tervel"/>
<link wikidata="Q31755" start="26650" end="26657" title="Leo III the Isaurian" label="Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q60199" start="26876" end="26886" title="Theophilos (emperor)" label="Theophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41622" start="26946" end="26957" title="Michael III" label="Michael III"/>
<link wikidata="Q514563" start="27296" end="27316" title="Sancaktar Hayrettin Mosque" label="monastery of Gastria"/>
<link wikidata="Q815167" start="27509" end="27515" title="Rus&amp;#x27;–Byzantine War (860)" label="attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="27589" end="27593" title="Kyiv" label="Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q381737" start="27597" end="27611" title="Askold and Dir" label="Askold and Dir"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="27617" end="27626" title="Varangian" label="Varangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020668" start="27756" end="27777" title="Princes&amp;#x27; Islands" label="Princes&amp;#x27; Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612491" start="27779" end="27786" title="Niketas Oryphas" label="Oryphas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41833" start="28004" end="28012" title="Basil II" label="Basil II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14974" start="28050" end="28058" title="Vladimir I of Kiev" label="Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q48343" start="28074" end="28083" title="Varangian" label="Varangian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464130" start="28147" end="28162" title="Varangian Guard" label="Varangian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121813" start="28293" end="28309" title="Thracesian Theme" label="Thracesian Theme"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="28781" end="28793" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="28847" end="28874" title="Norman conquest of England" label="new Norman kings of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993944" start="28887" end="28905" title="Book of the Eparch" label="Book of the Eparch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018769" start="29706" end="29716" title="Byzantine Iconoclasm" label="iconoclast"/>
<link wikidata="Q31755" start="29793" end="29800" title="Leo III the Isaurian" label="Leo III"/>
<link wikidata="Q41635" start="29978" end="29991" title="Constantine V" label="Constantine V"/>
<link wikidata="Q519139" start="30003" end="30024" title="Council of Hieria" label="church council in 754"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069807" start="30198" end="30223" title="Church of St. Mary of Blachernae (Istanbul)" label="church of the Holy Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749015" start="30227" end="30237" title="Blachernae" label="Blachernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q41645" start="30343" end="30349" title="Leo IV the Khazar" label="Leo IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q206737" start="30370" end="30375" title="Irene (empress)" label="Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q187201" start="30436" end="30460" title="Second Council of Nicaea" label="Second Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q230001" start="30599" end="30607" title="Theodora (9th century)" label="Theodora"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="30711" end="30718" title="Roman Catholic" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="30727" end="30734" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q200032" start="30911" end="30930" title="Battle of Manzikert" label="Battle of Manzikert"/>
<link wikidata="Q41834" start="30963" end="30970" title="Romanos IV" label="Romanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200193" start="31022" end="31032" title="Alp Arslan" label="Alp Arslan"/>
<link wikidata="Q210564" start="31295" end="31306" title="Michael VII" label="Michael VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q484472" start="31583" end="31591" title="Turkmen people" label="Turkoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="31931" end="31940" title="Pechenegs" label="Pechenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q682597" start="32022" end="32030" title="Kipchaks" label="Kipchaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41600" start="32090" end="32097" title="Alexios I Komnenos" label="Alexius"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="32103" end="32116" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="32218" end="32227" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41628" start="32248" end="32255" title="John II Komnenos" label="John II"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="32975" end="32984" title="Venice" label="Venetians"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="33106" end="33114" title="Outremer" label="Outremer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="33179" end="33184" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41610" start="33356" end="33373" title="Manuel I Komnenos" label="Manuel I Komnenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246569" start="33652" end="33666" title="Massacre of the Latins" label="were massacred"/>
<link wikidata="Q133067" start="33762" end="33768" title="mosaic" label="mosaic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34135" end="34146" title="Constantine Stilbes#Works" label="severe fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q121130" start="34392" end="34408" title="Philip of Swabia" label="Philip of Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q312369" start="34410" end="34432" title="Boniface of Montferrat" label="Boniface of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q205688" start="34441" end="34455" title="Enrico Dandolo" label="Doge of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="34461" end="34475" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q37069" start="34588" end="34606" title="Alexios IV Angelos" label="Alexios IV Angelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37135" start="34660" end="34676" title="Isaac II Angelos" label="Isaac II Angelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37065" start="34699" end="34718" title="Alexios III Angelos" label="Alexios III Angelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q501817" start="34767" end="34773" title="Galata" label="Galata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567938" start="34785" end="34800" title="boom (navigational barrier)" label="defensive chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179839" start="34816" end="34827" title="Golden Horn" label="Golden Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176737" start="35149" end="35164" title="protovestiarius" label="protovestiarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q37076" start="35171" end="35189" title="Alexios V Doukas" label="Alexios Murzuphlos"/>
<link wikidata="Q755221" start="35314" end="35330" title="Athena Promachos" label="Athena Promachos"/>
<link wikidata="Q177302" start="35344" end="35351" title="Phidias" label="Phidias"/>
<link wikidata="Q37076" start="35517" end="35533" title="Alexios V Doukas" label="Alexios V Doukas"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="35892" end="35904" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37086" start="35930" end="35947" title="Theodore I Laskaris" label="Theodore Lascaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q521122" start="35974" end="35989" title="Angelos dynasty" label="Angelos dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187329" start="36050" end="36066" title="Milion" label="Golden Milestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464130" start="36109" end="36124" title="Varangian Guard" label="Varangian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q49979" start="36349" end="36368" title="Sir Steven Runciman" label="Sir Steven Runciman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178897" start="36538" end="36550" title="Latin Empire" label="Latin Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q24642077" start="36664" end="36681" title="Alice-Mary Talbot" label="Alice-Mary Talbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q192222" start="38312" end="38320" title="Lysippos" label="Lysippos"/>
<link wikidata="Q37072" start="38399" end="38416" title="John III Vatatzes" label="John III Vatatzes"/>
<link wikidata="Q65045400" start="38713" end="38725" title="Rouphinianai" label="Rouphinianai"/>
<link wikidata="Q586568" start="38805" end="38832" title="Church of the Holy Apostles" label="Church of the Holy Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q181254" start="38933" end="38939" title="Empire of Nicaea" label="Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="38997" end="39003" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178913" start="39057" end="39066" title="Empire of Trebizond" label="Trebizond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400402" start="39287" end="39295" title="Reconquest of Constantinople" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q269573" start="39323" end="39333" title="Baldwin II of Constantinople" label="Baldwin II"/>
<link wikidata="Q181254" start="39356" end="39371" title="Nicaean Empire" label="Nicaean emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="39372" end="39396" title="Michael VIII Palaiologos" label="Michael VIII Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q471132" start="39425" end="39447" title="Alexios Strategopoulos" label="Alexios Strategopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q200033" start="39555" end="39579" title="Michael VIII Palaiologos" label="Michael VIII Palaiologos"/>
<link wikidata="Q879941" start="39667" end="39687" title="palace of Blachernae" label="palace of Blachernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35958" start="39801" end="39809" title="Bosporus" label="Bosporus"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="40166" end="40177" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="40277" end="40288" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q725872" start="40427" end="40450" title="Ruy González de Clavijo" label="Ruy González de Clavijo"/>
<link wikidata="Q381211" start="41119" end="41139" title="Gennadios Scholarios" label="Gennadios Scholarios"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359535" start="41325" end="41338" title="Ottoman Turks" label="Ottoman Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="41339" end="41356" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="captured the city"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="42438" end="42452" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q34503" start="44337" end="44346" title="Mehmed II" label="Mehmed II"/>
<link wikidata="Q647228" start="44434" end="44444" title="Edirnekapı" label="Edirnekapı"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="44523" end="44535" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125482" start="44749" end="44753" title="imam" label="imam"/>
<link wikidata="Q165494" start="44801" end="44806" title="adhan" label="adhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="44829" end="44837" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q32815" start="44862" end="44868" title="mosque" label="mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="44882" end="44887" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q202308" start="45725" end="45738" title="Evliya Çelebi" label="Evliya Çelebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="45846" end="45854" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q123751" start="45864" end="45871" title="Aksaray, Istanbul" label="Aksaray"/>
<link wikidata="Q8077543" start="45873" end="45881" title="Çarşamba, Istanbul" label="Çarşamba"/>
<link wikidata="Q211884" start="46497" end="46510" title="Byzantine art" label="Byzantine art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12506" start="46851" end="46863" title="Hagia Sophia" label="Hagia Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442458" start="46938" end="46957" title="Stephen of Novgorod" label="Stephen of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q684384" start="47989" end="47997" title="Armenian literature" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945471" start="48382" end="48396" title="Srpouhi Dussap" label="Srpouhi Dussap"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="48842" end="48851" title="Byzantion" label="Byzantion"/>
<link wikidata="Q129772" start="48876" end="48884" title="Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318" start="48897" end="48907" title="Theopompus" label="Theopompus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="48997" end="49006" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q186153" start="49108" end="49117" title="Procopius" label="Procopius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331" start="49202" end="49213" title="Ibn Batutta" label="Ibn Batutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172988" start="49664" end="49687" title="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St Mark&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="49716" end="49723" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q650702" start="49824" end="49830" title="Italian coin florin" label="florin"/>
<link wikidata="Q231455" start="49888" end="49895" title="Solidus (coin)" label="solidus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="49899" end="49909" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q649847" start="49923" end="49929" title="bezant" label="bezant"/>
<link wikidata="Q89917" start="49969" end="49979" title="Theodosian Walls" label="city walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="50017" end="50034" title="Caernarfon Castle" label="Caernarfon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q785952" start="50264" end="50274" title="Bath House" label="bathhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="50289" end="50306" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="50334" end="50341" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="50477" end="50497" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="50682" end="50694" title="East-West Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="50708" end="50727" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Western Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="50733" end="50750" title="Eastern Orthodoxy" label="Eastern Orthodoxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="50826" end="50831" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073559" start="50894" end="50911" title="Islamic eschatology" label="End time in Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q850247" start="50999" end="51036" title="University of Constantinople" label="Imperial University of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="51110" end="51123" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="51215" end="51228" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="51339" end="51353" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q761952" start="51366" end="51417" title="L&amp;#x27;Arrivée d&amp;#x27;un train en gare de La Ciotat" label="L&amp;#x27;Arrivée d&amp;#x27;un train en gare de La Ciotat"/>
<link wikidata="Q55965" start="51432" end="51448" title="Lumière Brothers" label="Lumière Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q792814" start="51533" end="51578" title="Ayastefanos&amp;#x27;taki Rus Abidesinin Yıkılışı" label="Ayastefanos&amp;#x27;taki Rus Abidesinin Yıkılışı"/>
<link wikidata="Q375247" start="51589" end="51601" title="Fuat Uzkınay" label="Fuat Uzkınay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298662" start="51795" end="51816" title="Young Turk Revolution" label="Young Turk Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="51837" end="51848" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1793020" start="51860" end="51891" title="Kurdistan (newspaper)" label="&amp;quot;Kurdistan&amp;quot; Newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186072" start="51933" end="51957" title="Mikdad Midhat Bedir Khan" label="Mikdad Midhad Bedir Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="52000" end="52005" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="52007" end="52012" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q160353" start="52206" end="52219" title="Theodosius II" label="Theodosius II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="52293" end="52305" title="Danube river" label="Danube river"/>
<link wikidata="Q487013" start="52455" end="52470" title="Anastasian Wall" label="Anastasian Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="52513" end="52521" title="Thrace" label="Thracian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="52522" end="52531" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="52649" end="52661" title="Ancient Rome" label="Ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="52666" end="52674" title="Western Roman Empire" label="the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q182246" start="52728" end="52744" title="Sino-Roman relations" label="it was described"/>
<link wikidata="Q175077" start="52766" end="52783" title="Twenty-Four Histories" label="Chinese histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146980" start="52795" end="52798" title="Old Book of Tang" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q386073" start="52815" end="52831" title="New Book of Tang" label="New Book of Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q194173" start="52906" end="52915" title="Water clock" label="clepsydra"/>
<link wikidata="Q399482" start="53003" end="53020" title="Siege of Constantinople (674-678)" label="had been besieged"/>
<link wikidata="Q181154" start="53043" end="53058" title="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya I" label="Mu&amp;#x27;awiya I"/>
<link wikidata="Q748289" start="53078" end="53085" title="tribute" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722638" start="53162" end="53196" title="List of people from Constantinople" label="List of people from Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187380" start="53240" end="53250" title="Augustaion" label="Augustaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231440" start="53253" end="53272" title="Column of Justinian" label="Column of Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q216511" start="53274" end="53290" title="Basilica Cistern" label="Basilica Cistern"/>
<link wikidata="Q285236" start="53292" end="53309" title="Column of Marcian" label="Column of Marcian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003322" start="53311" end="53326" title="Bucoleon Palace" label="Bucoleon Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994701" start="53328" end="53348" title="Horses of Saint Mark" label="Horses of Saint Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q763854" start="53350" end="53371" title="Obelisk of Theodosius" label="Obelisk of Theodosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q588892" start="53373" end="53387" title="Serpent Column" label="Serpent Column"/>
<link wikidata="Q742474" start="53389" end="53403" title="Walled Obelisk" label="Walled Obelisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997580" start="53405" end="53421" title="Palace of Lausus" label="Palace of Lausus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2728644" start="53423" end="53444" title="Cistern of Philoxenos" label="Cistern of Philoxenos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472490" start="53446" end="53475" title="Palace of the Porphyrogenitus" label="Palace of the Porphyrogenitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081830" start="53477" end="53493" title="Prison of Anemas" label="Prison of Anemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q952924" start="53495" end="53510" title="Valens Aqueduct" label="Valens Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706762" start="53555" end="53605" title="Atik Mustafa Pasha Mosque" label="Church of Saint Thekla of the Palace of Blachernae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305473" start="53607" end="53626" title="Bodrum Mosque" label="Church of Myrelaion"/>
<link wikidata="Q849489" start="53628" end="53640" title="Chora Church" label="Chora Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144576" start="53642" end="53678" title="Little Hagia Sophia" label="Church of Saints Sergius and Bacchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q586568" start="53680" end="53707" title="Church of the Holy Apostles" label="Church of the Holy Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578614" start="53709" end="53733" title="Church of St. Polyeuctus" label="Church of St. Polyeuctus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2410449" start="53735" end="53766" title="Eski Imaret Mosque" label="Monastery of Christ Pantepoptes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424612" start="53768" end="53782" title="Fenari Isa Mosque" label="Lips Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334536" start="53784" end="53822" title="Gül Mosque" label="Monastery of the Christ the Benefactor"/>
<link wikidata="Q736676" start="53824" end="53835" title="Hagia Irene" label="Hagia Irene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572506" start="53837" end="53874" title="Hirami Ahmet Pasha Mosque" label="Saint John the Forerunner by-the-Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758501" start="53876" end="53906" title="Kalenderhane Mosque" label="Church of Theotokos Kyriotissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q608787" start="53908" end="53940" title="Koca Mustafa Pasha Mosque" label="Church of Saint Andrew in Krisei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119702" start="53942" end="53954" title="Nea Ekklesia" label="Nea Ekklesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420984" start="53956" end="53976" title="Pammakaristos Church" label="Pammakaristos Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551419" start="53978" end="53986" title="Stoudios" label="Stoudios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813639" start="53998" end="54015" title="Toklu Dede Mosque" label="Toklu Dede Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q246275" start="54017" end="54041" title="Vefa Kilise Mosque" label="Church of Saint Theodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q197094" start="54043" end="54071" title="Zeyrek Mosque" label="Monastery of the Pantokrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4585036" start="54179" end="54201" title="Ahmed Bican Yazıcıoğlu" label="Ahmed Bican Yazıcıoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982627" start="54203" end="54221" title="Byzantine calendar" label="Byzantine calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488940" start="54223" end="54237" title="Byzantine silk" label="Byzantine silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q544015" start="54239" end="54263" title="Eparch of Constantinople" label="Eparch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241417" start="54265" end="54280" title="List of urban prefects of Constantinople" label="List of eparchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q815169" start="54283" end="54307" title="Sieges of Constantinople" label="Sieges of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q96590840" start="54309" end="54319" title="Third Rome" label="Third Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q635058" start="54321" end="54328" title="Thracia" label="Thracia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152390" start="54330" end="54358" title="Timeline of Istanbul history" label="Timeline of Istanbul history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582706" start="54409" end="54422" title="Warwick Ball" label="Ball, Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5821882" start="54716" end="54732" title="Raymond Ibrahim" label="Ibrahim, Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370317" start="55393" end="55404" title="Henry Yule" label="Yule, Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q502912" start="55796" end="55806" title="J. B. Bury" label="J. B. Bury"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5647" wikidata="Q106922" url="?curid=5647" title="Columbus">
<text>Columbus is a Latinized version of the Italian surname &quot;Colombo&quot;. It most commonly refers to:

* Christopher Columbus (1451–1506), the Italian explorer
* Columbus, Ohio, the capital city of the U.S. state of Ohio
* Columbus, Georgia, the 2nd-largest city in the U.S. State of Georgia

Columbus may also refer to:
==Places==
===Extraterrestrial===
* Columbus (crater), a crater on Mars
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (ISS module), the European module for the International Space Station
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (spacecraft), a program to develop a European space station 1986–1991

===Italy===
* Columbus (Rome), a residential district

===United States===
* Columbus, Arkansas
* Columbus, Georgia, the 119th-largest city in the United States, and the 2nd-largest in Georgia after Atlanta
* Columbus, Illinois
* Columbus, Indiana, known for modern architecture
* Columbus, Kansas
* Columbus, Kentucky
* Columbus, Minnesota
* Columbus, Mississippi
* Columbus, Missouri
* Columbus, Montana
* Columbus, Nebraska
* Columbus, New Jersey
* Columbus, New Mexico
* Columbus, New York
* Columbus, North Carolina
* Columbus, North Dakota
* Columbus, Ohio, the largest city in the United States with this name
* Columbus, Texas
* Columbus, Wisconsin
* Columbus (town), Wisconsin
* Columbus Avenue (disambiguation)
* Columbus Circle, a traffic circle in Manhattan, New York 
* Columbus City (disambiguation)
* Columbus Township (disambiguation)

==Persons with the name==
===Forename===
* Columbus Caldwell (1830–1908), American politician 
* Columbus Germain (1827–1880), American politician
* Columbus Short (born 1982), American choreographer and actor

===Surname===
* Bartholomew Columbus (c. 1461–1515), Christopher Columbus&#x27; younger brother
* Chris Columbus (filmmaker) (born 1958), American filmmaker
* Diego Columbus (1479/80–1526), Christopher Columbus&#x27; eldest son
* Ferdinand Columbus (1488–1539), Christopher Columbus&#x27; second son
* Scott Columbus (1956–2011), long-time drummer for the heavy metal band Manowar

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
===Films===
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (2015 film), an Indian comedy, subtitled &quot;Discovering Love&quot;
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (2017 film), an American drama set amidst the architecture of Columbus, Indiana
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (&quot;Star Trek&quot;), a shuttlecraft in the &quot;Star Trek&quot; series

===Music===
====Opera====
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (Egk), German-language opera by Egk, 1943
*&quot;Columbus&quot;, 1855 opera by František Škroup
* &quot;Christophe Colomb&quot;, French-language opera by Milhaud often referred to as &quot;Columbus&quot; in English sources

====Other uses in music====
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (Herzogenberg), large scale cantata by Heinrich von Herzogenberg 1870
*&quot;Colombus&quot;, song by Mary Black from No Frontiers
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (song), a song by the band Kent from their album &quot;Tillbaka till samtiden&quot;

===Other uses in arts, entertainment, and media===
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (novel), a 1941 novel about Christopher Columbus by Rafael Sabatini
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (Bartholdi), a statue depicting Christopher Columbus by Frédéric Auguste Bartholdi, in Providence, Rhode Island, US
* Columbus Edwards, the character known as Lum of &quot;Lum and Abner&quot;

==Brands and enterprises==
* COLUMBUS, ab initio quantum chemistry software
* &quot;ColumBus&quot;, former name of Howard Transit in Howard County, Maryland
* Columbus Communications, a cable television and broadband speed Internet service provider in the Caribbean region
* Columbus Salame, an American food processing company
* Columbus Tubing, an Italian manufacturer of bicycle frame tubing
* Columbus Buggy Company, an American automotive manufacturer from 1875 to 1913

==Ships==
* &quot;Columbus&quot; (1824), a disposable ship built to transport lumber from North America to Britain
* MS &quot;Columbus&quot;, a cruise ship owned by Plantours &amp; Partner GmbH
* MV &quot;Columbus&quot;, a cruise ship owned by Seajets
* SS &quot;Christopher Columbus&quot;, Great Lakes excursion liner (1893–1933)
* SS &quot;City of Columbus&quot;, a passenger steamer that sailed from Boston to Savannah and sank off Martha&#x27;s Vineyard in 1884
* SS &quot;Columbus&quot; (1873), an American merchantman converted in 1878 into the Russian cruiser &quot;Asia&quot;
* SS &quot;Columbus&quot; (1924), a transatlantic ocean liner for the North German Lloyd steamship line
* USS &quot;Columbus&quot;, various ships of the US Navy

==Other uses==
* Columbus hops, a variety of hops
* Generation of Columbuses, a generation of Poles born ca. 1920, who had to fight twenty years later
* Columbus (shopping centre), a shopping centre in Vuosaari, Helsinki, Finland

==See also==

* Christopher Columbus (disambiguation)
* Columbus City Hall (disambiguation)
* Columba
* Columbia (disambiguation)
* Columbus Day
* List of places named for Christopher Columbus
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q106922" start="0" end="8" title="Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13553768" start="61" end="68" title="Colombo (surname)" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="107" end="127" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Christopher Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="164" end="178" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="225" end="242" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q106922" start="295" end="303" title="Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175020" start="359" end="376" title="Columbus (crater)" label="Columbus (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q155935" start="397" end="430" title="Columbus (ISS module)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (ISS module)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149991" start="490" end="523" title="Columbus (spacecraft)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (spacecraft)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21234215" start="596" end="611" title="Columbus (Rome)" label="Columbus (Rome)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149977" start="659" end="677" title="Columbus, Arkansas" label="Columbus, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q239870" start="680" end="697" title="Columbus, Georgia" label="Columbus, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993556" start="791" end="809" title="Columbus, Illinois" label="Columbus, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q941870" start="812" end="829" title="Columbus, Indiana" label="Columbus, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232985" start="863" end="879" title="Columbus, Kansas" label="Columbus, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170410" start="882" end="900" title="Columbus, Kentucky" label="Columbus, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463946" start="903" end="922" title="Columbus, Minnesota" label="Columbus, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q985648" start="925" end="946" title="Columbus, Mississippi" label="Columbus, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28954096" start="949" end="967" title="Columbus, Missouri" label="Columbus, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q961735" start="970" end="987" title="Columbus, Montana" label="Columbus, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q932391" start="990" end="1008" title="Columbus, Nebraska" label="Columbus, Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149981" start="1011" end="1031" title="Columbus, New Jersey" label="Columbus, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112742" start="1034" end="1054" title="Columbus, New Mexico" label="Columbus, New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708769" start="1057" end="1075" title="Columbus, New York" label="Columbus, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026104" start="1078" end="1102" title="Columbus, North Carolina" label="Columbus, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315759" start="1105" end="1127" title="Columbus, North Dakota" label="Columbus, North Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="1130" end="1144" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q975782" start="1201" end="1216" title="Columbus, Texas" label="Columbus, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570063" start="1219" end="1238" title="Columbus, Wisconsin" label="Columbus, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149996" start="1241" end="1267" title="Columbus (town), Wisconsin" label="Columbus (town), Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482858" start="1270" end="1302" title="Columbus Avenue (disambiguation)" label="Columbus Avenue (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109968" start="1305" end="1320" title="Columbus Circle" label="Columbus Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q989656" start="1365" end="1395" title="Columbus City (disambiguation)" label="Columbus City (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112809" start="1398" end="1432" title="Columbus Township (disambiguation)" label="Columbus Township (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21177528" start="1477" end="1494" title="Columbus Caldwell" label="Columbus Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063375" start="1531" end="1547" title="Columbus Germain" label="Columbus Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q265661" start="1583" end="1597" title="Columbus Short" label="Columbus Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q186138" start="1661" end="1681" title="Bartholomew Columbus" label="Bartholomew Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q75079" start="1743" end="1769" title="Chris Columbus (filmmaker)" label="Chris Columbus (filmmaker)"/>
<link wikidata="Q452379" start="1804" end="1818" title="Diego Columbus" label="Diego Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406718" start="1875" end="1893" title="Ferdinand Columbus" label="Ferdinand Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070118" start="1947" end="1961" title="Scott Columbus" label="Scott Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q21427266" start="2076" end="2108" title="Columbus (2015 film)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (2015 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612286" start="2169" end="2201" title="Columbus (2017 film)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (2017 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q600142" start="2272" end="2316" title="Columbus (Star Trek)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Star Trek&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20754773" start="2398" end="2424" title="Columbus (Egk)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (Egk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375928" start="2498" end="2514" title="František Škroup" label="František Škroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966173" start="2523" end="2540" title="Christophe Colomb" label="Christophe Colomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790600" start="2673" end="2708" title="Columbus (Herzogenberg)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (Herzogenberg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044201" start="2811" end="2823" title="No Frontiers" label="No Frontiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149992" start="2826" end="2853" title="Columbus (song)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149990" start="2985" end="3013" title="Columbus (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149988" start="3076" end="3108" title="Columbus (Bartholdi)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (Bartholdi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702993" start="3269" end="3282" title="Lum and Abner" label="Lum and Abner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013344" start="3319" end="3327" title="COLUMBUS" label="COLUMBUS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921096" start="3405" end="3419" title="Howard Transit" label="Howard Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150028" start="3449" end="3472" title="Columbus Communications" label="Columbus Communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q5150105" start="3565" end="3580" title="Columbus Salame" label="Columbus Salame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277724" start="3620" end="3635" title="Columbus Tubing" label="Columbus Tubing"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594804" start="3687" end="3709" title="Columbus Buggy Company" label="Columbus Buggy Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q109284824" start="3778" end="3805" title="Columbus (1824 ship)" label="&amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (1824)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372783" start="3883" end="3906" title="MS Columbus" label="MS &amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621790" start="3962" end="3985" title="MV Columbus" label="MV &amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7393365" start="4020" end="4055" title="SS Christopher Columbus" label="SS &amp;quot;Christopher Columbus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q914066" start="4099" end="4130" title="SS City of Columbus" label="SS &amp;quot;City of Columbus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q726850" start="4234" end="4264" title="SS Columbus (1873)" label="SS &amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (1873)"/>
<link wikidata="Q320192" start="4352" end="4382" title="SS Columbus (1924)" label="SS &amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot; (1924)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2468965" start="4456" end="4480" title="USS Columbus" label="USS &amp;quot;Columbus&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4546" end="4561" title="List of hop varieties#Columbus" label="variety of hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976323" start="4564" end="4588" title="Generation of Columbuses" label="Generation of Columbuses"/>
<link wikidata="Q11855459" start="4665" end="4691" title="Columbus (shopping centre)" label="Columbus (shopping centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q416008" start="4759" end="4796" title="Christopher Columbus (disambiguation)" label="Christopher Columbus (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911303" start="4799" end="4834" title="Columbus City Hall (disambiguation)" label="Columbus City Hall (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="4837" end="4844" title="Columba" label="Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q766625" start="4847" end="4872" title="Columbia (disambiguation)" label="Columbia (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q367523" start="4875" end="4887" title="Columbus Day" label="Columbus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299657" start="4890" end="4935" title="List of places named for Christopher Columbus" label="List of places named for Christopher Columbus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5648" wikidata="Q23148" url="?curid=5648" title="Cornwall">
<text>Cornwall (; or ) is a ceremonial county in South West England. It is recognised by Cornish and Celtic political groups as one of the Celtic nations, and is the homeland of the Cornish people. The county is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to the north and west, Devon to the east, and the English Channel to the south. The largest urban area in the county is a conurbation that includes the former mining towns of Redruth and Camborne, and the county town is the city of Truro.

The county is rural, with an area of and population of 568,210. Outside of the Redruth-Camborne conurbation the largest settlements are Falmouth, Penzance, Newquay, St Austell, and Truro. For local government purposes most of Cornwall is a unitary authority area, with the Isles of Scilly having a unique local authority. The Cornish nationalist movement disputes the constitutional status of Cornwall and seeks greater autonomy within the United Kingdom.

Cornwall is the westernmost part of the South West Peninsula, and the southernmost county within the United Kingdom. Its coastline is characterised by steep cliffs and, to the south, several rias, including those at the mouths of the rivers Fal and Fowey. It includes the southernmost point on Great Britain, Lizard Point, and forms a large part of the Cornwall National Landscape. The national landscape also includes Bodmin Moor, an upland outcrop of the Cornubian batholith granite formation. The county contains many short rivers; the longest is the Tamar, which forms the border with Devon.

Cornwall had a minor Roman presence, and later formed part of the Brittonic kingdom of Dumnonia. From the 7th century, the Britons in the South West increasingly came into conflict with the expanding Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Wessex, eventually being pushed west of the Tamar; by the Norman Conquest Cornwall was administered as part of England, though it retained its own culture. The remainder of the Middle Ages and Early Modern Period were relatively settled, with Cornwall developing its tin mining industry and becoming a duchy in 1337. During the Industrial Revolution, the tin and copper mines were expanded and then declined, with china clay extraction becoming a major industry. Railways were built, leading to a growth of tourism in the 20th century. The Cornish language became extinct as a living community language at the end of the 18th century, but is now being revived.

== Name ==
The modern English name &quot;Cornwall&quot; is a compound of two terms coming from two different language groups:
*&quot;Corn-&quot; originates from the Proto-Celtic &quot;*kornu&quot;- (&quot;&quot;, presumed in reference to &quot;headland&quot;), and is cognate with the English word &quot;horn&quot; and Latin &quot;cornu&quot; (both deriving from the Proto-Indo-European *ḱerh₂-). There may also have been an Iron Age group that occupied the Cornish peninsula known as the &quot;Cornovii&quot; (i.e. &quot;people of the horn or headland&quot;).
*&quot;-wall&quot; derives from , an exonym in Old English meaning &quot;foreigner&quot;, &quot;slave&quot; or &quot;Brittonic-speaker&quot; (as in Welsh).

In the Cornish language, Cornwall is &quot;Kernow&quot; which stems from the same Proto-Celtic root.

==History==


===Prehistory, Roman and post-Roman periods===
Humans reoccupied Britain after the last Ice Age. The area now known as Cornwall was first inhabited in the Palaeolithic and Mesolithic periods. It continued to be occupied by Neolithic and then by Bronze Age people.

Cornwall in the Late Bronze Age formed part of a maritime trading-networked culture which researchers have dubbed the Atlantic Bronze Age system, and which extended over most of the areas of present-day Ireland, England, Wales, France, Spain, and Portugal.

During the British Iron Age, Cornwall, like all of Britain (modern England, Scotland, Wales, and the Isle of Man), was inhabited by a Celtic-speaking people known as the Britons with distinctive cultural relations to neighbouring Brittany. The Common Brittonic spoken at this time eventually developed into several distinct tongues, including Cornish, Welsh, Breton, Cumbric and Pictish.

The first written account of Cornwall comes from the 1st-century BC Sicilian Greek historian Diodorus Siculus, supposedly quoting or paraphrasing the 4th-century BCE geographer Pytheas, who had sailed to Britain:
The identity of these merchants is unknown. It has been theorized that they were Phoenicians, but there is no evidence for this. Professor Timothy Champion, discussing Diodorus Siculus&#x27;s comments on the tin trade, states that &quot;Diodorus never actually says that the Phoenicians sailed to Cornwall. In fact, he says quite the opposite: the production of Cornish tin was in the hands of the natives of Cornwall, and its transport to the Mediterranean was organized by local merchants, by sea and then overland through France, passing through areas well outside Phoenician control.&quot; Isotopic evidence suggests that tin ingots found off the coast of Haifa, Israel, may have been from Cornwall. Tin, required for the production of bronze, was a relatively rare and precious commodity in the Bronze Age – hence the interest shown in Devon and Cornwall&#x27;s tin resources. (For further discussion of tin mining see the section on the economy below.)

In the first four centuries AD, during the time of Roman dominance in Britain, Cornwall was rather remote from the main centres of Romanization – the nearest being Isca Dumnoniorum, modern-day Exeter. However, the Roman road system extended into Cornwall with four significant Roman sites based on forts: Tregear near Nanstallon was discovered in the early 1970s, two others were found at Restormel Castle, Lostwithiel in 2007, and a third fort near Calstock was also discovered early in 2007. In addition, a Roman-style villa was found at Magor Farm, Illogan in 1935. Ptolemy&#x27;s &quot;Geographike Hyphegesis&quot; mentions four towns controlled by the Dumnonii, three of which may have been in Cornwall. However, after 410 AD, Cornwall appears to have reverted to rule by Romano-Celtic chieftains of the Cornovii tribe as part of the Brittonic kingdom of Dumnonia (which also included present-day Devonshire and the Scilly Isles), including the territory of one Marcus Cunomorus, with at least one significant power base at Tintagel in the early 6th century.

King Mark of Cornwall is a semi-historical figure known from Welsh literature, from the Matter of Britain, and, in particular, from the later Norman-Breton medieval romance of Tristan and Yseult, where he appears as a close relative of King Arthur, himself usually considered to be born of the Cornish people in folklore traditions derived from Geoffrey of Monmouth&#x27;s 12th-century &quot;Historia Regum Britanniae&quot;.

Archaeology supports ecclesiastical, literary and legendary evidence for some relative economic stability and close cultural ties between the sub-Roman Westcountry, South Wales, Brittany, the Channel Islands, and Ireland through the fifth and sixth centuries. In Cornwall, the arrival of Celtic saints such as Nectan, Paul Aurelian, Petroc, Piran, Samson and numerous others reinforced the preexisting Roman Christianity.

===Conflict with Wessex===
The Battle of Deorham in 577 saw the separation of Dumnonia (and therefore Cornwall) from Wales, following which the Dumnonii often came into conflict with the expanding English kingdom of Wessex. Centwine of Wessex &quot;drove the Britons as far as the sea&quot; in 682, and by 690 St Bonifice, then a Saxon boy, was attending an abbey in Exeter, which was in turn ruled by a Saxon abbot. The Carmen Rhythmicum written by Aldhelm contains the earliest literary reference to Cornwall as distinct from Devon. Religious tensions between the Dumnonians (who celebrated celtic Christian traditions) and Wessex (who were Roman Catholic) are described in Aldhelm&#x27;s letter to King Geraint. The &quot;Annales Cambriae&quot; report that in AD 722 the Britons of Cornwall won a battle at &quot;Hehil&quot;. It seems likely that the enemy the Cornish fought was a West Saxon force, as evidenced by the naming of King Ine of Wessex and his kinsman Nonna in reference to an earlier Battle of Llongborth in 710.

The &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; stated in 815 (adjusted date) &quot;and in this year king Ecgbryht raided in Cornwall from east to west.&quot; this has been interpreted to mean a raid from the Tamar to Land&#x27;s End, and the end of Cornish independence. However, the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; states that in 825 (adjusted date) a battle took place between the Wealas (Cornish) and the Defnas (men of Devon) at Gafulforda. The Cornish giving battle here, and the later battle at Hingston Down, casts doubt on any claims of control Wessex had at this stage.

In 838, the Cornish and their Danish allies were defeated by Egbert in the Battle of Hingston Down at Hengestesdune. In 875, the last recorded king of Cornwall, Dumgarth, is said to have drowned. Around the 880s, Anglo-Saxons from Wessex had established modest land holdings in the north eastern part of Cornwall; notably Alfred the Great who had acquired a few estates. William of Malmesbury, writing around 1120, says that King Athelstan of England (r. 924–939) fixed the boundary between English and Cornish people at the east bank of the River Tamar. While elements of William&#x27;s story, like the burning of Exeter, have been cast in doubt by recent writers Athelstan did re-establish a separate Cornish Bishop and relations between Wessex and the Cornish elite improved from the time of his rule.

Eventually King Edgar (r. 959–975) was able to issue charters the width of Cornwall, and frequently sent emissaries or visited personally as seen by his appearances in the Bodmin Manumissions.

===Breton–Norman period===

One interpretation of the Domesday Book is that by this time the native Cornish landowning class had been almost completely dispossessed and replaced by English landowners, particularly Harold Godwinson himself. However, the Bodmin manumissions show that two leading Cornish figures nominally had Saxon names, but these were both glossed with native Cornish names. In 1068, Brian of Brittany may have been created Earl of Cornwall, and naming evidence cited by medievalist Edith Ditmas suggests that many other post-Conquest landowners in Cornwall were Breton allies of the Normans, the Bretons being descended from Britons who had fled to what is today Brittany during the early years of the Anglo-Saxon conquest. She also proposed this period for the early composition of the Tristan and Iseult cycle by poets such as Béroul from a pre-existing shared Brittonic oral tradition.

Soon after the Norman conquest most of the land was transferred to the new Breton–Norman aristocracy, with the lion&#x27;s share going to Robert, Count of Mortain, half-brother of King William and the largest landholder in England after the king with his stronghold at Trematon Castle near the mouth of the Tamar.

===Later medieval administration and society===
Subsequently, however, Norman absentee landlords became replaced by a new Cornish-Norman ruling class including scholars such as Richard Rufus of Cornwall. These families eventually became the new rulers of Cornwall, typically speaking Norman French, Breton-Cornish, Latin, and eventually English, with many becoming involved in the operation of the Stannary Parliament system, the Earldom and eventually the Duchy of Cornwall. The Cornish language continued to be spoken and acquired a number of characteristics establishing its identity as a separate language from Breton.

====Stannary parliaments====
The stannary parliaments and stannary courts were legislative and legal institutions in Cornwall and in Devon (in the Dartmoor area). The stannary courts administered equity for the region&#x27;s tin-miners and tin mining interests, and they were also courts of record for the towns dependent on the mines. The separate and powerful government institutions available to the tin miners reflected the enormous importance of the tin industry to the English economy during the Middle Ages. Special laws for tin miners pre-date written legal codes in Britain, and ancient traditions exempted everyone connected with tin mining in Cornwall and Devon from any jurisdiction other than the stannary courts in all but the most exceptional circumstances.

====Piracy and smuggling====
Cornish piracy was active during the Elizabethan era on the west coast of Britain. Cornwall is well known for its wreckers who preyed on ships passing Cornwall&#x27;s rocky coastline. During the 17th and 18th centuries Cornwall was a major smuggling area.

===Heraldry===
In later times, Cornwall was known to the Anglo-Saxons as &quot;West Wales&quot; to distinguish it from &quot;North Wales&quot; (the modern nation of Wales). The name appears in the &quot;Anglo-Saxon Chronicle&quot; in 891 as &quot;On Corn walum&quot;. In the Domesday Book it was referred to as &quot;Cornualia&quot; and in c. 1198 as &quot;Cornwal&quot;. Other names for the county include a latinisation of the name as &quot;Cornubia&quot; (first appears in a mid-9th-century deed purporting to be a copy of one dating from c. 705), and as &quot;Cornugallia&quot; in 1086.
==Physical geography==

Cornwall forms the tip of the south-west peninsula of the island of Great Britain, and is therefore exposed to the full force of the prevailing winds that blow in from the Atlantic Ocean. The coastline is composed mainly of resistant rocks that give rise in many places to tall cliffs. Cornwall has a border with only one other county, Devon, which is formed almost entirely by the River Tamar, and the remainder (to the north) by the Marsland Valley.

===Coastal areas===
The north and south coasts have different characteristics. The north coast on the Celtic Sea, part of the Atlantic Ocean, is more exposed and therefore has a wilder nature. The &quot;High Cliff&quot;, between Boscastle and St Gennys, is the highest sheer-drop cliff in Cornwall at . Beaches, which form an important part of the tourist industry, include Bude, Polzeath, Watergate Bay, Perranporth, Porthtowan, Fistral Beach, Newquay, St Agnes, St Ives, and on the south coast Gyllyngvase beach in Falmouth and the large beach at Praa Sands further to the south-west. There are two river estuaries on the north coast: Hayle Estuary and the estuary of the River Camel, which provides Padstow and Rock with a safe harbour. The seaside town of Newlyn is a popular holiday destination, as it is one of the last remaining traditional Cornish fishing ports, with views reaching over Mount&#x27;s Bay.
The south coast, dubbed the &quot;Cornish Riviera&quot;, is more sheltered and there are several broad estuaries offering safe anchorages, such as at Falmouth and Fowey. Beaches on the south coast usually consist of coarser sand and shingle, interspersed with rocky sections of wave-cut platform. Also on the south coast, the picturesque fishing village of Polperro, at the mouth of the Pol River, and the fishing port of Looe on the River Looe are both popular with tourists.

===Inland areas===

The interior of the county consists of a roughly east–west spine of infertile and exposed upland, with a series of granite intrusions, such as Bodmin Moor, which contains the highest land within Cornwall. From east to west, and with approximately descending altitude, these are Bodmin Moor, Hensbarrow north of St Austell, Carnmenellis to the south of Camborne, and the Penwith or Land&#x27;s End peninsula. These intrusions are the central part of the granite outcrops that form the exposed parts of the Cornubian batholith of south-west Britain, which also includes Dartmoor to the east in Devon and the Isles of Scilly to the west, the latter now being partially submerged.
The intrusion of the granite into the surrounding sedimentary rocks gave rise to extensive metamorphism and mineralisation, and this led to Cornwall being one of the most important mining areas in Europe until the early 20th century. It is thought tin was mined here as early as the Bronze Age, and copper, lead, zinc and silver have all been mined in Cornwall. Alteration of the granite also gave rise to extensive deposits of China Clay, especially in the area to the north of St Austell, and the extraction of this remains an important industry.

The uplands are surrounded by more fertile, mainly pastoral farmland. Near the south coast, deep wooded valleys provide sheltered conditions for flora that like shade and a moist, mild climate. These areas lie mainly on Devonian sandstone and slate. The north east of Cornwall lies on Carboniferous rocks known as the Culm Measures. In places these have been subjected to severe folding, as can be seen on the north coast near Crackington Haven and in several other locations.

===Lizard Peninsula===
The geology of the Lizard peninsula is unusual, in that it is mainland Britain&#x27;s only example of an ophiolite, a section of oceanic crust now found on land. Much of the peninsula consists of the dark green and red Precambrian serpentinite, which forms spectacular cliffs, notably at Kynance Cove, and carved and polished serpentine ornaments are sold in local gift shops. This ultramafic rock also forms a very infertile soil which covers the flat and marshy heaths of the interior of the peninsula. This is home to rare plants, such as the Cornish Heath, which has been adopted as the county flower.

===Hills and high points===
==Settlements and transport==
Cornwall&#x27;s only city, and the home of the council headquarters, is Truro. Nearby Falmouth is notable as a port. St Just in Penwith is the westernmost town in England, though the same claim has been made for Penzance, which is larger. St Ives and Padstow are today small vessel ports with a major tourism and leisure sector in their economies. Newquay on the north coast is another major urban settlement which is known for its beaches and is a popular surfing destination, as is Bude further north, but Newquay is now also becoming important for its aviation-related industries. Camborne is the county&#x27;s largest town and more populous than the county town Truro. Together with the neighbouring town of Redruth, it forms the largest urban area in Cornwall, and both towns were significant as centres of the global tin mining industry in the 19th century; nearby copper mines were also very productive during that period. St Austell is also larger than Truro and was the centre of the china clay industry in Cornwall. Until four new parishes were created for the St Austell area on 1 April 2009 St Austell was the largest settlement in Cornwall.

Cornwall borders the county of Devon at the River Tamar. Major roads between Cornwall and the rest of Great Britain are the A38 which crosses the Tamar at Plymouth via the Tamar Bridge and the town of Saltash, the A39 road (Atlantic Highway) from Barnstaple, passing through North Cornwall to end in Falmouth, and the A30 which connects Cornwall to the M5 motorway at Exeter, crosses the border south of Launceston, crosses Bodmin Moor and connects Bodmin, Truro, Redruth, Camborne, Hayle and Penzance. Torpoint Ferry links Plymouth with Torpoint on the opposite side of the Hamoaze. A rail bridge, the Royal Albert Bridge built by Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1859), provides the other main land transport link. The city of Plymouth, a large urban centre in south west Devon, is an important location for services such as hospitals, department stores, road and rail transport, and cultural venues, particularly for people living in east Cornwall.

Cardiff and Swansea, across the Bristol Channel, have at some times in the past been connected to Cornwall by ferry, but these do not operate now.

The Isles of Scilly are served by ferry (from Penzance) and by aeroplane, having its own airport: St Mary&#x27;s Airport. There are regular flights between St Mary&#x27;s and Land&#x27;s End Airport, near St Just, and Newquay Airport; during the summer season, a service is also provided between St Mary&#x27;s and Exeter Airport, in Devon.

==Ecology==
===Flora and fauna===

Cornwall has varied habitats including terrestrial and marine ecosystems. One noted species in decline locally is the Reindeer lichen, which species has been made a priority for protection under the national UK Biodiversity Action Plan.

Botanists divide Cornwall and Scilly into two vice-counties: West (1) and East (2). The standard flora is by F. H. Davey &quot;Flora of Cornwall&quot; (1909). Davey was assisted by A. O. Hume and he thanks Hume, his companion on excursions in Cornwall and Devon, and for help in the compilation of that Flora, publication of which was financed by him.

===Climate===

Cornwall has a temperate Oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Cfb&quot;), with mild winters and cool summers. Cornwall has the mildest and one of the sunniest climates of the United Kingdom, as a result of its oceanic setting and the influence of the Gulf Stream. The average annual temperature in Cornwall ranges from on the Isles of Scilly to in the central uplands. Winters are among the warmest in the country due to the moderating effects of the warm ocean currents, and frost and snow are very rare at the coast and are also rare in the central upland areas. Summers are, however, not as warm as in other parts of southern England. The surrounding sea and its southwesterly position mean that Cornwall&#x27;s weather can be relatively changeable.

Cornwall is one of the sunniest areas in the UK. It has more than 1,541 hours of sunshine per year, with the highest average of 7.6 hours of sunshine per day in July. The moist, mild air coming from the southwest brings higher amounts of rainfall than in eastern Great Britain, at per year. However, this is not as much as in more northern areas of the west coast. The Isles of Scilly, for example, where there are on average fewer than two days of air frost per year, is the only area in the UK to be in the Hardiness zone 10. The islands have, on average, less than one day of air temperature exceeding 30 °C per year and are in the AHS Heat Zone 1. Extreme temperatures in Cornwall are particularly rare; however, extreme weather in the form of storms and floods is common. Due to climate change Cornwall faces more heatwaves and severe droughts, faster coastal erosion, stronger storms and higher wind speeds as well as the possibility of more high-impact flooding.

==Culture==
===Language===

====Cornish language====
 
Cornish, a member of the Brythonic branch of the Celtic language family, died out as a first language in the late 18th century. In the 20th and 21st centuries, it has been revived by a small number of speakers. It is closely related to the other Brythonic languages (Breton and Welsh), and less so to the Goidelic languages. Cornish has no legal status in the UK.

There has been a revival of the language by academics and optimistic enthusiasts since the mid-19th century that gained momentum from the publication in 1904 of Henry Jenner&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of the Cornish Language&quot;. It is a social networking community language rather than a social community group language. Cornwall Council encourages and facilitates language classes within the county, in schools and within the wider community.

In 2002, Cornish was named as a UK regional language in the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. As a result, in 2005 its promoters received limited government funding. Several words originating in Cornish are used in the mining terminology of English, such as costean, gossan, gunnies, kibbal, and vug.

====English dialect====

The Cornish language and culture influenced the emergence of particular pronunciations and grammar not used elsewhere in England. The Cornish dialect is spoken to varying degrees; however, someone speaking in broad Cornish may be practically unintelligible to one not accustomed to it. Cornish dialect has generally declined, as in most places it is now little more than a regional accent and grammatical differences have been eroded over time. Marked differences in vocabulary and usage still exist between the eastern and western parts of Cornwall.

===Flag===
Saint Piran&#x27;s Flag is the national flag and ancient banner of Cornwall, and an emblem of the Cornish people. The banner of Saint Piran is a white cross on a black background (in terms of heraldry &#x27;sable, a cross argent&#x27;). According to legend Saint Piran adopted these colours from seeing the white tin in the black coals and ashes during his discovery of tin. The Cornish flag is an exact reverse of the former Breton black cross national flag and is known by the same name &quot;Kroaz Du&quot;.

===Arts and media===

Since the 19th century, Cornwall, with its unspoilt maritime scenery and strong light, has sustained a vibrant visual art scene of international renown. Artistic activity within Cornwall was initially centred on the art-colony of Newlyn, most active at the turn of the 20th century. This Newlyn School is associated with the names of Stanhope Forbes, Elizabeth Forbes, Norman Garstin and Lamorna Birch. Modernist writers such as D. H. Lawrence and Virginia Woolf lived in Cornwall between the wars, and Ben Nicholson, the painter, having visited in the 1920s came to live in St Ives with his then wife, the sculptor Barbara Hepworth, at the outbreak of the Second World War. They were later joined by the Russian emigrant Naum Gabo, and other artists. These included Peter Lanyon, Terry Frost, Patrick Heron, Bryan Wynter and Roger Hilton. St Ives also houses the Leach Pottery, where Bernard Leach, and his followers championed Japanese inspired studio pottery. Much of this modernist work can be seen in Tate St Ives. The Newlyn Society and Penwith Society of Arts continue to be active, and contemporary visual art is documented in a dedicated online journal.

Local television programmes are provided by BBC South West &amp; ITV West Country. Radio programmes are produced by BBC Radio Cornwall in Truro for the entire county, Heart West, Source FM for the Falmouth and Penryn areas, Coast FM for west Cornwall, Radio St Austell Bay for the St Austell area, NCB Radio for north Cornwall &amp; Pirate FM.

===Music===

Cornwall has a folk music tradition that has survived into the present and is well known for its unusual folk survivals such as Mummers Plays, the Furry Dance in Helston played by the famous Helston Town Band, and Obby Oss in Padstow.

Newlyn is home to a food and music festival that hosts live music, cooking demonstrations, and displays of locally caught fish.

As in other former mining districts of Britain, male voice choirs and brass bands, such as &quot;Brass on the Grass&quot; concerts during the summer at Constantine, are still very popular in Cornwall. Cornwall also has around 40 brass bands, including the six-times National Champions of Great Britain, Camborne Youth Band, and the bands of Lanner and St Dennis.

Cornish players are regular participants in inter-Celtic festivals, and Cornwall itself has several inter-Celtic festivals such as Perranporth&#x27;s Lowender Peran folk festival.

Contemporary musician Richard D. James (also known as Aphex Twin) grew up in Cornwall, as did Luke Vibert and Alex Parks, winner of Fame Academy 2003. Roger Taylor, the drummer from the band Queen was also raised in the county, and currently lives not far from Falmouth. The American singer-songwriter Tori Amos now resides predominantly in North Cornwall not far from Bude with her family. The lutenist, composer and festival director Ben Salfield lives in Truro. Mick Fleetwood of Fleetwood Mac was born in Redruth.

===Literature===
Cornwall&#x27;s rich heritage and dramatic landscape have inspired numerous writers.

====Fiction====

Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch, author of many novels and works of literary criticism, lived in Fowey: his novels are mainly set in Cornwall. Daphne du Maurier lived at Menabilly near Fowey and many of her novels had Cornish settings: &quot;The Loving Spirit&quot;, &quot;Jamaica Inn&quot;, &quot;Rebecca&quot;, &quot;Frenchman&#x27;s Creek&quot;, &quot;The King&#x27;s General&quot; (partially), &quot;My Cousin Rachel&quot;, &quot;The House on the Strand&quot; and &quot;Rule Britannia&quot;. She is also noted for writing &quot;Vanishing Cornwall&quot;. Cornwall provided the inspiration for &quot;The Birds&quot;, one of her terrifying series of short stories, made famous as a film by Alfred Hitchcock. 

Conan Doyle&#x27;s &quot;The Adventure of the Devil&#x27;s Foot&quot; featuring Sherlock Holmes is set in Cornwall. Winston Graham&#x27;s series &quot;Poldark&quot;, Kate Tremayne&#x27;s Adam Loveday series, Susan Cooper&#x27;s novels &quot;Over Sea, Under Stone&quot; and &quot;Greenwitch&quot;, and Mary Wesley&#x27;s &quot;The Camomile Lawn&quot; are all set in Cornwall. Writing under the pseudonym of Alexander Kent, Douglas Reeman sets parts of his Richard Bolitho and Adam Bolitho series in the Cornwall of the late 18th and the early 19th centuries, particularly in Falmouth. Gilbert K. Chesterton placed the action of many of his stories there.

Medieval Cornwall is the setting of the trilogy by Monica Furlong, &quot;Wise Child&quot;, &quot;Juniper&quot; and &quot;Colman&quot;, as well as part of Charles Kingsley&#x27;s &quot;Hereward the Wake&quot;.

Hammond Innes&#x27;s novel, &quot;The Killer Mine&quot;; Charles de Lint&#x27;s novel &quot;The Little Country&quot;; and Chapters 24–25 of J. K. Rowling&#x27;s &quot;Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows&quot; take place in Cornwall (Shell Cottage, on the beach outside the fictional village of Tinworth).

David Cornwell, who wrote espionage novels under the name John le Carré, lived and worked in Cornwall. Nobel Prize-winning novelist William Golding was born in St Columb Minor in 1911, and returned to live near Truro from 1985 until his death in 1993. D. H. Lawrence spent a short time living in Cornwall. Rosamunde Pilcher grew up in Cornwall, and several of her books take place there.

St. Michael&#x27;s Mount in Cornwall (under the fictional name of Mount Polbearne) is the setting of the Little Beach Street Bakery series by Jenny Colgan, who spent holidays in Cornwall as a child. The book series includes &quot;Little Beach Street Bakery&quot; (2014), &quot;Summer at Little Beach Street Bakery&quot; (2015), &quot;Christmas at Little Beach Street Bakery&quot; (2016), and &quot;Sunrise by the Sea&quot; (2021).

In the &quot;Paddington Bear&quot; novels by Michael Bond the title character is said to have landed at an unspecified port in Cornwall having travelled in a lifeboat aboard a cargo ship from darkest Peru. From here he travels to London on a train and eventually arrives at Paddington Station.

Enid Blyton&#x27;s 1953 novel &quot;Five Go Down to the Sea&quot; (the twelfth book in &quot;The Famous Five&quot; series) is set in Cornwall, near the fictional coastal village of Tremannon.

====Poetry====

The late Poet Laureate Sir John Betjeman was famously fond of Cornwall and it featured prominently in his poetry. He is buried in the churchyard at St Enodoc&#x27;s Church, Trebetherick.
Charles Causley, the poet, was born in Launceston and is perhaps the best known of Cornish poets. Jack Clemo and the scholar A. L. Rowse were also notable Cornishmen known for their poetry; The Rev. R. S. Hawker of Morwenstow wrote some poetry which was very popular in the Victorian period. The Scottish poet W. S. Graham lived in West Cornwall from 1944 until his death in 1986.

The poet Laurence Binyon wrote &quot;For the Fallen&quot; (first published in 1914) while sitting on the cliffs between Pentire Point and The Rumps and a stone plaque was erected in 2001 to commemorate the fact. The plaque bears the inscription &quot;FOR THE FALLEN / Composed on these cliffs, 1914&quot;. The plaque also bears below this the fourth stanza (sometimes referred to as &quot;The Ode&quot;) of the poem:
:They shall grow not old, as we that are left grow old
:Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn
:At the going down of the sun and in the morning
:We will remember them

====Other literary works====
Cornwall produced a substantial number of passion plays such as the Ordinalia during the Middle Ages. Many are still extant, and provide valuable information about the Cornish language. See also Cornish literature

Colin Wilson, a prolific writer who is best known for his debut work &quot;The Outsider&quot; (1956) and for &quot;The Mind Parasites&quot; (1967), lived in Gorran Haven, a small village on the southern Cornish coast. The writer D. M. Thomas was born in Redruth but lived and worked in Australia and the United States before returning to his native Cornwall. He has written novels, poetry, and other works, including translations from Russian.

Thomas Hardy&#x27;s drama &quot;The Queen of Cornwall&quot; (1923) is a version of the Tristan story; the second act of Richard Wagner&#x27;s opera &quot;Tristan und Isolde&quot; takes place in Cornwall, as do Gilbert and Sullivan&#x27;s operettas &quot;The Pirates of Penzance&quot; and &quot;Ruddigore&quot;.

Clara Vyvyan was the author of various books about many aspects of Cornish life such as &quot;Our Cornwall&quot;. She once wrote: &quot;The Loneliness of Cornwall is a loneliness unchanged by the presence of men, its freedoms a freedom inexpressible by description or epitaph. Your cannot say Cornwall is this or that. Your cannot describe it in a word or visualise it in a second. You may know the country from east to west and sea to sea, but if you close your eyes and think about it no clear-cut image rises before you. In this quality of changefulness have we possibly surprised the secret of Cornwall&#x27;s wild spirit—in this intimacy the essence of its charm? Cornwall!&quot;.
A level of &quot;Tomb Raider: Legend&quot;, a game dealing with Arthurian Legend, takes place in Cornwall at a museum above King Arthur&#x27;s tomb. The adventure game &quot;The Lost Crown&quot; is set in the fictional town of Saxton, which uses the Cornish settlements of Polperro, Talland and Looe as its model.

The fairy tale Jack the Giant Killer takes place in Cornwall.

&quot;The Mousehole Cat&quot;, a children&#x27;s book written by Antonia Barber and illustrated by Nicola Bayley, is set in the Cornish village Mousehole and based on the legend of Tom Bawcock and the continuing tradition of Tom Bawcock&#x27;s Eve.

===Sports===
The main sports played in Cornwall are rugby, football and cricket. Athletes from Truro have done well in Olympic and Commonwealth Games fencing, winning several medals. Surfing is popular, particularly with tourists, thousands of whom take to the water throughout the summer months. Some towns and villages have bowling clubs, and a wide variety of British sports are played throughout Cornwall. Cornwall is also one of the few places in England where shinty is played; the English Shinty Association is based in Penryn.

The Cornwall County Cricket Club plays as one of the minor counties of English cricket.

Truro, and all of the towns and some villages have football clubs belonging to the Cornwall County Football Association, and some clubs have teams competing higher within the English football league pyramid. Of these, the highest ranked — by two flights — is Truro City F.C., who will be playing in the National League South in the 2023–24 season. Other notable Cornish teams include Mousehole A.F.C., Helston Athletic F.C., and Falmouth Town F.C.

====Rugby football====

Viewed as an &quot;important identifier of ethnic affiliation&quot;, rugby union has become a sport strongly tied to notions of Cornishness. and since the 20th century, rugby union has emerged as one of the most popular spectator and team sports in Cornwall (perhaps the most popular), with professional Cornish rugby footballers being described as a &quot;formidable force&quot;, &quot;naturally independent, both in thought and deed, yet paradoxically staunch English patriots whose top players have represented England with pride and passion&quot;.

In 1985, sports journalist Alan Gibson made a direct connection between the love of rugby in Cornwall and the ancient parish games of hurling and wrestling that existed for centuries before rugby officially began. Among Cornwall&#x27;s native sports are a distinctive form of Celtic wrestling related to Breton wrestling, and Cornish hurling, a kind of mediaeval football played with a silver ball (distinct from Irish Hurling). Cornish Wrestling is Cornwall&#x27;s oldest sport and as Cornwall&#x27;s native tradition it has travelled the world to places like Victoria, Australia and Grass Valley, California following the miners and gold rushes. Cornish hurling now takes place at St. Columb Major, St Ives, and less frequently at Bodmin.

In rugby league, Cornwall R.L.F.C., founded in 2021, will represent the county in the professional league system. The semi-pro club will start in the third tier RFL League 1. At an amateur level, the county is represented by Cornish Rebels.

====Surfing and watersports====

Due to its long coastline, various maritime sports are popular in Cornwall, notably sailing and surfing. International events in both are held in Cornwall. Cornwall hosted the Inter-Celtic Watersports Festival in 2006. Surfing in particular is very popular, as locations such as Bude and Newquay offer some of the best surf in the UK. Pilot gig rowing has been popular for many years and the World championships takes place annually on the Isles of Scilly. On 2 September 2007, 300 surfers at Polzeath beach set a new world record for the highest number of surfers riding the same wave as part of the Global Surf Challenge and part of a project called Earthwave to raise awareness about global warming.

====Fencing====
As its population is comparatively small, and largely rural, Cornwall&#x27;s contribution to British national sport in the United Kingdom has been limited; the county&#x27;s greatest successes have come in fencing. In 2014, half of the men&#x27;s GB team fenced for Truro Fencing Club, and 3 Truro fencers appeared at the 2012 Olympics.

===Cuisine===

Cornwall has a strong culinary heritage. Surrounded on three sides by the sea amid fertile fishing grounds, Cornwall naturally has fresh seafood readily available; Newlyn is the largest fishing port in the UK by value of fish landed, and is known for its wide range of restaurants. Television chef Rick Stein has long operated a fish restaurant in Padstow for this reason, and Jamie Oliver chose to open his second restaurant, Fifteen, in Watergate Bay near Newquay. &quot;MasterChef&quot; host and founder of Smiths of Smithfield, John Torode, in 2007 purchased Seiners in Perranporth. One famous local fish dish is Stargazy pie, a fish-based pie in which the heads of the fish stick through the piecrust, as though &quot;star-gazing&quot;. The pie is cooked as part of traditional celebrations for Tom Bawcock&#x27;s Eve, but is not generally eaten at any other time.
Cornwall is perhaps best known though for its pasties, a savoury dish made with pastry. Today&#x27;s pasties usually contain a filling of beef steak, onion, potato and swede with salt and white pepper, but historically pasties had a variety of different fillings. &quot;Turmut, &#x27;tates and mate&quot; (i.e. &quot;Turnip, potatoes and meat&quot;, turnip being the Cornish and Scottish term for swede, itself an abbreviation of &#x27;Swedish Turnip&#x27;, the British term for rutabaga) describes a filling once very common. For instance, the licky pasty contained mostly leeks, and the herb pasty contained watercress, parsley, and shallots. Pasties are often locally referred to as &quot;oggies&quot;. Historically, pasties were also often made with sweet fillings such as jam, apple and blackberry, plums or cherries.
The wet climate and relatively poor soil of Cornwall make it unsuitable for growing many arable crops. However, it is ideal for growing the rich grass required for dairying, leading to the production of Cornwall&#x27;s other famous export, clotted cream. This forms the basis for many local specialities including Cornish fudge and Cornish ice cream. Cornish clotted cream has Protected Geographical Status under EU law, and cannot be made anywhere else. Its principal manufacturer is A. E. Rodda &amp; Son of Scorrier.

Local cakes and desserts include Saffron cake, Cornish heavy (&quot;hevva&quot;) cake, Cornish fairings biscuits, figgy &#x27;obbin, Cream tea and whortleberry pie.

There are also many types of beers brewed in Cornwall—those produced by Sharp&#x27;s Brewery, Skinner&#x27;s Brewery, Keltek Brewery and St Austell Brewery are the best known—including stouts, ales and other beer types. There is some small scale production of wine, mead and cider.

==Politics and administration==
===Cornish national identity===

 Cornwall is recognised by Cornish and Celtic political groups as one of six Celtic nations, alongside Brittany, Ireland, the Isle of Man, Scotland and Wales. (The Isle of Man Government and the Welsh Government also recognise Asturias and Galicia.) Cornwall is represented, as one of the Celtic nations, at the &quot;Festival Interceltique de Lorient&quot;, an annual celebration of Celtic culture held in Brittany.

Cornwall Council consider Cornwall&#x27;s unique cultural heritage and distinctiveness to be one of the area&#x27;s major assets. They see Cornwall&#x27;s language, landscape, Celtic identity, political history, patterns of settlement, maritime tradition, industrial heritage, and non-conformist tradition, to be among the features making up its &quot;distinctive&quot; culture. However, it is uncertain exactly how many of the people living in Cornwall consider themselves to be Cornish; results from different surveys (including the national census) have varied. In the 2001 census, 7 per cent of people in Cornwall identified themselves as Cornish, rather than British or English. However, activists have argued that this underestimated the true number as there was no explicit &quot;Cornish&quot; option included in the official census form. Subsequent surveys have suggested that as many as 44 per cent identify as Cornish. Many people in Cornwall say that this issue would be resolved if a Cornish option became available on the census. The question and content recommendations for the 2011 census provided an explanation of the process of selecting an ethnic identity which is relevant to the understanding of the often quoted figure of 37,000 who claimed Cornish identity. The 2021 census found that 17% of people in Cornwall identified as being Cornish (89,000), with 14% of people in Cornwall identifying as Cornish-only (80,000). Again there was no tick-box provided, and &quot;Cornish&quot; had to be written-in as &quot;Other&quot;.

On 24 April 2014 it was announced that Cornish people have been granted minority status under the European Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities.

===Local politics===

The ceremonial county of Cornwall is made up of two local government districts; mainland Cornwall, governed by Cornwall Council, and the Isles of Scilly. Cornwall Council, formerly &quot;Cornwall County Council&quot; until 2009, is a unitary authority based at Lys Kernow in Truro. The Isles of Scilly are governed by the &quot;sui generis&quot; Council of the Isles of Scilly based in Hugh Town, and have been administered by their own unitary authority since 1890. They are grouped with Cornwall for other administrative purposes, such as the National Health Service and Devon and Cornwall Police. The county&#x27;s Crown Court is based at the Courts of Justice in Truro. Magistrates&#x27; Courts are found in Truro (but at a different location to the Crown Court) and at Bodmin.

Cornwall County Council was established in 1889 under the Local Government Act 1888, and the Local Government Act 1972 reorganised the county&#x27;s second tier of administration with the formation of six district councils: Caradon, Carrick, Kerrier, North Cornwall, Penwith, and Restormel. In 2009, structural changes to local government in England resulted in the abolition of the six district councils and turned Cornwall Council into a unitary authority. While projected to streamline services, cut red tape and save around £17 million a year, the reorganisation was met with wide opposition, with a poll in 2008 showing 89% disapproval from Cornish residents.

The first elections for the unitary authority were held on 4 June 2009. At the most recent council election in 2021, the Conservative Party won 47 of the 87 seats. Also elected were 16 independent councillors, 13 Liberal Democrats, five from the Labour Party, five from Mebyon Kernow and one Green Party representative. Before the creation of the unitary council, the former county council had 82 seats, the majority of which were held by the Liberal Democrats, elected at the 2005 county council elections. The six former districts had a total of 249 council seats, and the groups with greatest numbers of councillors were Liberal Democrats, Conservatives and Independents.

===Parliament and national politics===

Until 1832, Cornwall was represented by 44 Members of Parliament (MPs) in the House of Commons—more than any other county—reflecting the importance of tin mining to the Crown. Most of the increase in numbers of MPs came between 1529 and 1584 after which there was no change until the Reform Act 1832, which enacted widespread changes to the country&#x27;s electoral system and reduced Cornwall&#x27;s number of MPs to 14. This was reduced further in subsequent boundary commission reviews to better reflect Cornwall&#x27;s population. The county is currently divided into six county constituencies.

The Liberal Party and its successor, the Liberal Democrats, have traditionally been popular in Cornwall; the Liberals won every Cornish seat in 1906 and January 1910, and again in 1929 despite the party finishing third nationally. The Liberal Democrats won every seat in the county in 2005, but lost seats to the Conservatives in 2010 before being wiped out in 2015. The Conservatives won all six Cornish seats in 2015, 2017 and 2019. Following expectation of a Conservative defeat at the 2024 general election, Cornwall was considered a three-party battleground. The Conservatives lost all six seats and the county is currently represented by four Labour and two Liberal Democrat MPs.

Although Cornwall does not have a designated government department, in 2007 while Leader of the Opposition David Cameron created a Shadow Secretary of State for Cornwall. The position was not made into a formal UK Cabinet position when Cameron entered government following the 2010 United Kingdom general election
|-
! rowspan=2 colspan=2 style=text-align:left; | Party
! colspan=5 | Votes (%)
! 2010
! 2015
! 2017
! 2019
! 2024
| style=&quot;color:inherit;background:&quot;|
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Labour
| 24,257 &quot;(8.6%)&quot;
| 36,235 &quot;(12.3%)&quot;
| 83,968 &quot;(26.7%)&quot;
| 74,392 &quot;(23.1%)&quot;
| 77,517 (26.3%)
| style=&quot;color:inherit;background:&quot;|
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Conservative
| 115,016 &quot;(40.9%)&quot;
| 127,079 (43.1%)
| 152,428 (48.4%)
| 173,117 (53.7%)
| 76,817 &quot;(26.1%)&quot;
| style=&quot;color:inherit;background:&quot;|
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Liberal Democrat
| 117,307 (41.8%)
| 66,056 &quot;(22.4%)&quot;
| 73,875 &quot;(23.5%)&quot;
| 62,169 &quot;(19.3%)&quot;
| 73,691 &quot;(25.0%)&quot;
| style=&quot;color:inherit;background:&quot;|
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Reform
|
|
| 48,574 &quot;(16.5%)&quot;
| style=&quot;color:inherit;background:&quot;|
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Green
| 3,573 &quot;(1.3%)&quot;
| 17,241 &quot;(5.8%)&quot;
| 3,218 &quot;(1.0%)&quot;
| 7,139 &quot;(2.2%)&quot;
| 13,778 &quot;(4.7%)&quot;
| style=&quot;color:inherit;background:&quot;|
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | UKIP
| 13,763 &quot;(4.9%)&quot;
| 40,785 &quot;(13.8%)&quot;
| 897 &quot;(0.3%)&quot;
| 111 &quot;(0.0%)&quot;
| style=&quot;color:inherit;background:#e9e9e9&quot;|
| style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Others
| 6,965 &quot;(2.5%)&quot;
| 7,432 &quot;(2.5%)&quot;
| 323 &quot;(0.1%)&quot;
| 5,262 &quot;(1.6%)&quot;
| 3,740 &quot;(1.3%)&quot;
! colspan=&quot;2&quot; style=&quot;text-align:left;&quot; | Total
! 280,881
! 294,828
! 314,709
! 322,079
! 294,228

===Devolution movement===

Cornish nationalists have organised into two political parties: Mebyon Kernow, formed in 1951, and the Cornish Nationalist Party. In addition to the political parties, there are various interest groups such as the Revived Cornish Stannary Parliament and the Celtic League. The Cornish Constitutional Convention was formed in 2000 as a cross-party organisation including representatives from the private, public and voluntary sectors to campaign for the creation of a Cornish Assembly, along the lines of the National Assembly for Wales, Northern Ireland Assembly and the Scottish Parliament. Between 5 March 2000 and December 2001, the campaign collected the signatures of 41,650 Cornish residents endorsing the call for a devolved assembly, along with 8,896 signatories from outside Cornwall. The resulting petition was presented to the Prime Minister, Tony Blair.

==Emergency services==
*Devon and Cornwall Police
*Cornwall Fire and Rescue Service
*South Western Ambulance Service
*Cornwall Air Ambulance
*HM Coastguard
*Cornwall Search &amp; Rescue Team
*British Transport Police

==Economy==

Cornwall is one of the poorest parts of the United Kingdom in terms of per capita GDP and average household incomes. At the same time, parts of the county, especially on the coast, have high house prices, driven up by demand from relatively wealthy retired people and second-home owners. The GVA per head was 65% of the UK average for 2004. The GDP per head for Cornwall and the Isles of Scilly was 79.2% of the EU-27 average for 2004, the UK per head average was 123.0%. In 2011, the latest available figures, Cornwall&#x27;s (including the Isles of Scilly) measure of wealth was 64% of the European average per capita.

Historically mining of tin (and later also of copper) was important in the Cornish economy. The first reference to this appears to be by Pytheas: &quot;see above&quot;. Julius Caesar was the last classical writer to mention the tin trade, which appears to have declined during the Roman occupation. The tin trade revived in the Middle Ages and its importance to the Kings of England resulted in certain privileges being granted to the tinners; the Cornish rebellion of 1497 is attributed to grievances of the tin miners. In the mid-19th century, however, the tin trade again fell into decline. Other primary sector industries that have declined since the 1960s include china clay production, fishing and farming.

Today, the Cornish economy depends heavily on its tourist industry, which makes up around a quarter of the economy. The official measures of deprivation and poverty at district and &#x27;sub-ward&#x27; level show that there is great variation in poverty and prosperity in Cornwall with some areas among the poorest in England and others among the top half in prosperity. For example, the ranking of 32,482 sub-wards in England in the index of multiple deprivation (2006) ranged from 819th (part of Penzance East) to 30,899th (part of Saltash Burraton in Caradon), where the lower number represents the greater deprivation.

Cornwall was one of two UK areas designated as &#x27;less developed regions&#x27; by the European Union, which, prior to Brexit, meant the area qualified for EU Cohesion Policy grants. It was granted Objective 1 status by the European Commission for 2000 to 2006, followed by further rounds of funding known as &#x27;Convergence Funding&#x27; from 2007 to 2013 and &#x27;Growth Programme&#x27; for 2014 to 2020.

===Tourism===

Cornwall has a tourism-based seasonal economy which is estimated to contribute up to 24% of Cornwall&#x27;s gross domestic product. In 2011 tourism brought £1.85 billion into the Cornish economy. Cornwall&#x27;s unique culture, spectacular landscape and mild climate make it a popular tourist destination, despite being somewhat distant from the United Kingdom&#x27;s main centres of population. Surrounded on three sides by the English Channel and Celtic Sea, Cornwall has many miles of beaches and cliffs; the South West Coast Path follows a complete circuit of both coasts. Other tourist attractions include moorland, country gardens, museums, historic and prehistoric sites, and wooded valleys. Five million tourists visit Cornwall each year, mostly drawn from within the UK. Visitors to Cornwall are served by the airport at Newquay, whilst private jets, charters and helicopters are also served by Perranporth airfield; nightsleeper and daily rail services run between Cornwall, London and other regions of the UK.

Newquay and Porthtowan are popular destinations for surfers. In recent years, the Eden Project near St Austell has been a major financial success, drawing one in eight of Cornwall&#x27;s visitors in 2004.

In the summer of 2018, due to the recognition of its beaches and weather through social media and the marketing of travel companies, Cornwall received about 20 per cent more visitors than the usual 4.5 million figure. The sudden rise and demand of tourism in Cornwall caused multiple traffic and safety issues in coastal areas.

In October 2021, Cornwall was longlisted for the UK City of Culture 2025, but failed to make the March 2022 shortlist.

===Fishing===

Other industries include fishing, although this has been significantly re-structured by EU fishing policies ( the Southwest Handline Fishermen&#x27;s Association has started to revive the fishing industry).

===Agriculture===
Agriculture, once an important part of the Cornish economy, has declined significantly relative to other industries. However, there is still a strong dairy industry, with products such as Cornish clotted cream.

===Mining===

Mining of tin and copper was also an industry, but today the derelict mine workings survive only as a World Heritage Site. However, the Camborne School of Mines, which was relocated to Penryn in 2004, is still a world centre of excellence in the field of mining and applied geology and the grant of World Heritage status has attracted funding for conservation and heritage tourism. China clay extraction has also been an important industry in the St Austell area, but this sector has been in decline, and this, coupled with increased mechanisation, has led to a decrease in employment in this sector, although the industry still employs around 2,133 people in Cornwall, and generates over £80 million to the local economy.

In March 2016, a Canadian company, Strongbow Exploration, had acquired, from administration, a 100% interest in the South Crofty tin mine and the associated mineral rights in Cornwall with the aim of reopening the mine and bringing it back to full production. Work is currently ongoing to build a water filtration plant in order to dewater the mine.

===Internet===
Cornwall is the landing point for twenty-two of the world&#x27;s fastest high-speed undersea and transatlantic fibre optic cables, making Cornwall an important hub within Europe&#x27;s Internet infrastructure. The Superfast Cornwall project completed in 2015, and saw 95% of Cornish houses and businesses connected to a fibre-based broadband network, with over 90% of properties able to connect with speeds above 24 Mbit/s.

===Aerospace===
The county&#x27;s newest industry is aviation: Newquay Airport is the home of a growing business park with Enterprise Zone status, known as Aerohub. Also a space launch facility, Spaceport Cornwall, has been established at Newquay, in partnership with Goonhilly satellite tracking station near Helston in south Cornwall.

==Demographics==

Cornwall&#x27;s population was 537,400 in the 2011 census, with a population density of 144 people per square kilometre, ranking it 40th and 41st, respectively, among the 47 counties of England. Cornwall&#x27;s population was 95.7% White British and has a relatively high rate of population growth. At 11.2% in the 1980s and 5.3% in the 1990s, it had the fifth-highest population growth rate of the counties of England. The natural change has been a small population decline, and the population increase is due to inward migration into Cornwall. According to the 1991 census, the population was 469,800.

Cornwall has a relatively high retired population, with 22.9% of pensionable age, compared with 20.3% for the United Kingdom as a whole. This may be due partly to Cornwall&#x27;s rural and coastal geography increasing its popularity as a retirement location, and partly to outward migration of younger residents to more economically diverse areas.

==Education==


Over 10,000 students attend Cornwall&#x27;s two universities, Falmouth University and the University of Exeter (including Camborne School of Mines). Falmouth University is a specialist public university for the creative industries and arts, while the University Of Exeter has two campuses in Cornwall, Truro and Penryn, the latter shared with Falmouth. Penryn campus is home to educational departments such as the rapidly growing Centre for Ecology and Conservation (CEC), the Environment and Sustainability Institute (ESI), and the Institute of Cornish Studies.

Cornwall has a comprehensive education system, with 31 state and eight independent secondary schools. There are three further education colleges: Truro and Penwith College, Cornwall College and Callywith College which opened in September 2017. The Isles of Scilly only has one school, while the former Restormel district has the highest school population, and school year sizes are around 200, with none above 270. Before the introduction of comprehensive schools there were a number of grammar schools and secondary modern schools, e.g. the schools that later became Sir James Smith&#x27;s School and Wadebridge School. There are also primary schools in many villages and towns: e.g. St Mabyn Church of England Primary School.

==See also==
*Christianity in Cornwall
* Index of Cornwall-related articles
* Outline of Cornwall – overview of the wide range of topics covered by this subject
* Tamar Valley AONB
*Duchy of Cornwall

==Notes==
== References ==
== Sources ==
* A second edition was published in 2001 by the House of Stratus, Thirsk: the original text new illustrations and an afterword by Halliday&#x27;s son


==Further reading==
* 
* 
* (illustrated edition Published by Victor Gollancz, London, 1981, , photographs by Christian Browning)
* (Available online on Google Books).
* (Available online on Digital Book Index)
* (Available online on Google Books).
* 
* 
* (eleven chapters by various hands, including three previously published essays)

==External links==
* The History of Parliament: the House of Commons – Cornwall, County, 1386 to 1831</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="0" end="8" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="22" end="39" title="Ceremonial counties of England" label="ceremonial county"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="43" end="61" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="133" end="147" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="176" end="190" title="Cornish people" label="Cornish people"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="222" end="236" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="260" end="265" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="287" end="302" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q245260" start="359" end="370" title="conurbation" label="conurbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010210" start="412" end="419" title="Redruth" label="Redruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="424" end="432" title="Camborne" label="Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357964" start="442" end="453" title="county town" label="county town"/>
<link wikidata="Q180803" start="469" end="474" title="Truro" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q478029" start="613" end="621" title="Falmouth, Cornwall" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208209" start="623" end="631" title="Penzance" label="Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="633" end="640" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="642" end="652" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="669" end="685" title="Local government in England" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="717" end="734" title="Unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="750" end="765" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195166" start="775" end="797" title="Council of the Isles of Scilly" label="unique local authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064295" start="803" end="822" title="Cornish nationalism" label="Cornish nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164335" start="845" end="878" title="constitutional status of Cornwall" label="constitutional status of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q484105" start="897" end="905" title="autonomy" label="autonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832366" start="974" end="994" title="South West Peninsula" label="South West Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q554394" start="1125" end="1128" title="ria" label="ria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242393" start="1175" end="1178" title="River Fal" label="Fal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212567" start="1183" end="1188" title="River Fowey" label="Fowey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="1228" end="1241" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808092" start="1243" end="1255" title="Lizard Point, Cornwall" label="Lizard Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171946" start="1287" end="1314" title="Cornwall Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="Cornwall National Landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q889885" start="1353" end="1364" title="Bodmin Moor" label="Bodmin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q633259" start="1391" end="1410" title="Cornubian batholith" label="Cornubian batholith"/>
<link wikidata="Q578127" start="1488" end="1493" title="River Tamar" label="Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q313136" start="1618" end="1626" title="Dumnonia" label="Dumnonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="1654" end="1661" title="Celtic Britons" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="1754" end="1760" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="1812" end="1827" title="Norman Conquest" label="Norman Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1931" end="1942" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="1947" end="1966" title="Early modern period" label="Early Modern Period"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807843" start="2021" end="2031" title="Tin mining in Britain" label="tin mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="2056" end="2061" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="2082" end="2103" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="2294" end="2310" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q38058796" start="2318" end="2325" title="Extinct language" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494910" start="2364" end="2387" title="Last speaker of the Cornish language" label="end of the 18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2438" end="2445" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="2477" end="2485" title="Compound (linguistics)" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="2581" end="2593" title="Proto-Celtic language" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="2660" end="2668" title="headland" label="headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="2684" end="2691" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2701" end="2708" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2735" end="2740" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2783" end="2802" title="Proto-Indo-European" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q838586" start="2911" end="2919" title="Cornovii (Cornwall)" label="Cornovii"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920493" start="3014" end="3020" title="Exonym and endonym" label="exonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="3024" end="3035" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q188353" start="3125" end="3130" title="Welsh person" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="3141" end="3157" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="3216" end="3228" title="Proto-Celtic" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="3315" end="3322" title="Great Britain" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="3333" end="3345" title="Last Glacial Period" label="last Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="3405" end="3417" title="Palaeolithic" label="Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44155" start="3422" end="3432" title="Mesolithic" label="Mesolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="3473" end="3482" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3495" end="3505" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q114434870" start="3515" end="3546" title="Cornish Bronze Age" label="Cornwall in the Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629081" start="3633" end="3652" title="Atlantic Bronze Age" label="Atlantic Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q277399" start="3784" end="3800" title="British Iron Age" label="British Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="3907" end="3922" title="Celts" label="Celtic-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q849967" start="3943" end="3950" title="Britons (Celtic people)" label="Britons"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="4003" end="4011" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="4017" end="4033" title="Common Brittonic" label="Common Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="4116" end="4123" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="4125" end="4130" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="4132" end="4138" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="4140" end="4147" title="Cumbric language" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="4152" end="4159" title="Pictish language" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171241" start="4255" end="4271" title="Diodorus Siculus" label="Diodorus Siculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q189971" start="4339" end="4346" title="Pytheas" label="Pytheas"/>
<link wikidata="Q41642" start="4456" end="4465" title="Phoenicia" label="Phoenicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621" start="5035" end="5040" title="Haifa" label="Haifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="5042" end="5048" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="5115" end="5121" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5299" end="5331" title="#Economy" label="the section on the economy below"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="5386" end="5412" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman dominance in Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226112" start="5499" end="5515" title="Isca Dumnoniorum" label="Isca Dumnoniorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="5528" end="5534" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11789479" start="5653" end="5663" title="Nanstallon" label="Nanstallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140030" start="5724" end="5740" title="Restormel Castle" label="Restormel Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q744317" start="5785" end="5793" title="Calstock" label="Calstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q681695" start="5875" end="5885" title="Illogan" label="Magor Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="5904" end="5911" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194350" start="5925" end="5947" title="Geographike Hyphegesis" label="Geographike Hyphegesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246122" start="5992" end="6000" title="Dumnonii" label="Dumnonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q838586" start="6144" end="6152" title="Cornovii (Cornwall)" label="Cornovii"/>
<link wikidata="Q313136" start="6195" end="6203" title="Dumnonia" label="Dumnonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462742" start="6302" end="6318" title="Mark of Cornwall" label="Marcus Cunomorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q748777" start="6364" end="6372" title="Tintagel" label="Tintagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462742" start="6405" end="6421" title="Mark of Cornwall" label="Mark of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q507738" start="6488" end="6505" title="Matter of Britain" label="Matter of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q335367" start="6576" end="6594" title="Tristan and Iseult" label="Tristan and Yseult"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="6636" end="6647" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="6745" end="6765" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238693" start="6792" end="6817" title="Historia Regum Britanniae" label="Historia Regum Britanniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q977566" start="6968" end="6977" title="Sub-Roman Britain" label="sub-Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344070" start="6978" end="6989" title="Westcountry" label="Westcountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308964" start="7136" end="7142" title="Nectan of Hartland" label="Nectan"/>
<link wikidata="Q534049" start="7159" end="7165" title="Saint Petroc" label="Petroc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472762" start="7167" end="7172" title="Saint Piran" label="Piran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269091" start="7174" end="7180" title="Samson of Dol" label="Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429157" start="7280" end="7297" title="Battle of Deorham" label="Battle of Deorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q313136" start="7327" end="7335" title="Dumnonia" label="Dumnonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246122" start="7393" end="7401" title="Dumnonii" label="Dumnonii"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="7465" end="7471" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q545010" start="7473" end="7481" title="Centwine of Wessex" label="Centwine"/>
<link wikidata="Q160445" start="7559" end="7570" title="Saint Boniface" label="St Bonifice"/>
<link wikidata="Q122828101" start="7670" end="7687" title="Carmen Rhythmicum" label="Carmen Rhythmicum"/>
<link wikidata="Q709718" start="7699" end="7706" title="Aldhelm" label="Aldhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258552" start="7842" end="7858" title="Celtic Christianity" label="celtic Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="7892" end="7906" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122827977" start="7925" end="7946" title="Epistola ad Geruntium" label="Aldhelm&amp;#x27;s letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3761244" start="7950" end="7962" title="Geraint of Dumnonia" label="King Geraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q564369" start="7974" end="7990" title="Annales Cambriae" label="Annales Cambriae"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871203" start="8059" end="8076" title="Battle of Hehil" label="&amp;quot;Hehil&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q451580" start="8182" end="8190" title="King Ine" label="King Ine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516765" start="8706" end="8716" title="Gafulforda" label="Gafulforda"/>
<link wikidata="Q18330892" start="8928" end="8951" title="Battle of Hingston Down" label="Battle of Hingston Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166039" start="9014" end="9022" title="Donyarth" label="Dumgarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="9175" end="9191" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q345524" start="9224" end="9245" title="William of Malmesbury" label="William of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q170017" start="9283" end="9292" title="Athelstan" label="Athelstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q578127" start="9395" end="9406" title="River Tamar" label="River Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="9468" end="9474" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q868142" start="9556" end="9570" title="Bishop of Cornwall" label="Cornish Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="9670" end="9680" title="Edgar, King of England" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936684" start="9831" end="9850" title="Bodmin manumissions" label="Bodmin Manumissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="9907" end="9920" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q159597" start="10067" end="10083" title="Harold Godwinson" label="Harold Godwinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936684" start="10106" end="10125" title="Bodmin manumissions" label="Bodmin manumissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q376662" start="10255" end="10272" title="Brian of Brittany" label="Brian of Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277252" start="10295" end="10311" title="Earl of Cornwall" label="Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284959" start="10354" end="10366" title="Edith Ditmas" label="Edith Ditmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="10535" end="10543" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q335367" start="10659" end="10677" title="Tristan and Iseult" label="Tristan and Iseult"/>
<link wikidata="Q4506" start="10701" end="10707" title="Béroul" label="Béroul"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="10777" end="10792" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q724235" start="10900" end="10924" title="Robert, Count of Mortain" label="Robert, Count of Mortain"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="10942" end="10954" title="William the Conqueror" label="King William"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838051" start="11031" end="11046" title="Trematon Castle" label="Trematon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038445" start="11254" end="11279" title="Richard Rufus of Cornwall" label="Richard Rufus of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q33850" start="11361" end="11374" title="Norman French" label="Norman French"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="11392" end="11397" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600119" start="11475" end="11494" title="Stannary law" label="Stannary Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="11534" end="11551" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="Duchy of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="11557" end="11573" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="11692" end="11698" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600119" start="11734" end="11753" title="stannary parliament" label="stannary parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578557" start="11897" end="11903" title="equity (law)" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122086" start="12618" end="12626" title="Wrecking (shipwreck)" label="wreckers"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="12744" end="12753" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="12818" end="12830" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="12926" end="12931" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q212746" start="12964" end="12985" title="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle" label="Anglo-Saxon Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="13036" end="13049" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="13170" end="13182" title="latinisation of names" label="latinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="13444" end="13457" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330018" start="13509" end="13525" title="prevailing winds" label="prevailing winds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535329" start="13600" end="13609" title="resistance (geology)" label="resistant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="13712" end="13717" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q578127" start="13758" end="13769" title="River Tamar" label="River Tamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773974" start="13811" end="13826" title="Marsland Valley" label="Marsland Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q81499" start="13931" end="13941" title="Celtic Sea" label="Celtic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q848212" start="14058" end="14067" title="Boscastle" label="Boscastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q955886" start="14072" end="14081" title="St Gennys" label="St Gennys"/>
<link wikidata="Q984974" start="14203" end="14207" title="Bude" label="Bude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298857" start="14209" end="14217" title="Polzeath" label="Polzeath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974113" start="14219" end="14232" title="Watergate Bay" label="Watergate Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q390260" start="14234" end="14245" title="Perranporth" label="Perranporth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231794" start="14247" end="14257" title="Porthtowan" label="Porthtowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455353" start="14259" end="14272" title="Fistral Beach" label="Fistral Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="14274" end="14281" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025776" start="14283" end="14291" title="St Agnes, Cornwall" label="St Agnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q724182" start="14293" end="14300" title="St Ives, Cornwall" label="St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5624132" start="14325" end="14336" title="Gyllyngvase" label="Gyllyngvase"/>
<link wikidata="Q478029" start="14346" end="14354" title="Falmouth, Cornwall" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237198" start="14378" end="14388" title="Praa Sands" label="Praa Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686784" start="14466" end="14479" title="Hayle Estuary" label="Hayle Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778836" start="14503" end="14514" title="River Camel" label="River Camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q943931" start="14531" end="14538" title="Padstow" label="Padstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q534730" start="14543" end="14547" title="Rock, Cornwall" label="Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443285" start="14589" end="14595" title="Newlyn" label="Newlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025790" start="14906" end="14911" title="Fowey" label="Fowey"/>
<link wikidata="Q480902" start="15021" end="15038" title="wave-cut platform" label="wave-cut platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025780" start="15100" end="15108" title="Polperro" label="Polperro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024896" start="15165" end="15169" title="Looe" label="Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395654" start="15177" end="15187" title="River Looe" label="River Looe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41177" start="15356" end="15363" title="granite" label="granite"/>
<link wikidata="Q889885" start="15384" end="15395" title="Bodmin Moor" label="Bodmin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223679" start="15532" end="15542" title="Hensbarrow" label="Hensbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="15552" end="15562" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044151" start="15564" end="15576" title="Carnmenellis" label="Carnmenellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="15593" end="15601" title="Camborne" label="Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212501" start="15611" end="15618" title="Penwith" label="Penwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q169532" start="15622" end="15637" title="Land&amp;#x27;s End" label="Land&amp;#x27;s End"/>
<link wikidata="Q633259" start="15746" end="15765" title="Cornubian batholith" label="Cornubian batholith"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="15809" end="15817" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="15847" end="15862" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="15968" end="15979" title="sedimentary" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q380971" start="16009" end="16021" title="metamorphism" label="metamorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864409" start="16026" end="16040" title="Mineralization (geology)" label="mineralisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="16166" end="16169" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="16201" end="16211" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="16231" end="16235" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865570" start="16261" end="16278" title="Mining in Cornwall" label="mined in Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="16346" end="16356" title="Kaolinite" label="China Clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121" start="16519" end="16527" title="pasture" label="pastoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="16688" end="16696" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="16697" end="16706" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q207079" start="16711" end="16716" title="slate" label="slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="16753" end="16766" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193075" start="16786" end="16799" title="Culm Measures" label="Culm Measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q268642" start="16895" end="16912" title="Crackington Haven" label="Crackington Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660550" start="16973" end="17004" title="Geology of Lizard, Cornwall" label="geology of the Lizard peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q605396" start="17074" end="17083" title="ophiolite" label="ophiolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q103910" start="17188" end="17199" title="Precambrian" label="Precambrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q737339" start="17200" end="17212" title="serpentinite" label="serpentinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817686" start="17257" end="17269" title="Kynance Cove" label="Kynance Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143398" start="17351" end="17366" title="ultramafic rock" label="ultramafic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134318" start="17515" end="17528" title="Erica vagans" label="Cornish Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177796" start="17560" end="17573" title="county flower" label="county flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="17681" end="17701" title="Cornwall Council" label="council headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q478029" start="17720" end="17728" title="Falmouth, Cornwall" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q941861" start="17751" end="17769" title="St Just in Penwith" label="St Just in Penwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q208209" start="17846" end="17854" title="Penzance" label="Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q724182" start="17873" end="17880" title="St Ives, Cornwall" label="St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q943931" start="17885" end="17892" title="Padstow" label="Padstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="17982" end="17989" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q984974" start="18118" end="18122" title="Bude" label="Bude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="18218" end="18226" title="Camborne" label="Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010210" start="18346" end="18353" title="Redruth" label="Redruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="18564" end="18574" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="18627" end="18637" title="kaolin" label="china clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="18671" end="18683" title="St Austell parishes" label="new parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="18820" end="18825" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649195" start="18913" end="18916" title="A38 road" label="A38"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="18944" end="18952" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7680729" start="18961" end="18973" title="Tamar Bridge" label="Tamar Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994597" start="18990" end="18997" title="Saltash" label="Saltash"/>
<link wikidata="Q280125" start="19003" end="19011" title="A39 road" label="A39 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q808532" start="19036" end="19046" title="Barnstaple" label="Barnstaple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471205" start="19064" end="19078" title="North Cornwall" label="North Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="19107" end="19110" title="A30 road" label="A30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824663" start="19142" end="19153" title="M5 motorway" label="M5 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="19157" end="19163" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q287590" start="19193" end="19203" title="Launceston, England" label="Launceston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826765" start="19292" end="19306" title="Torpoint Ferry" label="Torpoint Ferry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041269" start="19327" end="19335" title="Torpoint" label="Torpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q74269" start="19364" end="19371" title="Hamoaze" label="Hamoaze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570586" start="19392" end="19411" title="Royal Albert Bridge" label="Royal Albert Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="19421" end="19444" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="19734" end="19741" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="19746" end="19753" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="19886" end="19901" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305515" start="19980" end="20002" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Airport (Isles of Scilly)" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q474682" start="20057" end="20080" title="Land&amp;#x27;s End Airport" label="Land&amp;#x27;s End Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q477555" start="20100" end="20115" title="Newquay Airport" label="Newquay Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8999" start="20197" end="20211" title="Exeter Airport" label="Exeter Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q248744" start="20377" end="20392" title="Reindeer lichen" label="Reindeer lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914772" start="20470" end="20494" title="Biodiversity Action Plan" label="Biodiversity Action Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497956" start="20606" end="20617" title="F. H. Davey" label="F. H. Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q455438" start="20678" end="20688" title="A. O. Hume" label="A. O. Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="20880" end="20889" title="temperate" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="20890" end="20905" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="20907" end="20936" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q130905" start="21133" end="21144" title="Gulf Stream" label="Gulf Stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="21208" end="21223" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q925615" start="22145" end="22159" title="Hardiness zone" label="Hardiness zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="22420" end="22434" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="22687" end="22703" title="Brythonic languages" label="Brythonic branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="22711" end="22733" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398539" start="22834" end="22841" title="List of revived languages" label="revived"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="22929" end="22935" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="22940" end="22945" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="22967" end="22985" title="Goidelic languages" label="Goidelic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710684" start="23188" end="23200" title="Henry Jenner" label="Henry Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="23530" end="23581" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175075" start="23747" end="23754" title="costean" label="costean"/>
<link wikidata="Q639293" start="23756" end="23762" title="gossan" label="gossan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619250" start="23764" end="23771" title="gunnies" label="gunnies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630132" start="23785" end="23788" title="vug" label="vug"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472762" start="24379" end="24390" title="Saint Piran" label="Saint Piran"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="24571" end="24579" title="heraldry" label="heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="24805" end="24811" title="Brittany" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12188" start="24824" end="24837" title="Flag of Brittany" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426512" start="24874" end="24882" title="Kroaz Du" label="Kroaz Du"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443285" start="25143" end="25149" title="Newlyn" label="Newlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q557532" start="25201" end="25214" title="Newlyn School" label="Newlyn School"/>
<link wikidata="Q360724" start="25247" end="25262" title="Stanhope Forbes" label="Stanhope Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q386247" start="25264" end="25280" title="Elizabeth Forbes (artist)" label="Elizabeth Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740505" start="25282" end="25296" title="Norman Garstin" label="Norman Garstin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372034" start="25301" end="25314" title="Lamorna Birch" label="Lamorna Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="25342" end="25356" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q40909" start="25361" end="25375" title="Virginia Woolf" label="Virginia Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q281637" start="25416" end="25429" title="Ben Nicholson" label="Ben Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q234109" start="25529" end="25545" title="Barbara Hepworth" label="Barbara Hepworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="25570" end="25586" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q309482" start="25635" end="25644" title="Naum Gabo" label="Naum Gabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q869919" start="25680" end="25692" title="Peter Lanyon" label="Peter Lanyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q320336" start="25694" end="25705" title="Terry Frost" label="Terry Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563132" start="25707" end="25720" title="Patrick Heron" label="Patrick Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q995133" start="25722" end="25734" title="Bryan Wynter" label="Bryan Wynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q321841" start="25739" end="25751" title="Roger Hilton" label="Roger Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898210" start="25798" end="25811" title="Bernard Leach" label="Bernard Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577210" start="25919" end="25931" title="Tate St Ives" label="Tate St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165381" start="25956" end="25979" title="Penwith Society of Arts" label="Penwith Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876715" start="26121" end="26135" title="BBC Spotlight" label="BBC South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975143" start="26142" end="26158" title="ITV West Country" label="ITV West Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401225" start="26193" end="26211" title="BBC Radio Cornwall" label="BBC Radio Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q65066887" start="26244" end="26254" title="Heart West" label="Heart West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565150" start="26256" end="26265" title="Source FM" label="Source FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165380" start="26301" end="26309" title="Coast FM (West Cornwall)" label="Coast FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281062" start="26329" end="26349" title="Radio St Austell Bay" label="Radio St Austell Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998581" start="26375" end="26384" title="NCB Radio" label="NCB Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197792" start="26410" end="26419" title="Pirate FM" label="Pirate FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="26450" end="26460" title="folk music" label="folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q350800" start="26563" end="26575" title="Mummers Play" label="Mummers Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509718" start="26582" end="26593" title="Furry Dance" label="Furry Dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012535" start="26597" end="26604" title="Helston" label="Helston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710591" start="26626" end="26643" title="Helston Town Band" label="Helston Town Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540507" start="26649" end="26657" title="Obby Oss" label="Obby Oss"/>
<link wikidata="Q943931" start="26661" end="26668" title="Padstow" label="Padstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443285" start="26671" end="26677" title="Newlyn" label="Newlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154562" start="26870" end="26880" title="Brass band (British style)" label="brass band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070635" start="26952" end="26963" title="Constantine, Kerrier" label="Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487245" start="27141" end="27147" title="Lanner, Cornwall" label="Lanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q390260" start="27295" end="27306" title="Perranporth" label="Perranporth"/>
<link wikidata="Q223161" start="27367" end="27383" title="Aphex Twin" label="Richard D. James"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352724" start="27439" end="27450" title="Luke Vibert" label="Luke Vibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911007" start="27455" end="27465" title="Alex Parks" label="Alex Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q895680" start="27477" end="27489" title="Fame Academy" label="Fame Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15880" start="27496" end="27508" title="Roger Taylor (Queen drummer)" label="Roger Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="27536" end="27541" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q478029" start="27606" end="27614" title="Falmouth, Cornwall" label="Falmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193744" start="27647" end="27656" title="Tori Amos" label="Tori Amos"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="27740" end="27744" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213750" start="27781" end="27793" title="Ben Salfield" label="Ben Salfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q508439" start="27810" end="27824" title="Mick Fleetwood" label="Mick Fleetwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="27828" end="27841" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010210" start="27854" end="27861" title="Redruth" label="Redruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q322871" start="27984" end="28008" title="Arthur Quiller-Couch" label="Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="28120" end="28137" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854609" start="28147" end="28156" title="Menabilly" label="Menabilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749102" start="28219" end="28236" title="The Loving Spirit" label="The Loving Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202572" start="28250" end="28261" title="Jamaica Inn (novel)" label="Jamaica Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334940" start="28275" end="28282" title="Rebecca (novel)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q16385748" start="28296" end="28318" title="Frenchman&amp;#x27;s Creek (novel)" label="Frenchman&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3794105" start="28332" end="28355" title="The King&amp;#x27;s General" label="The King&amp;#x27;s General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273493" start="28381" end="28397" title="My Cousin Rachel" label="My Cousin Rachel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740716" start="28411" end="28434" title="The House on the Strand" label="The House on the Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010709" start="28451" end="28465" title="Rule Britannia (novel)" label="Rule Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7718091" start="28579" end="28588" title="The Birds (story)" label="The Birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="28668" end="28684" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q35610" start="28688" end="28699" title="Arthur Conan Doyle" label="Conan Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466799" start="28713" end="28751" title="The Adventure of the Devil&amp;#x27;s Foot" label="The Adventure of the Devil&amp;#x27;s Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653" start="28768" end="28783" title="Sherlock Holmes" label="Sherlock Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q598029" start="28804" end="28818" title="Winston Graham" label="Winston Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780164" start="28839" end="28846" title="Poldark" label="Poldark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375827" start="28854" end="28867" title="Kate Tremayne" label="Kate Tremayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679423" start="28875" end="28887" title="Adam Loveday" label="Adam Loveday"/>
<link wikidata="Q236848" start="28896" end="28908" title="Susan Cooper" label="Susan Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283906" start="28929" end="28950" title="Over Sea, Under Stone" label="Over Sea, Under Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q446943" start="28989" end="29000" title="Mary Wesley" label="Mary Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721095" start="29014" end="29031" title="The Camomile Lawn" label="The Camomile Lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252469" start="29110" end="29124" title="Douglas Reeman" label="Douglas Reeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719048" start="29143" end="29158" title="Richard Bolitho" label="Richard Bolitho"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="29272" end="29293" title="Gilbert K. Chesterton" label="Gilbert K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994401" start="29394" end="29408" title="Monica Furlong" label="Monica Furlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5738318" start="29527" end="29544" title="Hereward the Wake (novel)" label="Hereward the Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334230" start="29553" end="29566" title="Hammond Innes" label="Hammond Innes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066587" start="29610" end="29625" title="Charles de Lint" label="Charles de Lint"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="29693" end="29706" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q46758" start="29720" end="29756" title="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows" label="Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q209641" start="29918" end="29931" title="John le Carré" label="John le Carré"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="29963" end="29982" title="Nobel Prize in Literature" label="Nobel Prize-winning"/>
<link wikidata="Q44183" start="29992" end="30007" title="William Golding" label="William Golding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997404" start="30020" end="30035" title="St Columb Minor" label="St Columb Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="30112" end="30126" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q254240" start="30166" end="30183" title="Rosamunde Pilcher" label="Rosamunde Pilcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431121" start="30249" end="30273" title="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Mount" label="St. Michael&amp;#x27;s Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177138" start="30391" end="30403" title="Jenny Colgan" label="Jenny Colgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q632908" start="30694" end="30709" title="Paddington Bear" label="Paddington Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q122127" start="30726" end="30738" title="Michael Bond" label="Michael Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746393" start="30839" end="30847" title="Lifeboat (shipboard)" label="lifeboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105999" start="30857" end="30867" title="cargo ship" label="cargo ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="30881" end="30885" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="30911" end="30917" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q214788" start="30955" end="30973" title="Paddington Station" label="Paddington Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q192069" start="30976" end="30987" title="Enid Blyton" label="Enid Blyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455950" start="31012" end="31035" title="Five Go Down to the Sea" label="Five Go Down to the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134354" start="31069" end="31084" title="The Famous Five" label="The Famous Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="31194" end="31207" title="Poet Laureate" label="Poet Laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="31208" end="31225" title="John Betjeman" label="Sir John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593035" start="31333" end="31370" title="St Enodoc&amp;#x27;s Church, Trebetherick" label="St Enodoc&amp;#x27;s Church, Trebetherick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076146" start="31372" end="31387" title="Charles Causley" label="Charles Causley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111711" start="31470" end="31480" title="Jack Clemo" label="Jack Clemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q335484" start="31497" end="31508" title="A. L. Rowse" label="A. L. Rowse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158892" start="31571" end="31583" title="Robert Stephen Hawker" label="R. S. Hawker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945967" start="31682" end="31694" title="W. S. Graham" label="W. S. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807972" start="31763" end="31778" title="Laurence Binyon" label="Laurence Binyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165243" start="31874" end="31887" title="Pentire Head" label="Pentire Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q42953329" start="32137" end="32156" title="Ode of Remembrance" label="&amp;quot;The Ode&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349065" start="32419" end="32431" title="passion play" label="passion play"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697773" start="32445" end="32454" title="Ordinalia" label="Ordinalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q900642" start="32572" end="32590" title="Cornish literature" label="Cornish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q368831" start="32592" end="32604" title="Colin Wilson" label="Colin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428090" start="32667" end="32679" title="The Outsider (Colin Wilson)" label="The Outsider"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751516" start="32707" end="32725" title="The Mind Parasites" label="The Mind Parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586852" start="32749" end="32761" title="Gorran Haven" label="Gorran Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969995" start="32821" end="32833" title="D. M. Thomas" label="D. M. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="33037" end="33049" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129262118" start="33069" end="33090" title="The Famous Tragedy of the Queen of Cornwall" label="The Queen of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511" start="33157" end="33171" title="Richard Wagner" label="Richard Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324254" start="33191" end="33209" title="Tristan und Isolde" label="Tristan und Isolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146602" start="33247" end="33267" title="Gilbert and Sullivan" label="Gilbert and Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215463" start="33291" end="33314" title="The Pirates of Penzance" label="The Pirates of Penzance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091683" start="33331" end="33340" title="Ruddigore" label="Ruddigore"/>
<link wikidata="Q98589638" start="33349" end="33361" title="Clara Vyvyan" label="Clara Vyvyan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34052" end="34071" title="Tomb Raider: Legend" label="Tomb Raider: Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157362" start="34365" end="34386" title="Jack the Giant Killer" label="Jack the Giant Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752515" start="34419" end="34436" title="The Mousehole Cat" label="The Mousehole Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776225" start="34478" end="34492" title="Antonia Barber" label="Antonia Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q48803198" start="34512" end="34525" title="Nicola Bayley" label="Nicola Bayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951055" start="34557" end="34566" title="Mousehole" label="Mousehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814906" start="34594" end="34605" title="Tom Bawcock" label="Tom Bawcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814908" start="34638" end="34660" title="Tom Bawcock&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="Tom Bawcock&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="34715" end="34720" title="Rugby union" label="rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="34722" end="34730" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="34735" end="34742" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="34782" end="34789" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q178340" start="34794" end="34812" title="Commonwealth Games" label="Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="34846" end="34853" title="Surfing" label="Surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172010" start="35105" end="35111" title="Cornwall Shinty Club" label="places"/>
<link wikidata="Q850256" start="35129" end="35135" title="shinty" label="shinty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378378" start="35151" end="35177" title="English Shinty Association" label="English Shinty Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025788" start="35190" end="35196" title="Penryn, Cornwall" label="Penryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171969" start="35203" end="35231" title="Cornwall County Cricket Club" label="Cornwall County Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869173" start="35252" end="35285" title="minor counties of English cricket" label="minor counties of English cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="35339" end="35347" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q18283749" start="35371" end="35407" title="Cornwall County Football Association" label="Cornwall County Football Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q18559" start="35463" end="35494" title="English football league pyramid" label="English football league pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392059" start="35547" end="35562" title="Truro City F.C." label="Truro City F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q58915" start="35591" end="35612" title="National League South" label="National League South"/>
<link wikidata="Q65044012" start="35672" end="35688" title="Mousehole A.F.C." label="Mousehole A.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5710577" start="35690" end="35711" title="Helston Athletic F.C." label="Helston Athletic F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5432598" start="35717" end="35735" title="Falmouth Town F.C." label="Falmouth Town F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="35830" end="35841" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378377" start="35930" end="35941" title="rugby union in Cornwall" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706698" start="36341" end="36352" title="Alan Gibson" label="Alan Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="36618" end="36624" title="Brittany" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618077" start="36640" end="36655" title="Hurling the Silver Ball" label="Cornish hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q213711" start="36727" end="36740" title="Hurling" label="Irish Hurling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354339" start="36743" end="36760" title="Cornish Wrestling" label="Cornish Wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="36875" end="36894" title="Victoria, Australia" label="Victoria, Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q834337" start="36899" end="36923" title="Grass Valley, California" label="Grass Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="36949" end="36960" title="gold rushes" label="gold rushes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851842" start="36997" end="37013" title="St. Columb Major" label="St. Columb Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q724182" start="37015" end="37022" title="St Ives, Cornwall" label="St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q889888" start="37047" end="37053" title="Bodmin" label="Bodmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962" start="37059" end="37071" title="rugby league" label="rugby league"/>
<link wikidata="Q109381507" start="37073" end="37090" title="Cornwall R.L.F.C." label="Cornwall R.L.F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5070107" start="37217" end="37229" title="RFL League 1" label="RFL League 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951749" start="37281" end="37295" title="Cornish Rebels" label="Cornish Rebels"/>
<link wikidata="Q159992" start="37427" end="37434" title="surfing" label="surfing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="37520" end="37531" title="Watersports" label="Watersports"/>
<link wikidata="Q984974" start="37610" end="37614" title="Bude" label="Bude"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="37619" end="37626" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003868" start="37666" end="37675" title="Cornish pilot gig" label="Pilot gig"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="37771" end="37786" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298857" start="37824" end="37832" title="Polzeath" label="Polzeath"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="38018" end="38032" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282250" start="38161" end="38188" title="sport in the United Kingdom" label="sport in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q13443285" start="38568" end="38574" title="Newlyn" label="Newlyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331770" start="38702" end="38712" title="Rick Stein" label="Rick Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q943931" start="38752" end="38759" title="Padstow" label="Padstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q190051" start="38781" end="38793" title="Jamie Oliver" label="Jamie Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681429" start="38831" end="38838" title="Fifteen (restaurant)" label="Fifteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974113" start="38843" end="38856" title="Watergate Bay" label="Watergate Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="38862" end="38869" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q45726" start="38871" end="38893" title="MasterChef (UK TV series)" label="&amp;quot;MasterChef&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213772" start="38936" end="38947" title="John Torode" label="John Torode"/>
<link wikidata="Q390260" start="38978" end="38989" title="Perranporth" label="Perranporth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7601887" start="39021" end="39033" title="Stargazy pie" label="Stargazy pie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814908" start="39204" end="39226" title="Tom Bawcock&amp;#x27;s Eve" label="Tom Bawcock&amp;#x27;s Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q126777" start="39320" end="39327" title="pasty" label="pasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q158464" start="39442" end="39447" title="Swedish turnip" label="swede"/>
<link wikidata="Q158464" start="39753" end="39761" title="rutabaga" label="rutabaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373885" start="40337" end="40350" title="clotted cream" label="clotted cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q379138" start="40419" end="40424" title="fudge" label="fudge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13233" start="40437" end="40446" title="ice cream" label="ice cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q363268" start="40474" end="40503" title="Geographical indications and traditional specialities in the European Union" label="Protected Geographical Status"/>
<link wikidata="Q18640398" start="40582" end="40603" title="A. E. Rodda &amp;amp; Son" label="A. E. Rodda &amp;amp; Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q112247828" start="40651" end="40663" title="Saffron bun" label="Saffron cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695228" start="40665" end="40703" title="Heavy cake" label="Cornish heavy (&amp;quot;hevva&amp;quot;) cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171851" start="40705" end="40721" title="Cornish fairings" label="Cornish fairings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139315" start="40751" end="40760" title="Cream tea" label="Cream tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490280" start="40856" end="40876" title="Sharp&amp;#x27;s Brewery" label="Sharp&amp;#x27;s Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535476" start="40878" end="40900" title="Skinner&amp;#x27;s Brewery" label="Skinner&amp;#x27;s Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592564" start="40921" end="40939" title="St Austell Brewery" label="St Austell Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q217825" start="40969" end="40974" title="stout" label="stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q208385" start="40977" end="40980" title="ale" label="ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q184442" start="41050" end="41054" title="mead" label="mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="41059" end="41064" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="41235" end="41243" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="41258" end="41269" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112593" start="41296" end="41318" title="Isle of Man Government" label="Isle of Man Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="41327" end="41343" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="41359" end="41367" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908" start="41372" end="41379" title="Galicia (Spain)" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322517" start="41450" end="41483" title="Festival Interceltique de Lorient" label="Festival Interceltique de Lorient"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="42122" end="42133" title="2001 United Kingdom census" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="42642" end="42653" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="42835" end="42846" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="43195" end="43203" title="European Union" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q506020" start="43204" end="43266" title="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities" label="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q180673" start="43295" end="43312" title="ceremonial county" label="ceremonial county"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="43402" end="43418" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="43428" end="43443" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160920" start="43525" end="43542" title="unitary authority" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q26609404" start="43552" end="43562" title="Lys Kernow" label="Lys Kernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q180803" start="43566" end="43571" title="Truro" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q311290" start="43619" end="43630" title="sui generis" label="sui generis"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195166" start="43637" end="43667" title="Council of the Isles of Scilly" label="Council of the Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q917474" start="43677" end="43686" title="Hugh Town" label="Hugh Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="43836" end="43859" title="National Health Service (England)" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267784" start="43864" end="43889" title="Devon and Cornwall Constabulary" label="Devon and Cornwall Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q54818049" start="43891" end="43920" title="Truro Crown Court" label="The county&amp;#x27;s Crown Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q889888" start="44065" end="44071" title="Bodmin" label="Bodmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664051" start="44132" end="44157" title="Local Government Act 1888" label="Local Government Act 1888"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510461" start="44167" end="44192" title="Local Government Act 1972" label="Local Government Act 1972"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035347" start="44298" end="44305" title="Caradon" label="Caradon"/>
<link wikidata="Q368068" start="44307" end="44314" title="Carrick, Cornwall" label="Carrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212491" start="44316" end="44323" title="Kerrier" label="Kerrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471205" start="44325" end="44339" title="North Cornwall" label="North Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212501" start="44341" end="44348" title="Penwith" label="Penwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756244" start="44354" end="44363" title="Restormel" label="Restormel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4615461" start="44374" end="44423" title="2009 structural changes to local government in England" label="structural changes to local government in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761743" start="44577" end="44585" title="red tape" label="red tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171965" start="44744" end="44759" title="2009 Cornwall Council election" label="first elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q96370934" start="44819" end="44855" title="2021 Cornwall Council election" label="most recent council election in 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="44861" end="44879" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="44925" end="44936" title="independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="44953" end="44970" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="44986" end="44998" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q161957" start="45010" end="45023" title="Mebyon Kernow" label="Mebyon Kernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="45032" end="45043" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888161" start="45217" end="45246" title="2005 United Kingdom local elections" label="2005 county council elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="45499" end="45520" title="Member of Parliament (UK)" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="45534" end="45550" title="House of Commons (UK)" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="45740" end="45755" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q182985" start="45812" end="45828" title="electoral system" label="electoral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949922" start="45917" end="45936" title="Boundary commissions (United Kingdom)" label="boundary commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593576" start="46028" end="46053" title="List of Parliamentary constituencies in Cornwall" label="six county constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="46060" end="46073" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076606" start="46200" end="46204" title="1906 United Kingdom general election" label="1906"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075752" start="46209" end="46221" title="January 1910 United Kingdom general election" label="January 1910"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="46236" end="46240" title="1929 United Kingdom general election" label="1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q428598" start="46341" end="46345" title="2005 United Kingdom general election" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="46386" end="46390" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586935" start="46417" end="46421" title="2015 United Kingdom general election" label="2015"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052149" start="46476" end="46480" title="2017 United Kingdom general election" label="2017"/>
<link wikidata="Q30173038" start="46485" end="46489" title="2019 United Kingdom general election" label="2019"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851988" start="46545" end="46566" title="2024 United Kingdom general election" label="2024 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="46825" end="46849" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q215622" start="47020" end="47056" title="2010 United Kingdom general election" label="2010 United Kingdom general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="47258" end="47264" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="47483" end="47495" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9624" start="47695" end="47711" title="Liberal Democrats (UK)" label="Liberal Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q104721252" start="47932" end="47938" title="Reform UK" label="Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q9669" start="48058" end="48063" title="Green Party of England and Wales" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q10647" start="48287" end="48291" title="UKIP" label="UKIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q161957" start="48841" end="48854" title="Mebyon Kernow" label="Mebyon Kernow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105878" start="48880" end="48905" title="Cornish Nationalist Party" label="Cornish Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318547" start="48991" end="49026" title="Revived Cornish Stannary Parliament" label="Revived Cornish Stannary Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q226050" start="49035" end="49048" title="Celtic League" label="Celtic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171802" start="49244" end="49260" title="Cornish Assembly" label="Cornish Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q493517" start="49285" end="49312" title="National Assembly for Wales" label="National Assembly for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q285714" start="49314" end="49339" title="Northern Ireland Assembly" label="Northern Ireland Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q206171" start="49348" end="49367" title="Scottish Parliament" label="Scottish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="49631" end="49641" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267784" start="49668" end="49693" title="Devon and Cornwall Police" label="Devon and Cornwall Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171976" start="49695" end="49727" title="Cornwall Fire and Rescue Service" label="Cornwall Fire and Rescue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568903" start="49729" end="49760" title="South Western Ambulance Service" label="South Western Ambulance Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171944" start="49762" end="49784" title="Cornwall Air Ambulance" label="Cornwall Air Ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607721" start="49786" end="49799" title="HM Coastguard" label="HM Coastguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172007" start="49801" end="49834" title="Cornwall Search &amp;amp; Rescue Team" label="Cornwall Search &amp;amp; Rescue Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q174588" start="49836" end="49860" title="British Transport Police" label="British Transport Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q994873" start="50167" end="50170" title="Gross value added" label="GVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180209" start="50254" end="50269" title="Isles of Scilly" label="Isles of Scilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865570" start="50510" end="50523" title="Mining in Cornwall and Devon" label="mining of tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="50666" end="50679" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="50725" end="50728" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q500395" start="50945" end="50970" title="Cornish rebellion of 1497" label="Cornish rebellion of 1497"/>
<link wikidata="Q55640" start="51097" end="51111" title="primary sector" label="primary sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q268592" start="51112" end="51122" title="Industry (economics)" label="industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="51166" end="51176" title="china clay" label="china clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="51924" end="51938" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7888194" start="51956" end="51962" title="Brexit" label="Brexit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13217620" start="52035" end="52046" title="Regional policy of the European Union" label="Objective 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="52061" end="52080" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="52692" end="52707" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81499" start="52712" end="52722" title="Celtic Sea" label="Celtic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631281" start="52775" end="52796" title="South West Coast Path" label="South West Coast Path"/>
<link wikidata="Q943517" start="53093" end="53100" title="Newquay" label="Newquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q390260" start="53167" end="53178" title="Perranporth" label="Perranporth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231794" start="53297" end="53307" title="Porthtowan" label="Porthtowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q596642" start="53367" end="53379" title="Eden Project" label="Eden Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q772614" start="53385" end="53395" title="St Austell" label="St Austell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864835" start="53869" end="53887" title="UK City of Culture" label="UK City of Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5455047" start="53980" end="53987" title="Fishing in Cornwall" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373885" start="54377" end="54390" title="clotted cream" label="clotted cream"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="54509" end="54528" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025231" start="54543" end="54567" title="Camborne School of Mines" label="Camborne School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838189" start="54592" end="54598" title="Penryn Campus" label="Penryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q223197" start="54789" end="54799" title="Kaolinite" label="China clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304399" start="55247" end="55259" title="South Crofty" label="South Crofty"/>
<link wikidata="Q586034" start="55711" end="55729" title="Fiber to the x" label="Superfast Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q477555" start="55985" end="56000" title="Newquay Airport" label="Newquay Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q477555" start="56117" end="56135" title="Spaceport Cornwall" label="Spaceport Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="56324" end="56335" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994501" start="56510" end="56523" title="White British" label="White British"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432602" start="57310" end="57329" title="Falmouth University" label="Falmouth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="57338" end="57358" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025231" start="57370" end="57394" title="Camborne School of Mines" label="Camborne School of Mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="57433" end="57450" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838189" start="57560" end="57566" title="Penryn Campus" label="Penryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q641498" start="57701" end="57713" title="Conservation biology" label="Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040150" start="57781" end="57809" title="Institute of Cornish Studies" label="Institute of Cornish Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848041" start="57958" end="57983" title="Truro and Penwith College" label="Truro and Penwith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171960" start="57985" end="58001" title="Cornwall College (England)" label="Cornwall College"/>
<link wikidata="Q26429258" start="58006" end="58023" title="Callywith College" label="Callywith College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527490" start="58380" end="58409" title="Sir James Smith&amp;#x27;s School" label="Sir James Smith&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959151" start="58414" end="58431" title="Wadebridge School" label="Wadebridge School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594074" start="58497" end="58538" title="St Mabyn Church of England Primary School" label="St Mabyn Church of England Primary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110510" start="58555" end="58579" title="Christianity in Cornwall" label="Christianity in Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q29379024" start="58582" end="58616" title="Index of Cornwall-related articles" label="Index of Cornwall-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979640" start="58619" end="58638" title="Outline of Cornwall" label="Outline of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738885" start="58704" end="58721" title="Tamar Valley AONB" label="Tamar Valley AONB"/>
<link wikidata="Q876107" start="58723" end="58740" title="Duchy of Cornwall" label="Duchy of Cornwall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5649" wikidata="Q41614" url="?curid=5649" title="Constitutional monarchy">
<text>Constitutional monarchy, also known as limited monarchy, parliamentary monarchy or democratic monarchy, is a form of monarchy in which the monarch exercises their authority in accordance with a constitution and is not alone in making decisions. Constitutional monarchies differ from absolute monarchies (in which a monarch is the only decision-maker) in that they are bound to exercise powers and authorities within limits prescribed by an established legal framework. A constitutional monarch in a parliamentary democracy is a hereditary symbolic head of state (who may be an emperor, king or queen, prince or grand duke) who mainly performs representative and civic roles but does not exercise executive or policy-making power. 

Constitutional monarchies range from countries such as Liechtenstein, Monaco, Morocco, Jordan, Kuwait, Bahrain and Bhutan, where the constitution grants substantial discretionary powers to the sovereign, to countries such as the United Kingdom and other Commonwealth realms, the Netherlands, Spain, Belgium, Denmark, Norway, Sweden, Lesotho, Malaysia, Thailand, Cambodia, and Japan, where the monarch retains significantly less, if any, personal discretion in the exercise of their authority. On the surface level, this distinction may be hard to establish, with numerous liberal democracies restraining monarchic power in practice rather than written law, e.g., the constitution of the United Kingdom, which affords the monarch substantial, if limited, legislative and executive powers.

&quot;Constitutional monarchy&quot; may refer to a system in which the monarch acts as a non-party political ceremonial head of state under the constitution, whether codified or uncodified. While most monarchs may hold formal authority and the government may legally operate in the monarch&#x27;s name, in the form typical in Europe the monarch no longer personally sets public policy or chooses political leaders. Political scientist Vernon Bogdanor, paraphrasing Thomas Macaulay, has defined a constitutional monarch as &quot;A sovereign who reigns but does not rule&quot;.

In addition to acting as a visible symbol of national unity, a constitutional monarch may hold formal powers such as dissolving parliament or giving royal assent to legislation. However, such powers generally may only be exercised strictly in accordance with either written constitutional principles or unwritten constitutional conventions, rather than any personal political preferences of the sovereign. 

In &quot;The English Constitution&quot;, British political theorist Walter Bagehot identified three main political rights which a constitutional monarch may freely exercise: the right to be consulted, the right to encourage, and the right to warn. Many constitutional monarchies still retain significant authorities or political influence, however, such as through certain reserve powers, and may also play an important political role.

The Commonwealth realms share the same person as hereditary monarchy under the Westminster system of constitutional governance. Two constitutional monarchies – Malaysia and Cambodia – are elective monarchies, in which the ruler is periodically selected by a small electoral college.

The concept of semi-constitutional monarch identifies constitutional monarchies where the monarch retains substantial powers, on a par with a president in a presidential or semi-presidential system. As a result, constitutional monarchies where the monarch has a largely ceremonial role may also be referred to as &quot;parliamentary monarchies&quot; to differentiate them from semi-constitutional monarchies. Strongly limited constitutional monarchies, such as those of the United Kingdom and Australia, have been referred to as crowned republics by writers H. G. Wells and Glenn Patmore.

==History==

The oldest constitutional monarchy dating back to ancient times was that of the Hittites. They were an ancient Anatolian people that lived during the Bronze Age whose king had to share his authority with an assembly, called the &quot;Panku&quot;, which was the equivalent to a modern-day deliberative assembly or a legislature. Members of the &quot;Panku&quot; came from scattered noble families who worked as representatives of their subjects in an adjutant or subaltern federal-type landscape.

According to Herodotus, Demonax created a constitutional monarchy for King Battus III the Lame, of Cyrene, when Cyrenaica had become an unstable state, in about 548 BC.

=== Constitutional and absolute monarchy ===

====England, Scotland and the United Kingdom====

In the Kingdom of England, the Glorious Revolution of 1688 furthered the constitutional monarchy, restricted by laws such as the Bill of Rights 1689 and the Act of Settlement 1701, although the first form of constitution was enacted with Magna Carta of 1215. At the same time, in Scotland, the Convention of Estates enacted the Claim of Right Act 1689, which placed similar limits on the Scottish monarchy.

Queen Anne was the last monarch to veto an Act of Parliament when, on 11 March 1708, she blocked the Scottish Militia Bill. However Hanoverian monarchs continued to selectively dictate government policies. For instance King George III constantly blocked Catholic Emancipation, eventually precipitating the resignation of William Pitt the Younger as prime minister in 1801. The sovereign&#x27;s influence on the choice of prime minister gradually declined over this period. King William IV was the last monarch to dismiss a prime minister, when in 1834 he removed Lord Melbourne as a result of Melbourne&#x27;s choice of Lord John Russell as Leader of the House of Commons. Queen Victoria was the last monarch to exercise real personal power, but this diminished over the course of her reign. In 1839, she became the last sovereign to keep a prime minister in power against the will of Parliament when the Bedchamber crisis resulted in the retention of Lord Melbourne&#x27;s administration. By the end of her reign, however, she could do nothing to block the unacceptable (to her) premierships of William Gladstone, although she still exercised power in appointments to the Cabinet. For example, in 1886 she vetoed Gladstone&#x27;s choice of Hugh Childers as War Secretary in favour of Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman.

Today, the role of the British monarch is by convention effectively ceremonial. The British Parliament and the Government – chiefly in the office of Prime Minister of the United Kingdom – exercise their powers under &quot;royal (or Crown) prerogative&quot;: on behalf of the monarch and through powers still formally possessed by the monarch.

No person may accept significant public office without swearing an oath of allegiance to the King. With few exceptions, the monarch is bound by constitutional convention to act on the advice of the government.

====Continental Europe====
Poland developed the first constitution for a monarchy in continental Europe, with the Constitution of 3 May 1791; it was the second single-document constitution in the world just after the first republican Constitution of the United States. Constitutional monarchy also occurred briefly in the early years of the French Revolution, but much more widely afterwards. Napoleon Bonaparte is considered the first monarch proclaiming himself as an embodiment of the nation, rather than as a divinely appointed ruler; this interpretation of monarchy is germane to continental constitutional monarchies. German philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, in his work &quot;Elements of the Philosophy of Right&quot; (1820), gave the concept a philosophical justification that concurred with evolving contemporary political theory and the Protestant Christian view of natural law. Hegel&#x27;s forecast of a constitutional monarch with very limited powers whose function is to embody the national character and provide constitutional continuity in times of emergency was reflected in the development of constitutional monarchies in Europe and Japan.

==== Executive monarchy versus ceremonial monarchy ==== 

There exist at least two different types of constitutional monarchies in the modern world – executive and ceremonial. In executive monarchies (also called &quot;semi-constitutional monarchies&quot;), the monarch wields significant (though not absolute) power. The monarchy under this system of government is a powerful political (and social) institution. By contrast, in ceremonial monarchies, the monarch holds little or no actual power or direct political influence, though they frequently still have a great deal of social and cultural influence.

Ceremonial and executive monarchy should not be confused with democratic and non-democratic monarchical systems. For example, in Liechtenstein and Monaco, the ruling monarchs wield significant executive power. However, while they are theoretically very powerful within their small states, they are &quot;not&quot; absolute monarchs and have very limited &quot;de facto&quot; power compared to the Islamic monarchs, which is why their countries are generally considered to be liberal democracies and not undemocratic. For instance, when Hereditary Prince Alois of Liechtenstein threatened to veto a possible approval of a referendum to legalize abortion in 2011, it came as a surprise because the prince had not vetoed any law for over 30 years (in the end, this was moot, as the proposal was not approved).

=== Modern constitutional monarchy ===
As originally conceived, a constitutional monarch was head of the executive branch and quite a powerful figure even though their power was limited by the constitution and the elected parliament. Some of the framers of the U.S. Constitution may have envisioned the president as an elected constitutional monarch, as the term was then understood, following Montesquieu&#x27;s account of the separation of powers.

The present-day concept of a constitutional monarchy developed in the United Kingdom, where they democratically elected parliaments, and their leader, the prime minister, exercise power, with the monarchs having ceded power and remaining as a titular position. In many cases, the monarchs, while still at the very top of the political and social hierarchy, were given the status of &quot;servants of the people&quot; to reflect the new, egalitarian position. In the course of France&#x27;s July Monarchy, Louis-Philippe I was styled &quot;King of the French&quot; rather than &quot;King of France&quot;.

Following the unification of Germany, Otto von Bismarck rejected the British model. In the constitutional monarchy established under the Constitution of the German Empire which Bismarck inspired, the Kaiser retained considerable actual executive power, while the Imperial Chancellor needed no parliamentary vote of confidence and ruled solely by the imperial mandate. However, this model of constitutional monarchy was discredited and abolished following Germany&#x27;s defeat in the First World War. Later, Fascist Italy could also be considered a constitutional monarchy, in that there was a king as the titular head of state while actual power was held by Benito Mussolini under a constitution. This eventually discredited the Italian monarchy and led to its abolition in 1946. After the Second World War, surviving European monarchies almost invariably adopted some variant of the constitutional monarchy model originally developed in Britain.

Nowadays a parliamentary democracy that is a constitutional monarchy is considered to differ from one that is a republic only in detail rather than in substance. In both cases, the titular head of statemonarch or presidentserves the traditional role of embodying and representing the nation, while the government is carried on by a cabinet composed predominantly of elected Members of Parliament.

However, three important factors distinguish monarchies such as the United Kingdom from systems where greater power might otherwise rest with Parliament. These are:
* The royal prerogative, under which the monarch may exercise power under certain very limited circumstances
* Sovereign immunity, under which the monarch may &quot;do no wrong&quot; under the law because the responsible government is instead deemed accountable
* The immunity of the monarch from some taxation or restrictions on property use

Other privileges may be nominal or ceremonial (e.g., where the executive, judiciary, police or armed forces act on the authority of or owe allegiance to the Crown).

Today slightly more than a quarter of constitutional monarchies are Western European countries, including the United Kingdom, Spain, the Netherlands, Belgium, Norway, Denmark, Luxembourg, Monaco, Liechtenstein and Sweden. However, the two most populous constitutional monarchies in the world are in Asia: Japan and Thailand. In these countries, the prime minister holds the day-to-day powers of governance, while the monarch retains residual (but not always insignificant) powers. The powers of the monarch differ between countries. In Denmark and in Belgium, for example, the monarch formally appoints a representative to preside over the creation of a coalition government following a parliamentary election, while in Norway the King chairs special meetings of the cabinet.

In nearly all cases, the monarch is still the nominal chief executive, but is bound by convention to act on the advice of the Cabinet. However, a few monarchies (most notably Japan and Sweden) have amended their constitutions so that the monarch is no longer the nominal chief executive.

There are fifteen constitutional monarchies under King Charles III, which are known as Commonwealth realms. Unlike some of their continental European counterparts, the Monarch and his Governors-General in the Commonwealth realms hold significant &quot;reserve&quot; or &quot;prerogative&quot; powers, to be wielded in times of extreme emergency or constitutional crises, usually to uphold parliamentary government. For example, during the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis, the Governor-General dismissed the Australian Prime Minister Gough Whitlam. The Australian Senate had threatened to block the Government&#x27;s budget by refusing to pass the necessary appropriation bills. On 11 November 1975, Whitlam intended to call a half-Senate election to try to break the deadlock. When he sought the Governor-General&#x27;s approval of the election, the Governor-General instead dismissed him as Prime Minister. Shortly after that, he installed leader of the opposition Malcolm Fraser in his place. Acting quickly before all parliamentarians became aware of the government change, Fraser and his allies secured passage of the appropriation bills, and the Governor-General dissolved Parliament for a double dissolution election. Fraser and his government were returned with a massive majority. This led to much speculation among Whitlam&#x27;s supporters as to whether this use of the Governor-General&#x27;s reserve powers was appropriate, and whether Australia should become a republic. Among supporters of constitutional monarchy, however, the event confirmed the monarchy&#x27;s value as a source of checks and balances against elected politicians who might seek powers in excess of those conferred by the constitution, and ultimately as a safeguard against dictatorship.

In Thailand&#x27;s constitutional monarchy, the monarch is recognized as the Head of State, Head of the Armed Forces, Upholder of the Buddhist Religion, and Defender of the Faith. The immediate former King, Bhumibol Adulyadej, was the longest-reigning monarch in the world and in all of Thailand&#x27;s history, before passing away on 13 October 2016. Bhumibol reigned through several political changes in the Thai government. He played an influential role in each incident, often acting as mediator between disputing political opponents. (See Bhumibol&#x27;s role in Thai Politics.) Among the powers retained by the Thai monarch under the constitution, lèse majesté protects the image of the monarch and enables him to play a role in politics. It carries strict criminal penalties for violators. Generally, the Thai people were reverent of Bhumibol. Much of his social influence arose from this reverence and from the socioeconomic improvement efforts undertaken by the royal family.

In the United Kingdom, a frequent debate centres on when it is appropriate for a British monarch to act. When a monarch does act, political controversy can often ensue, partially because the neutrality of the crown is seen to be compromised in favour of a partisan goal, while some political scientists champion the idea of an &quot;interventionist monarch&quot; as a check against possible illegal action by politicians. For instance, the monarch of the United Kingdom can theoretically exercise an absolute veto over legislation by withholding royal assent. However, no monarch has done so since 1708, and it is widely believed that this and many of the monarch&#x27;s other political powers are lapsed powers.

== List of current constitutional monarchies ==

There are currently 43 monarchies worldwide.

===Ceremonial constitutional monarchies===

===Executive constitutional monarchies===

== Former constitutional monarchies ==

* The Kingdom of Afghanistan was a constitutional monarchy under Mohammad Zahir Shah from 1964 to 1973.
* The Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq was a constitutional monarchy until 1958 when King Faisal II was deposed in a military coup.
* The Anglo-Corsican Kingdom was a brief period in the history of Corsica (1794–1796) when the island broke with Revolutionary France and sought military protection from Great Britain. Corsica became an independent kingdom under George III of the United Kingdom, but with its own elected parliament and a written constitution guaranteeing local autonomy and democratic rights.
* Barbados from gaining its independence in 1966 until 2021, was a constitutional monarchy in the Commonwealth of Nations with a Governor-General representing the Monarchy of Barbados. After an extensive history of republican movements, a republic was declared on 30 November 2021.
* Brazil from 1822, with the proclamation of independence and rise of the Empire of Brazil by Pedro I of Brazil to 1889, when Pedro II was deposed by a military coup.
* Tsardom of Bulgaria until 1946 when Tsar Simeon was deposed by the communist assembly.
* Many republics in the Commonwealth of Nations were constitutional monarchies for some period after their independence, including South Africa (1910–1961), Ceylon (now Sri Lanka) (1948–1972), Fiji (1970–1987), Gambia (1965–1970), Ghana (1957–1960), Guyana (1966–1970), Mauritius (1968–1992), Trinidad and Tobago (1962–1976), and Barbados (1966–2021).
* Egypt was a constitutional monarchy starting from the later part of the Khedivate, with parliamentary structures and a responsible khedival ministry developing in the 1860s and 1870s. The constitutional system continued through the Khedivate period and developed during the Sultanate and then Kingdom of Egypt, which established an essentially democratic liberal constitutional regime under the Egyptian Constitution of 1923. This system persisted until the declaration of a republic after the Free Officers Movement coup in 1952. For most of this period, however, Egypt was occupied by the United Kingdom, and overall political control was in the hands of British colonial officials nominally accredited as diplomats to the Egyptian royal court but actually able to overrule any decision of the monarch or elected government.
* The Grand Principality of Finland was a constitutional monarchy though its ruler, Alexander I, was simultaneously an autocrat and absolute ruler in Russia.
* France, several times from 1789 through the 19th century. The transformation of the Estates General of 1789 into the National Assembly initiated an ad-hoc transition from the absolute monarchy of the &quot;Ancien Régime&quot; to a new constitutional system. France formally became an executive constitutional monarchy with the promulgation of the French Constitution of 1791, which took effect on 1 October of that year. This first French constitutional monarchy was short-lived, ending with the overthrow of the monarchy and establishment of the French First Republic after the Insurrection of 10 August 1792. Several years later, in 1804, Napoleon Bonaparte proclaimed himself Emperor of the French in what was ostensibly a constitutional monarchy, though modern historians often call his reign as an absolute monarchy. The Bourbon Restoration (under Louis XVIII and Charles X), the July Monarchy (under Louis-Philippe), and the Second Empire (under Napoleon III) were also constitutional monarchies, although the power of the monarch varied considerably between them and sometimes within them.
* The German Empire from 1871 to 1918, (as well as earlier confederations, and the monarchies it consisted of) was also a constitutional monarchy—see Constitution of the German Empire.
* Greece until 1973 when Constantine II was deposed by the military government. The decision was formalized by a plebiscite 8 December 1974.
* Hawaii, which was an absolute monarchy from its founding in 1810, transitioned to a constitutional monarchy in 1840 when King Kamehameha III promulgated the kingdom&#x27;s first constitution. This constitutional form of government continued until the monarchy was overthrown in an 1893 coup.
* The Kingdom of Hungary. In 1848–1849 and 1867–1918 as part of Austria-Hungary. In the interwar period (1920–1944) Hungary remained a constitutional monarchy without a reigning monarch.
* Iceland. The Act of Union, a 1 December 1918 agreement with Denmark, established Iceland as a sovereign kingdom united with Denmark under a common king. Iceland abolished the monarchy and became a republic on 17 June 1944 after the Icelandic constitutional referendum, 24 May 1944.
* India was a constitutional monarchy, with George VI as head of state and the Earl Mountbatten as governor-general, for a brief period between gaining its independence from the British on 15 August 1947 and becoming a republic when it adopted its constitution on 26 January 1950, henceforth celebrated as Republic Day.
* Pahlavi Iran under Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi was a constitutional monarchy, which had been originally established during the Persian Constitutional Revolution in 1906.
* Italy until 2 June 1946, when a referendum proclaimed the end of the Kingdom and the beginning of the Republic.
* The Kingdom of Laos was a constitutional monarchy until 1975, when Sisavang Vatthana was forced to abdicate by the communist Pathet Lao.
* Malta was a constitutional monarchy with Elizabeth II as Queen of Malta, represented by a Governor-General appointed by her, for the first ten years of independence from 21 September 1964 to the declaration of the Republic of Malta on 13 December 1974.
* Mexico was twice an Empire. The First Mexican Empire lasted from 19 May 1822 to 19 March 1823, with Agustin I elected as emperor. Then, the Mexican monarchists and conservatives, with the help of the Austrian and Spanish crowns and Napoleon III of France, elected Maximilian of Austria as Emperor of Mexico. This constitutional monarchy lasted three years, from 1864 to 1867.
* Montenegro until 1918 when it merged with Serbia and other areas to form Yugoslavia.
* Nepal until 28 May 2008, when King Gyanendra was deposed, and the Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal was declared.
* Nigeria was a constitutional monarchy from its independence in 1960 till it became a Republic in 1963. It&#x27;s only monarch was Queen Elizabeth II, Queen of Nigeria.
* Ottoman Empire from 1876 until 1878 and again from 1908 until the dissolution of the empire in 1922.
* Pakistan was a constitutional monarchy for a brief period between gaining its independence from the British on 14 August 1947 and becoming a republic when it adopted the first Constitution of Pakistan on 23 March 1956. The Dominion of Pakistan had a total of two monarchs (George VI and Elizabeth II) and four Governor-Generals (Muhammad Ali Jinnah being the first). Republic Day (or Pakistan Day) is celebrated every year on 23 March to commemorate the adoption of its Constitution and the transition of the Dominion of Pakistan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan.
* The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, formed after the Union of Lublin in 1569 and lasting until the final partition of the state in 1795, operated much like many modern European constitutional monarchies (into which it was officially changed by the establishment of the Constitution of 3 May 1791, which historian Norman Davies calls &quot;the first constitution of its kind in Europe&quot;). The legislators of the unified state truly did not see it as a monarchy at all, but as &quot;a republic under the presidency of the King&quot; . Poland–Lithuania also followed the principle of , had a bicameral parliament, and a collection of entrenched legal documents amounting to a constitution along the lines of the modern United Kingdom. The King was elected and had the duty of maintaining the people&#x27;s rights.
* Portugal was a monarchy since 1139 and a constitutional monarchy from 1822 to 1828, and again from 1834 until 1910, when Manuel II was overthrown by a military coup. From 1815 to 1825 it was part of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves which was a constitutional monarchy for the years 1820–23.
* Kingdom of Romania from its establishment in 1881 until 1947 when Michael I was forced to abdicate by the communists.
* Kingdom of Serbia from 1882 until 1918, when it merged with the State of Slovenes, Croats and Serbs into the unitary Yugoslav Kingdom, that was led by the Serbian Karadjordjevic dynasty.
* Trinidad and Tobago was a constitutional monarchy with Elizabeth II as Queen of Trinidad and Tobago, represented by a Governor-General appointed by her, for the first fourteen years of independence from 31 August 1962 to the declaration of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago on 1 August 1976. Republic Day is celebrated every year on 24 September.
* Yugoslavia from 1918 (as Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes) until 1929 and from 1931 (as Kingdom of Yugoslavia) until 1945 when the communist government abolished the monarchy under Peter II.
* Vietnam was a semi-constitutional monarchy from 1949 to 1955, Bảo Đại was its emperor but he was called the Head of state (&quot;quốc trưởng&quot;), political power was also in the hands of the government and the National Advisory Council. Vietnam under Bảo Đại planned to organize parliamentary elections and promulgate a constitution, but not in time due to the progress of the war.

== Other variants of constitutional monarchies ==
* Andorra is a diarchy, being headed by two co-princes: the bishop of Urgell and the president of France.
* Andorra, Monaco and Liechtenstein are the only countries with reigning princes.
* Belgium is the only remaining explicit popular monarchy: the formal title of its king is &quot;King of the Belgians&quot; rather than &quot;King of Belgium&quot;. Historically, several defunct constitutional monarchies followed this model; the Belgian formulation is recognized to have been modelled on the title &quot;King of the French&quot; granted by the Charter of 1830 to monarch of the July Monarchy.
* Japan is the only country remaining with an emperor.
* Luxembourg is the only country remaining with a grand duke.
* Malaysia is a federal country with an elective monarchy: the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is selected from among nine state rulers who are also constitutional monarchs themselves.
* Papua New Guinea. Unlike in most other Commonwealth realms, sovereignty is constitutionally vested in the citizenry of Papua New Guinea and the preamble to the constitution states &quot;that all power belongs to the people—acting through their duly elected representatives&quot;. The monarch has been, according to section 82 of the constitution, &quot;requested by the people of Papua New Guinea, through their Constituent Assembly, to become [monarch] and Head of State of Papua New Guinea&quot; and thus acts in that capacity.
* Spain. The Spanish Constitution does not recognize the Spanish Monarch as the &quot;sovereign&quot;, but as the head of state [Section 56(1)]. It states &quot;National Sovereignty belongs to the Spanish People, from whom all state powers emanate.&quot; [Section 1(2)]. Spanish Constitution | Spanish Senate
* United Arab Emirates is a federal country with an elective monarchy, the President or Ra&#x27;is, being selected from among the rulers of the seven emirates, each of whom is a hereditary absolute monarch in their own emirate.

== See also ==
* Australian Monarchist League
* Criticism of monarchy
* Monarchism
* Figurehead
* Parliamentary republic
* Reserve power

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* – excerpted from 
* 
* – originally published as Georg Friedrich Wilhelm Hegel, &quot;Philosophie des Rechts&quot;.
* – England and the Netherlands in the 17th and 18th centuries were parliamentary democracies.
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="0" end="23" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="Constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="39" end="55" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="limited monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="57" end="79" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="parliamentary monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="83" end="102" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="democratic monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="117" end="125" title="monarchy" label="monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="283" end="302" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="787" end="800" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="802" end="808" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="810" end="817" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="819" end="825" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="827" end="833" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="835" end="842" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="847" end="853" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="961" end="975" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="986" end="1004" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="1011" end="1022" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1024" end="1029" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1031" end="1038" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="1040" end="1047" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="1049" end="1055" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="1057" end="1063" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013" start="1065" end="1072" title="Lesotho" label="Lesotho"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="1074" end="1082" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="1084" end="1092" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1094" end="1102" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1108" end="1113" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q784210" start="1399" end="1433" title="constitution of the United Kingdom" label="constitution of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1641" end="1654" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755" start="1665" end="1677" title="constitution" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135084" start="1699" end="1709" title="Uncodified constitution" label="uncodified"/>
<link wikidata="Q546113" start="1892" end="1905" title="public policy" label="public policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922071" start="1956" end="1971" title="Vernon Bogdanor" label="Vernon Bogdanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="1986" end="2001" title="Thomas Macaulay" label="Thomas Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="2143" end="2157" title="national unity" label="national unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q741182" start="2215" end="2236" title="dissolving parliament" label="dissolving parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="2247" end="2259" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820779" start="2515" end="2539" title="The English Constitution" label="The English Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q369022" start="2574" end="2588" title="Walter Bagehot" label="Walter Bagehot"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="2879" end="2892" title="reserve power" label="reserve power"/>
<link wikidata="Q849242" start="2992" end="3011" title="hereditary monarchy" label="hereditary monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q720477" start="3022" end="3040" title="Westminster system" label="Westminster system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658454" start="3103" end="3111" title="Monarchy of Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42298246" start="3116" end="3124" title="Monarchy of Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="3131" end="3150" title="elective monarchies" label="elective monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="3207" end="3224" title="electoral college" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="3242" end="3269" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="semi-constitutional monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q30461" start="3369" end="3378" title="President (government title)" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q49892" start="3384" end="3396" title="Presidential system" label="presidential"/>
<link wikidata="Q49890" start="3400" end="3424" title="semi-presidential system" label="semi-presidential system"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="3546" end="3570" title="Constitutional monarchy" label="parliamentary monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="3701" end="3715" title="monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q669459" start="3720" end="3729" title="monarchy of Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572599" start="3756" end="3772" title="crowned republic" label="crowned republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="3785" end="3796" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406" start="3910" end="3918" title="Hittites" label="Hittites"/>
<link wikidata="Q290170" start="3933" end="3957" title="ancient Anatolian people" label="ancient Anatolian people"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3980" end="3990" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878332" start="4064" end="4069" title="Pankus" label="Panku"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="4340" end="4349" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256238" start="4351" end="4358" title="Demonax (lawmaker)" label="Demonax"/>
<link wikidata="Q811035" start="4402" end="4412" title="Battus III of Cyrene" label="Battus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="4426" end="4432" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="4439" end="4448" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4600" end="4618" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="4624" end="4643" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q219447" start="4722" end="4741" title="Bill of Rights 1689" label="Bill of Rights 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q316537" start="4750" end="4772" title="Act of Settlement 1701" label="Act of Settlement 1701"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="4831" end="4842" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="4873" end="4881" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166264" start="4887" end="4908" title="Convention of Estates (1689)" label="Convention of Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407381" start="4921" end="4944" title="Claim of Right Act 1689" label="Claim of Right Act 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q119702" start="5001" end="5011" title="Anne, Queen of Great Britain" label="Queen Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437859" start="5102" end="5123" title="Scottish Militia Bill" label="Scottish Militia Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="5220" end="5235" title="King George III" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602689" start="5255" end="5276" title="Catholic Emancipation in Britain" label="Catholic Emancipation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128902" start="5322" end="5346" title="William Pitt the Younger" label="William Pitt the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="5474" end="5489" title="William IV of the United Kingdom" label="King William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="5564" end="5578" title="Lord Melbourne" label="Lord Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q157259" start="5621" end="5638" title="Lord John Russell, 1st Earl Russell" label="Lord John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="5674" end="5688" title="Queen Victoria" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q863707" start="5906" end="5923" title="Bedchamber crisis" label="Bedchamber crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q160852" start="6097" end="6114" title="William Ewart Gladstone" label="William Gladstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217502" start="6242" end="6255" title="Hugh Childers" label="Hugh Childers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106618" start="6286" end="6314" title="Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman" label="Sir Henry Campbell-Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="6401" end="6419" title="British Parliament" label="British Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="6428" end="6438" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="6466" end="6502" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="6533" end="6573" title="Royal prerogative" label="&amp;quot;royal (or Crown) prerogative&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074471" start="6728" end="6758" title="Oath of Allegiance (United Kingdom)" label="oath of allegiance to the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164321" start="6805" end="6830" title="Constitutional conventions of the United Kingdom" label="constitutional convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308979" start="6845" end="6851" title="advice (constitutional)" label="advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="6986" end="7012" title="Constitution of 3 May 1791" label="Constitution of 3 May 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="7106" end="7139" title="Constitution of the United States" label="Constitution of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="7213" end="7230" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7265" end="7283" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="7515" end="7544" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486412" start="7564" end="7599" title="Elements of the Philosophy of Right" label="Elements of the Philosophy of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="7728" end="7738" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="8341" end="8349" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="9009" end="9017" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9046" end="9062" title="Monarchy#Monarchies in the Muslim world" label="Islamic monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="9124" end="9143" title="liberal democracies" label="liberal democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q311308" start="9185" end="9208" title="Hereditary Prince Alois" label="Hereditary Prince Alois"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544037" start="9270" end="9309" title="2011 Liechtenstein referendums" label="referendum to legalize abortion in 2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q35798" start="9562" end="9578" title="executive branch" label="executive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15975" start="9851" end="9869" title="Baron de Montesquieu" label="Montesquieu&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="10063" end="10077" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10384" end="10390" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="10398" end="10411" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="10413" end="10429" title="Louis-Philippe I" label="Louis-Philippe I"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="10527" end="10549" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="10551" end="10568" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q702349" start="10650" end="10683" title="Constitution of the German Empire" label="Constitution of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q138340" start="10713" end="10719" title="Kaiser" label="Kaiser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10776" end="10795" title="Chancellor of Germany#Empire (1871–1918)" label="Imperial Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="10997" end="11012" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="11021" end="11034" title="Kingdom of Italy under Fascism (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271148" start="11107" end="11111" title="King of Italy" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="11172" end="11188" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="11304" end="11320" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="11473" end="11496" title="parliamentary democracy" label="parliamentary democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="11574" end="11582" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="11836" end="11857" title="Member of Parliament" label="Members of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11928" end="11942" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q35749" start="12002" end="12012" title="Parliament" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="12031" end="12048" title="royal prerogative" label="royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457196" start="12136" end="12154" title="Sovereign immunity" label="Sovereign immunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665071" start="12234" end="12256" title="responsible government" label="responsible government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721121" start="12508" end="12518" title="allegiance" label="allegiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="12603" end="12617" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="12645" end="12659" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="12661" end="12666" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="12672" end="12683" title="Monarchy of the Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q160913" start="12685" end="12692" title="Monarchy of Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294765" start="12694" end="12700" title="Monarchy of Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273134" start="12702" end="12709" title="Monarchy of Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276071" start="12711" end="12721" title="Monarchy of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457774" start="12723" end="12729" title="Monarchy of Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898090" start="12731" end="12744" title="Monarchy of Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q26796319" start="12749" end="12755" title="Monarchy of Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="12840" end="12845" title="Monarchy of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663787" start="12850" end="12858" title="Monarchy of Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="12884" end="12898" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="13189" end="13209" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="13302" end="13309" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13487" end="13492" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="13497" end="13503" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="13656" end="13667" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q202686" start="13688" end="13706" title="Commonwealth realm" label="Commonwealth realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q575834" start="14040" end="14077" title="1975 Australian constitutional crisis" label="1975 Australian constitutional crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23333" start="14140" end="14153" title="Gough Whitlam" label="Gough Whitlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="14159" end="14176" title="Australian Senate" label="Australian Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41263" start="14223" end="14229" title="budget" label="budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q315979" start="14573" end="14587" title="Malcolm Fraser" label="Malcolm Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300018" start="14802" end="14820" title="double dissolution" label="double dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4201697" start="15055" end="15089" title="Republicanism in Australia" label="Australia should become a republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="15586" end="15604" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15947" end="15960" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej#Role in Thai politics" label="Thai Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1714218" start="16033" end="16045" title="Lèse majesté in Thailand" label="lèse majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140620" start="16621" end="16629" title="partisan (political)" label="partisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="16647" end="16666" title="political scientist" label="political scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q16943345" start="17063" end="17075" title="lapsed power" label="lapsed power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138904" start="17307" end="17329" title="Kingdom of Afghanistan" label="Kingdom of Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152265" start="17366" end="17385" title="Mohammad Zahir Shah" label="Mohammad Zahir Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q149805" start="17411" end="17436" title="Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq" label="Hashemite Kingdom of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q149724" start="17483" end="17497" title="King Faisal II" label="King Faisal II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83536" start="17536" end="17558" title="Anglo-Corsican Kingdom" label="Anglo-Corsican Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516499" start="17585" end="17603" title="history of Corsica" label="history of Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="17643" end="17663" title="Revolutionary France" label="Revolutionary France"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="17700" end="17713" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="17759" end="17769" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="17909" end="17917" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="18005" end="18028" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261556" start="18036" end="18052" title="Governor-General of Barbados" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257585" start="18070" end="18090" title="Monarchy of Barbados" label="Monarchy of Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314726" start="18122" end="18132" title="Republicanism in Barbados" label="republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="18191" end="18197" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q217230" start="18263" end="18279" title="Empire of Brazil" label="Empire of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q939" start="18283" end="18300" title="Pedro I of Brazil" label="Pedro I of Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q156774" start="18315" end="18323" title="Pedro II of Brazil" label="Pedro II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063024" start="18358" end="18377" title="Tsardom of Bulgaria" label="Tsardom of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060355" start="18394" end="18405" title="Simeon Saxe-Coburg-Gotha" label="Tsar Simeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1216856" start="18452" end="18492" title="republics in the Commonwealth of Nations" label="republics in the Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q193619" start="18576" end="18588" title="Union of South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670092" start="18602" end="18608" title="Dominion of Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="18614" end="18623" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q10816852" start="18638" end="18642" title="Monarchy of Fiji" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898107" start="18656" end="18662" title="Queen of the Gambia" label="Gambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733872" start="18676" end="18681" title="Queen of Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898084" start="18695" end="18701" title="Queen of Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898093" start="18715" end="18724" title="Queen of Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898101" start="18738" end="18757" title="Queen of Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257585" start="18775" end="18783" title="Monarchy of Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="18799" end="18804" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q127861" start="18871" end="18880" title="Khedivate of Egypt" label="Khedivate"/>
<link wikidata="Q370173" start="19073" end="19082" title="Sultanate of Egypt" label="Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124943" start="19092" end="19108" title="Kingdom of Egypt" label="Kingdom of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898743" start="19194" end="19223" title="Egyptian Constitution of 1923" label="Egyptian Constitution of 1923"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19272" end="19282" title="History of Egypt under Gamal Abdel Nasser#Republic of Egypt (1953–1958)" label="a republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q781607" start="19293" end="19315" title="Free Officers Movement (Egypt)" label="Free Officers Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474428" start="19374" end="19404" title="History of Egypt under the British" label="occupied by the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854654" start="19483" end="19516" title="List of ambassadors of the United Kingdom to Egypt" label="nominally accredited as diplomats"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="19632" end="19661" title="Grand Principality of Finland" label="Grand Principality of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="19710" end="19721" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="19745" end="19753" title="Autocracy" label="autocrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="19758" end="19772" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolute ruler"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="19786" end="19792" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463941" start="19870" end="19893" title="Estates General of 1789" label="Estates General of 1789"/>
<link wikidata="Q876424" start="19903" end="19920" title="National Constituent Assembly (France)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q234081" start="19992" end="20005" title="Ancien Régime" label="Ancien Régime"/>
<link wikidata="Q971176" start="20133" end="20160" title="French Constitution of 1791" label="French Constitution of 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="20333" end="20354" title="French First Republic" label="French First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154330" start="20365" end="20395" title="Insurrection of 10 August 1792" label="Insurrection of 10 August 1792"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="20427" end="20445" title="Napoleon Bonaparte" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q207162" start="20612" end="20631" title="Bourbon Restoration in France" label="Bourbon Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750" start="20639" end="20650" title="Louis XVIII" label="Louis XVIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="20655" end="20664" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="20671" end="20684" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="20692" end="20706" title="Louis-Philippe" label="Louis-Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q71092" start="20717" end="20730" title="Second French Empire" label="Second Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="20738" end="20750" title="Napoleon III" label="Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="20889" end="20902" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q702349" start="21033" end="21066" title="Constitution of the German Empire" label="Constitution of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="21070" end="21076" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q151773" start="21093" end="21107" title="Constantine II of Greece" label="Constantine II"/>
<link wikidata="Q504081" start="21127" end="21146" title="Greek military junta of 1967–74" label="military government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602054" start="21181" end="21191" title="Greek plebiscite, 1974" label="plebiscite"/>
<link wikidata="Q156418" start="21211" end="21217" title="Kingdom of Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q455795" start="21332" end="21351" title="King Kamehameha III" label="King Kamehameha III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12113272" start="21383" end="21401" title="1840 Constitution of the Kingdom of Hawaii" label="first constitution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21497" end="21501" title="Overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii#Coup d.27état" label="coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="21509" end="21527" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Kingdom of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="21567" end="21582" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="21619" end="21626" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="21692" end="21699" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q62567" start="21786" end="21803" title="Monarchy of Iceland" label="sovereign kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775277" start="21976" end="21981" title="Dominion of India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="22018" end="22027" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="22049" end="22069" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="the Earl Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="22073" end="22089" title="Governor-General of India" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q56106" start="22163" end="22177" title="Independence Day (India)" label="15 August 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q477108" start="22218" end="22234" title="Constitution of India" label="its constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139536" start="22280" end="22292" title="Republic Day (India)" label="Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258515" start="22296" end="22308" title="Pahlavi Iran" label="Pahlavi Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q128245" start="22315" end="22341" title="Mohammad Reza Pahlavi" label="Mohammad Reza Shah Pahlavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368440" start="22422" end="22455" title="Persian Constitutional Revolution" label="Persian Constitutional Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="22467" end="22472" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q870055" start="22585" end="22600" title="Kingdom of Laos" label="Kingdom of Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q379797" start="22648" end="22665" title="Savang Vatthana" label="Sisavang Vatthana"/>
<link wikidata="Q858887" start="22706" end="22716" title="Pathet Lao" label="Pathet Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="22720" end="22725" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="22761" end="22773" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="22975" end="22981" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q285658" start="23007" end="23027" title="First Mexican Empire" label="First Mexican Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133808" start="23075" end="23084" title="Agustín de Iturbide" label="Agustin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878075" start="23115" end="23134" title="Monarchism in Mexico" label="Mexican monarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="23207" end="23229" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Napoleon III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q84192" start="23239" end="23260" title="Maximilian of Mexico" label="Maximilian of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q890052" start="23264" end="23281" title="Emperor of Mexico" label="Emperor of Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q386496" start="23353" end="23363" title="Kingdom of Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="23395" end="23401" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="23426" end="23436" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="23440" end="23445" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201327" start="23470" end="23484" title="King Gyanendra" label="King Gyanendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="23729" end="23743" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="23832" end="23840" title="Dominion of Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007314" start="23943" end="23957" title="Independence Day (Pakistan)" label="14 August 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164223" start="24002" end="24032" title="Constitution of Pakistan of 1956" label="first Constitution of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006542" start="24055" end="24075" title="Dominion of Pakistan" label="Dominion of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="24105" end="24114" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="24119" end="24131" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462163" start="24142" end="24159" title="Governor-General of Pakistan" label="Governor-Generals"/>
<link wikidata="Q160554" start="24161" end="24180" title="Muhammad Ali Jinnah" label="Muhammad Ali Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597018" start="24199" end="24211" title="Republic Day (Pakistan)" label="Republic Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="24369" end="24397" title="Pakistan" label="Islamic Republic of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="24405" end="24435" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q963303" start="24454" end="24469" title="Union of Lublin" label="Union of Lublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="24670" end="24696" title="Constitution of 3 May 1791" label="Constitution of 3 May 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q376303" start="24714" end="24727" title="Norman Davies" label="Norman Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="25121" end="25135" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="25218" end="25226" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154308" start="25339" end="25348" title="Manuel II of Portugal" label="Manuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q903779" start="25421" end="25472" title="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves" label="United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="25534" end="25552" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="25600" end="25609" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q241748" start="25654" end="25671" title="Kingdom of Serbia" label="Kingdom of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220641" start="25817" end="25831" title="Karadjordjevic" label="Karadjordjevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="25843" end="25862" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="25898" end="25910" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898101" start="25914" end="25942" title="Queen of Trinidad and Tobago" label="Queen of Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q651523" start="25961" end="25977" title="Governor-General of Trinidad and Tobago" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="26194" end="26204" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="26219" end="26256" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="26287" end="26308" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Kingdom of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="26380" end="26388" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="Peter II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193879" start="26392" end="26399" title="State of Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q223771" start="26454" end="26461" title="Bảo Đại" label="Bảo Đại"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="26830" end="26837" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q936648" start="26843" end="26850" title="diarchy" label="diarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q683337" start="26868" end="26882" title="co-princes of Andorra" label="two co-princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q877736" start="26888" end="26904" title="bishop of Urgell" label="bishop of Urgell"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="26913" end="26932" title="president of France" label="president of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="26936" end="26943" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q235" start="26945" end="26951" title="Monaco" label="Monaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="26956" end="26969" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="27018" end="27025" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094259" start="27057" end="27073" title="popular monarchy" label="popular monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160913" start="27099" end="27103" title="Monarchy of Belgium" label="king"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578326" start="27377" end="27392" title="Charter of 1830" label="Charter of 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q58202" start="27411" end="27424" title="July Monarchy" label="July Monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="27428" end="27433" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208233" start="27472" end="27479" title="Emperor of Japan" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="27483" end="27493" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q205706" start="27531" end="27541" title="grand duke" label="grand duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="27545" end="27553" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="27559" end="27566" title="Federation" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="27583" end="27600" title="elective monarchy" label="elective monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174156" start="27606" end="27627" title="Yang di-Pertuan Agong" label="Yang di-Pertuan Agong"/>
<link wikidata="Q50464" start="27656" end="27661" title="States and federal territories of Malaysia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="27720" end="27736" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="28252" end="28257" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q847664" start="28259" end="28283" title="Constitution of Spain" label="The Spanish Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="28307" end="28322" title="King of Spain" label="Spanish Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="28364" end="28377" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="28447" end="28461" title="Spanish people" label="Spanish People"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="28561" end="28581" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q43702" start="28587" end="28594" title="Federation" label="federal"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="28611" end="28628" title="elective monarchy" label="elective monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q955006" start="28634" end="28657" title="President of the United Arab Emirates" label="President or Ra&amp;#x27;is"/>
<link wikidata="Q19833031" start="28709" end="28717" title="emirates of the United Arab Emirates" label="emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824428" start="28805" end="28833" title="Australian Monarchist League" label="Australian Monarchist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186811" start="28836" end="28857" title="Criticism of monarchy" label="Criticism of monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="28860" end="28870" title="Monarchism" label="Monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472275" start="28873" end="28883" title="Figurehead" label="Figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198907" start="28886" end="28908" title="Parliamentary republic" label="Parliamentary republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q389256" start="28911" end="28924" title="Reserve power" label="Reserve power"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5653" wikidata="Q513453" url="?curid=5653" title="Clarke's three laws">
<text>British science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke formulated three adages that are known as Clarke&#x27;s three laws, of which the third law is the best known and most widely cited. They are part of his ideas in his extensive writings about the future.

== The laws ==
The laws are:
# When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost certainly right. When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.
# The only way of discovering the limits of the possible is to venture a little way past them into the impossible.
# Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.

== Origins ==
One account stated that Clarke&#x27;s laws were developed after the editor of his works in French started numbering the author&#x27;s assertions. All three laws appear in Clarke&#x27;s essay &quot;Hazards of Prophecy: The Failure of Imagination&quot;, first published in &quot;Profiles of the Future&quot; (1962); however, they were not all published at the same time. Clarke&#x27;s first law was proposed in the 1962 edition of the essay, as &quot;Clarke&#x27;s Law&quot; in &quot;Profiles of the Future&quot;.

The second law is offered as a simple observation in the same essay but its status as Clarke&#x27;s second law was conferred by others. It was initially a derivative of the first law and formally became Clarke&#x27;s second law where the author proposed the third law in the 1973 revision of &quot;Profiles of the Future&quot;, which included an acknowledgement. It was also here that Clarke wrote about the third law in these words: &quot;As three laws were good enough for Newton, I have modestly decided to stop there&quot;.

The third law is the best known and most widely cited. It was published in a 1968 letter to &quot;Science&quot; magazine and eventually added to the 1973 revision of the &quot;Hazards of Prophecy&quot; essay.

== Variants of the third law ==
The third law has inspired many snowclones and other variations:
* Any sufficiently advanced extraterrestrial intelligence is indistinguishable from God. (Shermer&#x27;s last law)
* Any sufficiently advanced act of benevolence is indistinguishable from malevolence (referring to artificial intelligence)
* Any sufficiently advanced incompetence is indistinguishable from malice (Grey&#x27;s law)
*Any sufficiently advanced garbage is indistinguishable from magic. (Sterling&#x27;s corollary to Clarke&#x27;s law) This idea also underlies the setting of the novel Roadside Picnic by Arkady and Boris Strugatsky, in which human &quot;stalkers&quot; try to navigate the location of an alien &quot;visitation&quot;, trying to make sense of technically advanced items discarded by the aliens.
*Any sufficiently advanced garbage is indistinguishable from a rigged demo.

== Corollaries ==
Isaac Asimov&#x27;s Corollary to Clarke&#x27;s First Law: &quot;When, however, the lay public rallies round an idea that is denounced by distinguished but elderly scientists and supports that idea with great fervour and emotion – the distinguished but elderly scientists are then, after all, probably right.&quot;A of the third law is &quot;Any technology distinguishable from magic is insufficiently advanced.&quot; (Gehm&#x27;s corollary)

== See also ==
* Asimov&#x27;s 

== References ==
== External links ==

* The origins of the Three Laws
* &quot;What&#x27;s Your Law?&quot; (lists some of the corollaries)
* &quot;A Gadget Too Far&quot; by David Langford, at Infinity Plus</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q47087" start="31" end="47" title="Arthur C. Clarke" label="Arthur C. Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="65" end="70" title="adage" label="adage"/>
<link wikidata="Q513453" start="90" end="114" title="Clarke&amp;#x27;s three laws" label="Clarke&amp;#x27;s three laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="1653" end="1659" title="Isaac Newton" label="Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="1805" end="1812" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338287" start="1981" end="1990" title="snowclone" label="snowclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q126225" start="2104" end="2111" title="Michael Shermer" label="Shermer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2228" end="2251" title="Artificial intelligence#Malevolent and friendly AI" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q848517" start="2512" end="2527" title="Roadside Picnic" label="Roadside Picnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34981" start="3291" end="3297" title="Isaac Asimov" label="Asimov"/>
<link wikidata="Q720787" start="3480" end="3494" title="David Langford" label="David Langford"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614452" start="3499" end="3512" title="Infinity Plus" label="Infinity Plus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5654" wikidata="Q104884" url="?curid=5654" title="Caspar David Friedrich">
<text>Caspar David Friedrich (; 5 September 1774 – 7 May 1840) was a German Romantic landscape painter, generally considered the most important German artist of his generation, whose often symbolic, and anti-classical work, conveys a subjective, emotional response to the natural world. Friedrich&#x27;s paintings often set contemplative human figures silhouetted against night skies, morning mists, barren trees or Gothic ruins. Art historian Christopher John Murray described their presence, in diminished perspective, amid expansive landscapes, as reducing the figures to a scale that directs &quot;the viewer&#x27;s gaze towards their metaphysical dimension&quot;.

Friedrich was born in the town of Greifswald on the Baltic Sea in what was at the time Swedish Pomerania. He studied in Copenhagen 1794-1798, before settling in Dresden. He came of age during a period when, across Europe, a growing disillusionment with materialistic society was giving rise to a new appreciation of spirituality. This shift in ideals was often expressed through a reevaluation of the natural world, as artists such as Friedrich, J. M. W. Turner and John Constable sought to depict nature as a &quot;divine creation, to be set against the artifice of human civilization&quot;.

Friedrich&#x27;s work brought him renown early in his career. Contemporaries such as the French sculptor David d&#x27;Angers spoke of him as having discovered &quot;the tragedy of landscape&quot;. His work nevertheless fell from favour during his later years, and he died in obscurity. As Germany moved towards modernisation in the late 19th century, a new sense of urgency characterised its art, and Friedrich&#x27;s contemplative depictions of stillness came to be seen as products of a bygone age.

The early 20th century brought a renewed appreciation of his art, beginning in 1906 with an exhibition of thirty-two of his paintings in Berlin. His work influenced Expressionist artists and later Surrealists and Existentialists. The rise of Nazism in the early 1930s saw a resurgence in Friedrich&#x27;s popularity, but this was followed by a sharp decline as his paintings were, by association with the Nazi movement, seen as promoting German nationalism.

In the late 1970s Friedrich regained his reputation as an icon of the German Romantic movement and a painter of international importance. His work has been brought together in a major exhibition in Germany in 2024 under the title &quot;Infinitive Landscapes&quot;, which refers to the philosopher Friedrich Schleiermacher, who was important to Friedrich and whose mathematics of infinity found its way into Friedrich&#x27;s geometrically constructed paintings as hyperbolas and the golden ratio.

In 2025, the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York will also show a 75 piece exhibition on Caspar David Friedrich under the title &quot;Caspar David Friedrich: The Soul of Nature.&quot;

==Life==

===Early years and family===

Caspar David Friedrich was born on 5 September 1774, in Greifswald, Swedish Pomerania, on the Baltic coast of Germany. The sixth of ten children, he was raised in the strict Lutheran creed of his father Adolf Gottlieb Friedrich, a candle-maker and soap boiler. Records of the family&#x27;s financial circumstances are contradictory; while some sources indicate the children were privately tutored, others record that they were raised in relative poverty. He became familiar with death from an early age. His mother, Sophie, died in 1781 when he was seven. A year later, his sister Elisabeth died, and a second sister, Maria, succumbed to typhus in 1791. Arguably the greatest tragedy of his childhood happened in 1787 when his brother Johann Christoffer died: at the age of thirteen, Caspar David witnessed his younger brother fall through the ice of a frozen lake, and drown. Some accounts suggest that Johann Christoffer perished while trying to rescue Caspar David, who was also in danger on the ice.

Friedrich began his formal study of art in 1790 as a private student of artist Johann Gottfried Quistorp at the University of Greifswald in his home city, at which the art department is now named &quot;Caspar-David-Friedrich-Institut&quot; in his honour. Quistorp took his students on outdoor drawing excursions; as a result, Friedrich was encouraged to sketch from life at an early age. Through Quistorp, Friedrich met and was subsequently influenced by the theologian Ludwig Gotthard Kosegarten, who taught that nature was a revelation of God. Quistorp introduced Friedrich to the work of the German 17th-century artist Adam Elsheimer, whose works often included religious subjects dominated by landscape, and nocturnal subjects. During this period he also studied literature and aesthetics with Swedish professor Thomas Thorild. Four years later Friedrich entered the prestigious Academy of Copenhagen, where he began his education by making copies of casts from antique sculptures before proceeding to drawing from life.

Living in Copenhagen afforded the young painter access to the Royal Picture Gallery&#x27;s collection of 17th-century Dutch landscape painting. At the academy he studied under teachers such as Christian August Lorentzen and the landscape painter Jens Juel. These artists were inspired by the &quot;Sturm und Drang&quot; movement and represented a midpoint between the dramatic intensity and expressive manner of the budding Romantic aesthetic and the waning neo-classical ideal. Mood was paramount, and influence was drawn from such sources as the Icelandic legend of Edda, the poems of Ossian and Norse mythology.

===Move to Dresden===

Friedrich settled permanently in Dresden in 1798. During this early period, he experimented in printmaking with etchings and designs for woodcuts which his furniture-maker brother cut. By 1804 he had produced 18 etchings and four woodcuts; they were apparently made in small numbers and only distributed to friends. Despite these forays into other media, he gravitated toward working primarily with ink, watercolour and sepias. With the exception of a few early pieces, such as &quot;&quot; (1797), he did not work extensively with oils until his reputation was more established.

Landscapes were his preferred subject, inspired by frequent trips, beginning in 1801, to the Baltic coast, Bohemia, the Krkonoše and the Harz Mountains. Mostly based on the landscapes of northern Germany, his paintings depict woods, hills, harbors, morning mists and other light effects based on a close observation of nature. These works were modeled on sketches and studies of scenic spots, such as the cliffs on Rügen, the surroundings of Dresden and the river Elbe. He executed his studies almost exclusively in pencil, even providing topographical information, yet the subtle atmospheric effects characteristic of Friedrich&#x27;s mid-period paintings were rendered from memory. These effects took their strength from the depiction of light, and of the illumination of sun and moon on clouds and water: optical phenomena peculiar to the Baltic coast that had never before been painted with such an emphasis.

His reputation as an artist was established when he won a prize in 1805 at the Weimar competition organised by Johann Wolfgang von Goethe. At the time, the Weimar competition tended to draw mediocre and now-forgotten artists presenting derivative mixtures of neo-classical and pseudo-Greek styles. The poor quality of the entries began to prove damaging to Goethe&#x27;s reputation, so when Friedrich entered two sepia drawings—&quot;Procession at Dawn&quot; and &quot;Fisher-Folk by the Sea&quot;—the poet responded enthusiastically and wrote, &quot;We must praise the artist&#x27;s resourcefulness in this picture fairly. The drawing is well done, the procession is ingenious and appropriate ... his treatment combines a great deal of firmness, diligence and neatness ... the ingenious watercolour ... is also worthy of praise.&quot;

Friedrich completed the first of his major paintings in 1808, at the age of 34. &quot;Cross in the Mountains&quot;, today known as the &quot;Tetschen Altar&quot;, is an altarpiece panel said to have been commissioned for a family chapel in Tetschen, Bohemia. The panel depicts a cross in profile at the top of a mountain, alone, and surrounded by pine trees.

Although the altarpiece was generally coldly received, it was Friedrich&#x27;s first painting to receive wide publicity. The artist&#x27;s friends publicly defended the work, while art critic Basilius von Ramdohr published a long article challenging Friedrich&#x27;s use of landscape in a religious context. He rejected the idea that landscape painting could convey explicit meaning, writing that it would be &quot;a veritable presumption, if landscape painting were to sneak into the church and creep onto the altar&quot;. Friedrich responded with a programme describing his intentions in 1809, comparing the rays of the evening sun to the light of the Holy Father. This statement marked the only time Friedrich recorded a detailed interpretation of his own work, and the painting was among the few commissions the artist ever received.

Following the purchase of two of his paintings by the Prussian Crown Prince, Friedrich was elected a member of the Berlin Academy in 1810. Yet in 1816, he sought to distance himself from Prussian authority and applied that June for Saxon citizenship. The move was not expected; the Saxon government was pro-French, while Friedrich&#x27;s paintings were seen as generally patriotic and distinctly anti-French. Nevertheless, with the aid of his Dresden-based friend Graf Vitzthum von Eckstädt, Friedrich attained citizenship, and in 1818, membership in the Saxon Academy with a yearly dividend of 150 thalers. Although he had hoped to receive a full professorship, it was never awarded him as, according to the German Library of Information, &quot;it was felt that his painting was too personal, his point of view too individual to serve as a fruitful example to students.&quot; Politics too may have played a role in stalling his career: Friedrich&#x27;s decidedly Germanic subjects and costuming frequently clashed with the era&#x27;s prevailing pro-French attitudes.

===Marriage===
On 21 January 1818, Friedrich married , the twenty-five-year-old daughter of a dyer from Dresden. The couple had three children, with their first, Emma, arriving in 1820. , their third child, was named after Swedish King Gustavus Adolphus, and became a notable painter in his own right.

Physiologist and painter Carl Gustav Carus notes in his biographical essays that marriage did not impact significantly on either Friedrich&#x27;s life or personality, yet his canvasses from this period, including &quot;Chalk Cliffs on Rügen&quot;—painted after his honeymoon—display a new sense of levity, while his palette is brighter and less austere. Human figures appear with increasing frequency in the paintings of this period, which Siegel interprets as a reflection that &quot;the importance of human life, particularly his family, now occupies his thoughts more and more, and his friends, his wife, and his townspeople appear as frequent subjects in his art.&quot;

Around this time, he found support from two sources in Russia. In 1820, the Grand Duke Nikolai Pavlovich, at the behest of his wife Alexandra Feodorovna, visited Friedrich&#x27;s studio and returned to Saint Petersburg with a number of his paintings, an exchange that began a patronage that continued for many years. Not long thereafter, the poet Vasily Zhukovsky, tutor to the Grand Duke&#x27;s son (later Tsar Alexander II), met Friedrich in 1821 and found in him a kindred spirit. For decades Zhukovsky helped Friedrich both by purchasing his work himself and by recommending his art to the royal family; his assistance toward the end of Friedrich&#x27;s career proved invaluable to the ailing and impoverished artist. Zhukovsky remarked that his friend&#x27;s paintings &quot;please us by their precision, each of them awakening a memory in our mind.&quot;

Friedrich was acquainted with Philipp Otto Runge, another leading German painter of the Romantic period. He was also a friend of Georg Friedrich Kersting, and painted him at work in his unadorned studio, and of the Norwegian painter Johan Christian Clausen Dahl (1788–1857). Dahl was close to Friedrich during the artist&#x27;s final years, and he expressed dismay that to the art-buying public, Friedrich&#x27;s pictures were only &quot;curiosities&quot;. While the poet Zhukovsky appreciated Friedrich&#x27;s psychological themes, Dahl praised the descriptive quality of Friedrich&#x27;s landscapes, commenting that &quot;artists and connoisseurs saw in Friedrich&#x27;s art only a kind of mystic, because they themselves were only looking out for the mystic ... They did not see Friedrich&#x27;s faithful and conscientious study of nature in everything he represented&quot;.

==Later life==

Friedrich&#x27;s reputation steadily declined over the final fifteen years of his life. As the ideals of early Romanticism passed from fashion, he came to be viewed as an eccentric and melancholy character, out of touch with the times. Gradually his patrons fell away. By 1820, he was living as a recluse and was described by friends as the &quot;most solitary of the solitary&quot;. Towards the end of his life he lived in relative poverty. He became isolated and spent long periods of the day and night walking alone through woods and fields, often beginning his strolls before sunrise.

He suffered his first stroke in June 1835, which left him with minor limb paralysis and greatly reduced his ability to paint. As a result, he was unable to work in oil; instead he was limited to watercolour, sepia and reworking older compositions. Although his vision remained strong, he had lost the full strength of his hand. Yet he was able to produce a final &#x27;black painting&#x27;, &quot;Seashore by Moonlight&quot; (1835–1836), described by Vaughan as the &quot;darkest of all his shorelines, in which richness of tonality compensates for the lack of his former finesse&quot;. Symbols of death appeared in his work from this period. Soon after his stroke, the Russian royal family purchased a number of his earlier works, and the proceeds allowed him to travel to Teplitz—in today&#x27;s Czech Republic—to recover.

During the mid-1830s, Friedrich began a series of portraits and he returned to observing himself in nature. As the art historian William Vaughan observed, however, &quot;He can see himself as a man greatly changed. He is no longer the upright, supportive figure that appeared in &quot;Two Men Contemplating the Moon&quot; in 1819. He is old and stiff ... he moves with a stoop&quot;. By 1838, he was capable of working in a small format only. He and his family were living in poverty and grew increasingly dependent for support on the charity of friends.

===Death===

Friedrich died in Dresden on 7 May 1840, and was buried in Dresden&#x27;s Trinitatis-Friedhof (Trinity Cemetery) east of the city centre (the entrance to which he had painted some 15 years earlier). His simple flat gravestone lies north-west of the central roundel within the main avenue. His wife Caroline died impoverished seven years later, in 1847. 

By this time his reputation and fame had waned, and his passing was little noticed within the artistic community. His artwork had certainly been acknowledged during his lifetime, but not widely. While the close study of landscape and an emphasis on the spiritual elements of nature were commonplace in contemporary art, his interpretations were highly original and personal. By 1838, his work no longer sold or received attention from critics; the Romantic movement had moved away from the early idealism that the artist had helped found.

Carl Gustav Carus later wrote a series of articles which paid tribute to Friedrich&#x27;s transformation of the conventions of landscape painting. However, Carus&#x27; articles placed Friedrich firmly in his time, and did not place the artist within a continuing tradition. Only one of his paintings had been reproduced as a print, and that was produced in very few copies.

==Themes==
===Landscape and the sublime===

The visualisation and portrayal of landscape in an entirely new manner was Friedrich&#x27;s key innovation. He sought not just to explore the blissful enjoyment of a beautiful view, as in the classic conception, but rather to examine an instant of sublimity, a reunion with the spiritual self through the contemplation of nature. Friedrich was instrumental in transforming landscape in art from a backdrop subordinated to human drama to a self-contained emotive subject. Friedrich&#x27;s paintings commonly employed the &quot;Rückenfigur&quot;—a person seen from behind, contemplating the view. The viewer is encouraged to place himself in the position of the &quot;Rückenfigur&quot;, by which means he experiences the sublime potential of nature, understanding that the scene is as perceived and idealised by a human.

Friedrich created the idea of a landscape full of romantic feeling—&quot;die romantische Stimmungslandschaft&quot;. His art details a wide range of geographical features, such as rock coasts, forests and mountain scenes, and often used landscape to express religious themes. During his time, most of the best-known paintings were viewed as expressions of a religious mysticism. He wrote: &quot;The artist should paint not only what he sees before him, but also what he sees within him. If, however, he sees nothing within him, then he should also refrain from painting that which he sees before him. Otherwise, his pictures will be like those folding screens behind which one expects to find only the sick or the dead.&quot; Expansive skies, storms, mist, forests, ruins and crosses bearing witness to the presence of God are frequent elements in Friedrich&#x27;s landscapes. Though death finds symbolic expression in boats that move away from shore—a Charon-like motif—and in the poplar tree, it is referenced more directly in paintings like &quot;The Abbey in the Oakwood&quot; (1808–1810), in which monks carry a coffin past an open grave, toward a cross, and through the portal of a church in ruins.

He was one of the first artists to portray winter landscapes in which the land is rendered as stark and dead. Friedrich&#x27;s winter scenes are solemn and still—according to the art historian Hermann Beenken, Friedrich painted winter scenes in which &quot;no man has yet set his foot. The theme of nearly all the older winter pictures had been less winter itself than life in winter. In the 16th and 17th centuries, it was thought impossible to leave out such motifs as the crowd of skaters, the wanderer ... It was Friedrich who first felt the wholly detached and distinctive features of a natural life. Instead of many tones, he sought the one; and so, in his landscape, he subordinated the composite chord into one single basic note&quot;.

Bare oak trees and tree stumps, such as those in &quot;Raven Tree&quot; (), &quot;Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon&quot; (), and &quot;Willow Bush under a Setting Sun&quot; (), are recurring elements of his paintings, and usually symbolise death. Countering the sense of despair are Friedrich&#x27;s symbols for redemption: the cross and the clearing sky promise eternal life, and the slender moon suggests hope and the growing closeness of Christ. In his paintings of the sea, anchors often appear on the shore, also indicating a spiritual hope. In &quot;The Abbey in the Oakwood&quot;, the movement of the monks away from the open grave and toward the cross and the horizon imparts Friedrich&#x27;s message that the final destination of man&#x27;s life lies beyond the grave.

With dawn and dusk constituting prominent themes of his landscapes, Friedrich&#x27;s own later years were characterised by a growing pessimism. His work becomes darker, revealing a fearsome monumentality. &quot;The Wreck of the Hope&quot;—also known as &quot;The Polar Sea&quot; or &quot;The Sea of Ice&quot; (1823–1824)—perhaps best summarises Friedrich&#x27;s ideas and aims at this point, though in such a radical way that the painting was not well received. Completed in 1824, it depicted a grim subject, a shipwreck in the Arctic Ocean; &quot;the image he produced, with its grinding slabs of travertine-colored floe ice chewing up a wooden ship, goes beyond documentary into allegory: the frail bark of human aspiration crushed by the world&#x27;s immense and glacial indifference.&quot;

Friedrich&#x27;s written commentary on aesthetics was limited to a collection of aphorisms set down in 1830, in which he explained the need for the artist to match natural observation with an introspective scrutiny of his own personality. His best-known remark advises the artist to &quot;close your bodily eye so that you may see your picture first with the spiritual eye. Then bring to the light of day that which you have seen in the darkness so that it may react upon others from the outside inwards.&quot;

===Loneliness and death===

Both Friedrich&#x27;s life and art have at times been perceived by some to have been marked with an overwhelming sense of loneliness. Art historians and some of his contemporaries attribute such interpretations to the losses suffered during his youth to the bleak outlook of his adulthood, while Friedrich&#x27;s pale and withdrawn appearance helped reinforce the popular notion of the &quot;taciturn man from the North&quot;.

Friedrich suffered depressive episodes in 1799, 1803–1805, c. 1813, in 1816 and between 1824 and 1826. There are noticeable thematic shifts in the works he produced during these episodes, which see the emergence of such motifs and symbols as vultures, owls, graveyards and ruins. From 1826 these motifs became a permanent feature of his output, while his use of colour became more dark and muted. Carus wrote in 1829 that Friedrich &quot;is surrounded by a thick, gloomy cloud of spiritual uncertainty&quot;, though the noted art historian and curator Hubertus Gassner disagrees with such notions, seeing in Friedrich&#x27;s work a positive and life-affirming subtext inspired by Freemasonry and religion.

===Germanic folklore===

Reflecting Friedrich&#x27;s patriotism and resentment during the 1813 French occupation of the dominion of Pomerania, motifs from German folklore became increasingly prominent in his work. An anti-French German nationalist, Friedrich used motifs from his native landscape to celebrate Germanic culture, customs and mythology. He was impressed by the anti-Napoleonic poetry of Ernst Moritz Arndt and Theodor Körner, and the patriotic literature of Adam Müller and Heinrich von Kleist. Moved by the deaths of three friends killed in battle against France, as well as by Kleist&#x27;s 1808 drama &quot;Die Hermannsschlacht&quot;, Friedrich undertook a number of paintings in which he intended to convey political symbols solely by means of the landscape—a first in the history of art.

In &quot;&quot; (1812), a dilapidated monument inscribed &quot;Arminius&quot; invokes the Germanic chieftain, a symbol of nationalism, while the four tombs of fallen heroes are slightly ajar, freeing their spirits for eternity. Two French soldiers appear as small figures before a cave, lower and deep in a grotto surrounded by rock, as if farther from heaven. A second political painting, &quot;&quot; (c. 1813), depicts a lost French soldier dwarfed by a dense forest, while on a tree stump a raven is perched—a prophet of doom, symbolizing the anticipated defeat of France.

==Legacy==

===Influence===
Alongside other Romantic painters, Friedrich helped position landscape painting as a major genre within Western art. Of his contemporaries, Friedrich&#x27;s style most influenced the painting of Johan Christian Dahl (1788–1857). Among later generations, Arnold Böcklin (1827–1901) was strongly influenced by his work, and the substantial presence of Friedrich&#x27;s works in Russian collections influenced many Russian painters, in particular Arkhip Kuindzhi (c. 1842–1910) and Ivan Shishkin (1832–1898). Friedrich&#x27;s spirituality anticipated American painters such as Albert Pinkham Ryder (1847–1917), Ralph Blakelock (1847–1919), the painters of the Hudson River School and the New England Luminists.
At the turn of the 20th century, Friedrich was rediscovered by the Norwegian art historian Andreas Aubert (1851–1913), whose writing initiated modern Friedrich scholarship, and by the Symbolist painters, who valued his visionary and allegorical landscapes. The Norwegian Symbolist Edvard Munch (1863–1944) would have seen Friedrich&#x27;s work during a visit to Berlin in the 1880s. Munch&#x27;s 1899 print &quot;The Lonely Ones&quot; echoes Friedrich&#x27;s &quot;Rückenfigur (back figure)&quot;, although in Munch&#x27;s work the focus has shifted away from the broad landscape and toward the sense of dislocation between the two melancholy figures in the foreground.

Friedrich&#x27;s modern revival gained momentum in 1906, when thirty-two of his works were featured in an exhibition in Berlin of Romantic-era art. His landscapes exercised a strong influence on the work of German artist Max Ernst (1891–1976), and as a result other Surrealists came to view Friedrich as a precursor to their movement. In 1934, the Belgian painter René Magritte (1898–1967) paid tribute in his work &quot;The Human Condition&quot;, which directly echoes motifs from Friedrich&#x27;s art in its questioning of perception and the role of the viewer.

A few years later, the Surrealist journal &quot;Minotaure&quot; included Friedrich in a 1939 article by the critic Marie Landsberger, thereby exposing his work to a far wider circle of artists. The influence of &quot;The Wreck of Hope&quot; (or &quot;The Sea of Ice&quot;) is evident in the 1940–41 painting &quot;Totes Meer&quot; by Paul Nash (1889–1946), a fervent admirer of Ernst. Friedrich&#x27;s work has been cited as an inspiration by other major 20th-century artists, including Mark Rothko (1903–1970), Gerhard Richter (b. 1932), Gotthard Graubner and Anselm Kiefer (b. 1945). Friedrich&#x27;s Romantic paintings have also been singled out by writer Samuel Beckett (1906–89), who, standing before &quot;Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon&quot;, said &quot;This was the source of &quot;Waiting for Godot&quot;, you know.&quot;

In his 1961 article &quot;The Abstract Sublime&quot;, originally published in &quot;ARTnews&quot;, the art historian Robert Rosenblum drew comparisons between the Romantic landscape paintings of both Friedrich and Turner with the Abstract Expressionist paintings of Mark Rothko. Rosenblum specifically describes Friedrich&#x27;s 1809 painting &quot;The Monk by the Sea&quot;, Turner&#x27;s &quot;The Evening Star&quot; and Rothko&#x27;s 1954 &quot;Light, Earth and Blue&quot; as revealing affinities of vision and feeling. According to Rosenblum, &quot;Rothko, like Friedrich and Turner, places us on the threshold of those shapeless infinities discussed by the aestheticians of the Sublime. The tiny monk in the Friedrich and the fisher in the Turner establish a poignant contrast between the infinite vastness of a pantheistic God and the infinite smallness of His creatures. In the abstract language of Rothko, such literal detail—a bridge of empathy between the real spectator and the presentation of a transcendental landscape—is no longer necessary; we ourselves are the monk before the sea, standing silently and contemplatively before these huge and soundless pictures as if we were looking at a sunset or a moonlit night.&quot;

===Critical opinion===
Until 1890, and especially after his friends had died, Friedrich&#x27;s work lay in near-oblivion for decades. Yet, by 1890, the symbolism in his work began to ring true with the artistic mood of the day, especially in central Europe. However, despite a renewed interest and an acknowledgment of his originality, his lack of regard for &quot;painterly effect&quot; and thinly rendered surfaces jarred with the theories of the time.
During the 1930s, Friedrich&#x27;s work was used in the promotion of Nazi ideology, which attempted to fit the Romantic artist within the nationalistic &quot;Blut und Boden&quot;. It took decades for Friedrich&#x27;s reputation to recover from this association with Nazism. His reliance on symbolism and the fact that his work fell outside the narrow definitions of modernism contributed to his fall from favour. In 1949, art historian Kenneth Clark wrote that Friedrich &quot;worked in the frigid technique of his time, which could hardly inspire a school of modern painting&quot;, and suggested that the artist was trying to express in painting what is best left to poetry. Clark&#x27;s dismissal of Friedrich reflected the damage the artist&#x27;s reputation sustained during the late 1930s.

Friedrich&#x27;s reputation suffered further damage when his imagery was adopted by a number of Hollywood directors, including Walt Disney, built on the work of such German cinema masters as Fritz Lang and F. W. Murnau, within the horror and fantasy genres. His rehabilitation was slow, but enhanced through the writings of such critics and scholars as Werner Hofmann, Helmut Börsch-Supan and Sigrid Hinz, who successfully rebutted the political associations ascribed to his work, developed a &quot;catalogue raisonné&quot;, and placed Friedrich within a purely art-historical context.

By the 1970s, he was again being exhibited in major international galleries and found favour with a new generation of critics and art historians. Today, his international reputation is well established. He is a national icon in his native Germany, and highly regarded by art historians and connoisseurs across the Western World. He is generally viewed as a figure of great psychological complexity, and according to Vaughan, &quot;a believer who struggled with doubt, a celebrator of beauty haunted by darkness. In the end, he transcends interpretation, reaching across cultures through the compelling appeal of his imagery. He has truly emerged as a butterfly—hopefully one that will never again disappear from our sight&quot;.

==Work==
Friedrich was a prolific artist who produced more than 500 attributed works. In line with the Romantic ideals of his time, he intended his paintings to function as pure aesthetic statements, so he was cautious that the titles given to his work were not overly descriptive or evocative. It is likely that some of today&#x27;s more literal titles, such as &quot;The Stages of Life&quot;, were not given by the artist himself, but were instead adopted during one of the revivals of interest in Friedrich. Complications arise when dating Friedrich&#x27;s work, in part because he often did not directly name or date his canvases. He kept a carefully detailed notebook on his output, however, which has been used by scholars to tie paintings to their completion dates.

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* 250 Years Caspar David Friedrich
* Hermitage Museum Archive
* CasparDavidFriedrich.org – 89 paintings by Caspar David Friedrich
* Biographical timeline, Hamburg Kunsthalle
* Caspar David Friedrich and the German romantic landscape
* &quot;German masters of the nineteenth century: paintings and drawings from the Federal Republic of Germany&quot; (1981), full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on Caspar David Friedrich (no. 29–36)
* Caspar David Friedrich: The Soul of Nature Exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, February 8 — May 11, 2025. Press release &quot;The New York Times&quot; review</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q104884" start="0" end="22" title="Caspar David Friedrich" label="Caspar David Friedrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477112" start="63" end="78" title="German Romanticism" label="German Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="79" end="88" title="Landscape painting" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="202" end="211" title="Classicism" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="346" end="356" title="silhouette" label="silhouette"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="410" end="416" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098" start="698" end="708" title="Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="716" end="726" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q682318" start="751" end="768" title="Swedish Pomerania" label="Swedish Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="784" end="794" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="825" end="832" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="1110" end="1125" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="J. M. W. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="1130" end="1144" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q364498" start="1363" end="1382" title="David d&amp;#x27;Angers" label="David d&amp;#x27;Angers"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="1925" end="1938" title="Expressionism" label="Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="1957" end="1968" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q38066" start="1973" end="1988" title="Existentialism" label="Existentialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="2198" end="2216" title="German nationalism" label="German nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4098" start="3000" end="3010" title="Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q682318" start="3012" end="3029" title="Swedish Pomerania" label="Swedish Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="3038" end="3044" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="3118" end="3126" title="Lutheran" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100244" start="3175" end="3187" title="History of candle making" label="candle-maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q160649" start="3582" end="3588" title="typhus fever" label="typhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165528" start="4061" end="4085" title="University of Greifswald" label="University of Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q71484" start="4419" end="4445" title="Ludwig Gotthard Kosegarten" label="Ludwig Gotthard Kosegarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q310285" start="4571" end="4585" title="Adam Elsheimer" label="Adam Elsheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35986" start="4731" end="4741" title="aesthetics" label="aesthetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q545604" start="4765" end="4779" title="Thomas Thorild" label="Thomas Thorild"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641001" start="4832" end="4853" title="Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts" label="Academy of Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q671384" start="5037" end="5065" title="Statens Museum for Kunst" label="Royal Picture Gallery&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416034" start="5168" end="5194" title="Christian August Lorentzen" label="Christian August Lorentzen"/>
<link wikidata="Q581361" start="5221" end="5230" title="Jens Juel (painter)" label="Jens Juel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207741" start="5273" end="5288" title="Sturm und Drang" label="Sturm und Drang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5433" end="5446" title="Neoclassicism#In architecture and in the decorative and visual arts" label="neo-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q108652" start="5543" end="5547" title="Edda" label="Edda"/>
<link wikidata="Q15837802" start="5562" end="5568" title="Ossian" label="Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="5573" end="5588" title="Norse mythology" label="Norse mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q271588" start="5709" end="5720" title="printmaking" label="printmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q186986" start="5726" end="5733" title="etching" label="etching"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="5751" end="5758" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12981547" start="6013" end="6016" title="India ink" label="ink"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="6018" end="6029" title="watercolour" label="watercolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q767608" start="6034" end="6039" title="sepia (color)" label="sepia"/>
<link wikidata="Q174705" start="6146" end="6150" title="oil painting" label="oils"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="6288" end="6300" title="Baltic coast" label="Baltic coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="6302" end="6309" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214644" start="6315" end="6323" title="Krkonoše" label="Krkonoše"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="6332" end="6346" title="Harz Mountains" label="Harz Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="6610" end="6615" title="Rügen" label="Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="6659" end="6663" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="7220" end="7246" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q884782" start="8032" end="8054" title="Cross in the Mountains (Tetschen Altar)" label="Cross in the Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q15711026" start="8115" end="8125" title="altarpiece" label="altarpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q146307" start="8186" end="8194" title="Děčín" label="Tetschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="8196" end="8203" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215600" start="8498" end="8518" title="Basilius von Ramdohr" label="Basilius von Ramdohr"/>
<link wikidata="Q186350" start="8960" end="8971" title="God the Father" label="Holy Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="9260" end="9274" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Berlin Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162528" start="9744" end="9751" title="thalers" label="thalers"/>
<link wikidata="Q189720" start="10308" end="10311" title="dye" label="dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q52938" start="10450" end="10467" title="Gustavus Adolphus" label="Gustavus Adolphus"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="10517" end="10529" title="Physiologist" label="Physiologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61987" start="10542" end="10559" title="Carl Gustav Carus" label="Carl Gustav Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787143" start="10736" end="10757" title="Chalk Cliffs on Rügen" label="Chalk Cliffs on Rügen"/>
<link wikidata="Q130734" start="11279" end="11296" title="Nicholas I of Russia" label="Nikolai Pavlovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q57207" start="11324" end="11344" title="Alexandra Feodorovna (Charlotte of Prussia)" label="Alexandra Feodorovna"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="11394" end="11410" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157623" start="11539" end="11555" title="Vasily Zhukovsky" label="Vasily Zhukovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="11599" end="11616" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Tsar Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q166585" start="12084" end="12102" title="Philipp Otto Runge" label="Philipp Otto Runge"/>
<link wikidata="Q215590" start="12183" end="12207" title="Georg Friedrich Kersting" label="Georg Friedrich Kersting"/>
<link wikidata="Q164735" start="12287" end="12315" title="Johan Christian Clausen Dahl" label="Johan Christian Clausen Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="12746" end="12752" title="Mysticism" label="mystic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="13561" end="13567" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q112707" start="14209" end="14229" title="House of Romanov" label="Russian royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q146342" start="14313" end="14320" title="Teplice" label="Teplitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019694" start="14494" end="14509" title="William Vaughan (art historian)" label="William Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q232087" start="14650" end="14680" title="Two Men Contemplating the Moon" label="Two Men Contemplating the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q61987" start="15829" end="15846" title="Carl Gustav Carus" label="Carl Gustav Carus"/>
<link wikidata="Q999803" start="16496" end="16505" title="Sublime (philosophy)" label="sublimity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18027582" start="16774" end="16785" title="Rückenfigur" label="Rückenfigur"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="17435" end="17444" title="mysticism" label="mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144689" start="17711" end="17725" title="folding screen" label="folding screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612" start="18020" end="18026" title="Charon (mythology)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q334360" start="18117" end="18141" title="The Abbey in the Oakwood" label="The Abbey in the Oakwood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19073" end="19083" title=":File:Caspar David Friedrich The Tree of Crows.jpg" label="Raven Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q232087" start="19100" end="19136" title="Two Men Contemplating the Moon" label="Man and Woman Contemplating the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="19385" end="19397" title="Immortality" label="eternal life"/>
<link wikidata="Q194137" start="20089" end="20103" title="The Sea of Ice" label="The Sea of Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="20399" end="20409" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378564" start="20418" end="20422" title="Drift ice" label="floe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="20677" end="20685" title="aphorism" label="aphorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="22244" end="22255" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="22403" end="22412" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q858157" start="22426" end="22441" title="German folklore" label="German folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q378935" start="22611" end="22620" title="Continental Germanic mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="22651" end="22661" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q57351" start="22672" end="22690" title="Ernst Moritz Arndt" label="Ernst Moritz Arndt"/>
<link wikidata="Q62344" start="22695" end="22709" title="Theodor Körner (author)" label="Theodor Körner"/>
<link wikidata="Q63176" start="22743" end="22754" title="Adam Müller" label="Adam Müller"/>
<link wikidata="Q28494" start="22759" end="22778" title="Heinrich von Kleist" label="Heinrich von Kleist"/>
<link wikidata="Q68880" start="23142" end="23150" title="Arminius" label="Arminius"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="23746" end="23764" title="landscape painting" label="landscape painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q164735" start="23880" end="23900" title="Johan Christian Dahl" label="Johan Christian Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q123071" start="23939" end="23953" title="Arnold Böcklin" label="Arnold Böcklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q353628" start="24129" end="24144" title="Arkhip Kuindzhi" label="Arkhip Kuindzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193064" start="24164" end="24177" title="Ivan Shishkin" label="Ivan Shishkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q948598" start="24259" end="24279" title="Albert Pinkham Ryder" label="Albert Pinkham Ryder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353482" start="24293" end="24308" title="Ralph Albert Blakelock" label="Ralph Blakelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q943853" start="24342" end="24361" title="Hudson River School" label="Hudson River School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272569" start="24370" end="24391" title="Luminism (American art style)" label="New England Luminists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777870" start="24484" end="24498" title="Andreas Aubert (art historian)" label="Andreas Aubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="24577" end="24586" title="Symbolism (arts)" label="Symbolist"/>
<link wikidata="Q41406" start="24674" end="24686" title="Edvard Munch" label="Edvard Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q154842" start="25285" end="25294" title="Max Ernst" label="Max Ernst"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="25330" end="25340" title="Surrealist" label="Surrealist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836" start="25428" end="25441" title="René Magritte" label="René Magritte"/>
<link wikidata="Q52707506" start="25485" end="25504" title="The Human Condition (painting)" label="The Human Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518390" start="25677" end="25686" title="Minotaure" label="Minotaure"/>
<link wikidata="Q28532596" start="25943" end="25953" title="Totes Meer" label="Totes Meer"/>
<link wikidata="Q727643" start="25963" end="25972" title="Paul Nash (artist)" label="Paul Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q160149" start="26116" end="26127" title="Mark Rothko" label="Mark Rothko"/>
<link wikidata="Q164351" start="26141" end="26156" title="Gerhard Richter" label="Gerhard Richter"/>
<link wikidata="Q880775" start="26168" end="26185" title="Gotthard Graubner" label="Gotthard Graubner"/>
<link wikidata="Q170344" start="26190" end="26203" title="Anselm Kiefer" label="Anselm Kiefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="26288" end="26302" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="26425" end="26442" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Waiting for Godot"/>
<link wikidata="Q705816" start="26551" end="26558" title="ARTnews" label="ARTnews"/>
<link wikidata="Q177725" start="26697" end="26719" title="Abstract Expressionist" label="Abstract Expressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q693746" start="26816" end="26835" title="The Monk by the Sea" label="The Monk by the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="28229" end="28233" title="Nazism" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q570012" start="28318" end="28332" title="Blood and soil" label="Blut und Boden"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="28526" end="28535" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q371258" start="28596" end="28609" title="Kenneth Clark" label="Kenneth Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="29083" end="29094" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q19504" start="29147" end="29157" title="Fritz Lang" label="Fritz Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q55412" start="29162" end="29174" title="F. W. Murnau" label="F. W. Murnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q89629" start="29309" end="29323" title="Werner Hofmann (art historian)" label="Werner Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050259" start="29455" end="29473" title="catalogue raisonné" label="catalogue raisonné"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214313" start="30642" end="30660" title="The Stages of Life" label="The Stages of Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="31699" end="31725" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5655" wikidata="Q222071" url="?curid=5655" title="Courtney Love">
<text>Courtney Michelle Love (née Harrison; born July 9, 1964) is an American singer, guitarist, songwriter, and actress. A figure in the alternative and grunge scenes of the 1990s, her career has spanned four decades. She rose to prominence as the lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist of the alternative rock band Hole, which she formed in 1989. Love has drawn public attention for her uninhibited live performances and confrontational lyrics, as well as her highly publicized personal life following her marriage to Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain. In 2020, &quot;NME&quot; named her one of the most influential singers in alternative culture of the last 30 years.

Love had an itinerant childhood, but was primarily raised in Portland, Oregon, where she played in a series of short-lived bands and was active in the local punk scene. After briefly being in a juvenile hall, she spent a year living in Dublin and Liverpool before returning to the United States and pursuing an acting career. She appeared in supporting roles in the Alex Cox films &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; (1986) and &quot;Straight to Hell&quot; (1987) before forming the band Hole in Los Angeles with guitarist Eric Erlandson. The group received critical acclaim from underground rock press for their 1991 debut album &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot;, produced by Kim Gordon, while their second release, &quot;Live Through This&quot; (1994), was met with critical accolades and multi-platinum sales. In 1995, Love returned to acting, earning a Golden Globe Award nomination for her performance as Althea Leasure in Miloš Forman&#x27;s &quot;The People vs. Larry Flynt&quot; (1996), which established her as a mainstream actress. The following year, Hole&#x27;s third album, &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot; (1998), was nominated for three Grammy Awards.

Love continued to work as an actress into the early 2000s, appearing in big-budget pictures such as &quot;Man on the Moon&quot; (1999) and &quot;Trapped&quot; (2002), before releasing her first solo album, &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot;, in 2004. The subsequent several years were marred with publicity surrounding Love&#x27;s legal troubles and drug relapse, which resulted in a mandatory lockdown rehabilitation sentence in 2005 while she was writing a second solo album. That project became &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot;, released in 2010 as a Hole album but without the former Hole lineup. Between 2014 and 2015, Love released two solo singles and returned to acting in the network series &quot;Sons of Anarchy&quot; and &quot;Empire&quot;. In 2020, she confirmed she was writing new music. Love has also been active as a writer; she co-created and co-wrote three volumes of a manga, &quot;Princess Ai&quot;, between 2004 and 2006, and wrote a memoir, &quot;Dirty Blonde&quot; (2006).

==Life and career==
===1964–1982: Childhood and education===
Courtney Michelle Harrison was born July 9, 1964, at Saint Francis Memorial Hospital in San Francisco, the first child of psychotherapist Linda Carroll (née Risi; born 1944) and Hank Harrison (1941–2022), a publisher and road manager for the Grateful Dead. Her parents met at a party held for Dizzy Gillespie in 1963, and the two married in Reno, Nevada after Carroll discovered she was pregnant. Carroll, who was adopted at birth, is the biological daughter of novelist Paula Fox. Love&#x27;s matrilineal great-grandmother was Elsie Fox (née de Sola), a Cuban writer who co-wrote the film &quot;The Last Train from Madrid&quot; with Love&#x27;s great-grandfather, Paul Hervey Fox, cousin of writer Faith Baldwin and actor Douglas Fairbanks. Phil Lesh, the founding bassist of the Grateful Dead, was Love&#x27;s godfather. According to Love, she was named after Courtney Farrell, the protagonist of Pamela Moore&#x27;s 1956 novel &quot;Chocolates for Breakfast&quot;. Love is of mixed Cuban, English, German, Irish, Ashkenazi Jewish, and Welsh ancestry. Through her mother&#x27;s subsequent marriages, Love has two younger half-sisters, three younger half-brothers (one of whom died in infancy), and one adopted brother.

Love spent her early years in Haight-Ashbury, San Francisco, until her parents divorced in 1970. In a custody hearing, her mother, as well as one of her father&#x27;s girlfriends, testified that Hank had dosed Courtney with LSD when she was a toddler. Carroll also alleged that Hank threatened to abduct his daughter and flee with her to a foreign country. Though Hank denied these allegations, his custody was revoked. In 1970, Carroll relocated with Love to the rural community of Marcola, Oregon where they lived along the Mohawk River while Carroll completed her psychology degree at the University of Oregon. There, Carroll remarried to schoolteacher Frank Rodríguez, who legally adopted Love. Though Love was baptized a Roman Catholic, her mother maintained an unorthodox home; according to Love, &quot;There were hairy, wangly-ass hippies running around naked [doing] Gestalt therapy&quot;, and her mother raised her in a gender-free household with &quot;no dresses, no patent leather shoes, no canopy beds, nothing&quot;. Love attended a Montessori school in Eugene, Oregon, where she struggled academically and socially. She has said that she began seeing psychiatrists at &quot;like, [age] three. Observational therapy. TM for tots. You name it, I&#x27;ve been there.&quot; At age nine, a psychologist noted that she exhibited signs of autism, among them tactile defensiveness. Love commented in 1995: &quot;When I talk about being introverted, I was diagnosed autistic. At an early age, I would not speak. Then I simply bloomed.&quot;

In 1972, Love&#x27;s mother divorced Rodríguez, remarried to sportswriter David Menely, and moved the family to Nelson, New Zealand. Love was enrolled at Nelson College for Girls, but soon expelled for misbehavior. In 1973, Carroll sent Love back to Portland, Oregon, to be raised by her former stepfather and other family friends. At age 14, Love was arrested for shoplifting from a Portland department store and remanded at Hillcrest Correctional Facility, a juvenile hall in Salem, Oregon. While at Hillcrest, she became acquainted with records by Patti Smith, the Runaways, and the Pretenders, who later inspired her to start a band. She was intermittently placed in foster care throughout late 1979 until becoming legally emancipated in 1980, after which she remained staunchly estranged from her mother. Shortly after her emancipation, Love spent two months in Japan working as a topless dancer, but was deported after her passport was confiscated. She returned to Portland and began working at the strip club Mary&#x27;s Club, adopting the surname Love to conceal her identity; she later adopted Love as her surname. She worked odd jobs, including as a DJ at a gay disco. Love said she lacked social skills, and learned them while frequenting gay clubs and spending time with drag queens. During this period, she enrolled at Portland State University, studying English and philosophy. She later commented that, had she not found a passion for music, she would have sought a career working with children.
In 1981, Love was granted a small trust fund that had been left by her maternal grandparents, which she used to travel to Dublin, Ireland, where her biological father was living. She audited courses at Trinity College, studying theology for two semesters. She later received honorary patronage from Trinity&#x27;s University Philosophical Society in 2010. While in Dublin, Love met musician Julian Cope of the Teardrop Explodes at one of the band&#x27;s concerts. Cope took a liking to Love and offered to let her stay at his Liverpool home in his absence. She traveled to London, where she was met by her friend and future bandmate, Robin Barbur, from Portland. Recalling Cope&#x27;s offer, Love and Barbur moved into Cope&#x27;s home with him and several other artists, including Pete de Freitas of Echo &amp; the Bunnymen. De Freitas was initially hesitant to allow the girls to stay, but acquiesced as they were &quot;alarmingly young and obviously had nowhere else to go&quot;. Love recalled: &quot;They kind of took me in. I was sort of a mascot; I would get them coffee or tea during rehearsals.&quot; Cope writes of Love frequently in his 1994 autobiography, &quot;Head-On&quot;, in which he refers to her as &quot;the adolescent&quot;.

In July 1982, Love returned to the United States. In late 1982, she attended a Faith No More concert in San Francisco and convinced the members to let her join as a singer. The group recorded material with Love as a vocalist, but fired her; according to keyboardist Roddy Bottum, who remained Love&#x27;s friend in the years after, the band wanted a &quot;male energy&quot;. Love returned to working abroad as an erotic dancer, briefly in Taiwan, and then at a taxi dance hall in Hong Kong. By Love&#x27;s account, she first used heroin while working at the Hong Kong dance hall, having mistaken it for cocaine. While still inebriated from the drug, Love was pursued by a wealthy male client who requested that she return with him to the Philippines, and gave her money to purchase new clothes. She used the money to purchase an airfare back to the United States.

===1983–1987: Early music projects and film===
At age 19, through her then-boyfriend&#x27;s mother, film costume designer Bernadene Mann, Love took a job at Paramount Studios cleaning out the wardrobe department of vintage pieces that had suffered dry rot or other damage. During this time, Love became interested in vintage fashion. She subsequently returned to Portland, where she formed short-lived musical projects with her friends Ursula Wehr and Robin Barbur (namely Sugar Babylon, later known as Sugar Babydoll). Love briefly fronted Faith no More for their first TV appearance in 1984: she sang with a Siouxsie Sioux-style vocal. After meeting Kat Bjelland at the Satyricon nightclub in 1984, the two formed the group the Pagan Babies. Love asked Bjelland to start the band with her as a guitarist, and the two moved to San Francisco in June 1985, where they recruited bassist Jennifer Finch and drummer Janis Tanaka. According to Bjelland, &quot;[Courtney] didn&#x27;t play an instrument at the time&quot; aside from keyboards, so Bjelland would transcribe Love&#x27;s musical ideas on guitar for her. The group played several house shows and recorded one 4-track demo before disbanding in late 1985. After Pagan Babies, Love moved to Minneapolis, where Bjelland had formed the group Babes in Toyland, and briefly worked as a concert promoter before returning to California. Drummer Lori Barbero recalled Love&#x27;s time in Minneapolis: 
Deciding to shift her focus to acting, Love enrolled at the San Francisco Art Institute and studied film under experimental director George Kuchar, featuring in one of his short films, &quot;Club Vatican&quot;. She also took experimental theater courses in Oakland taught by Whoopi Goldberg. In 1985, Love submitted an audition tape for the role of Nancy Spungen in the Sid Vicious biopic &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; (1986) and was given a minor supporting role by director Alex Cox. After filming &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; in New York City, she worked at a peep show in Times Square and squatted at the ABC No Rio social center and Pyramid Club in the East Village. That year, Cox cast her in a leading role in his film &quot;Straight to Hell&quot; (1987), a Spaghetti Western starring Joe Strummer, Dennis Hopper, and Grace Jones, shot in Spain in 1986. The film was poorly reviewed by critics, but it caught the attention of Andy Warhol, who featured Love in an episode of &quot;Andy Warhol&#x27;s Fifteen Minutes&quot;. She also had a part in the 1988 Ramones music video for &quot;I Wanna Be Sedated&quot;, appearing as a bride among dozens of party guests.

Displeased by the &quot;celebutante&quot; fame she had attained, Love abandoned her acting career in 1988 and resumed work as a stripper in Oregon, where she was recognized by customers at a bar in the small town of McMinnville. This prompted Love to go into isolation and relocate to Anchorage, Alaska, where she lived for three months to &quot;gather her thoughts&quot;, supporting herself by working at a strip club frequented by local fishermen. &quot;I decided to move to Alaska because I needed to get my shit together and learn how to work&quot;, she said in retrospect. &quot;So I went on this sort of vision quest. I got rid of all my earthly possessions. I had my bad little strip clothes and some big sweaters, and I moved into a trailer with a bunch of other strippers.&quot;

===1988–1991: Beginnings of Hole===


At the end of 1988, Love taught herself to play guitar and relocated to Los Angeles, where she placed an ad in a local music zine: &quot;I want to start a band. My influences are Big Black, Sonic Youth, and Fleetwood Mac.&quot; By 1989, Love had recruited guitarist Eric Erlandson; bassist Lisa Roberts, her neighbor; and drummer Caroline Rue, whom she met at a Gwar concert. Love named the band Hole after a line from Euripides&#x27; &quot;Medea&quot; (&quot;There is a hole that pierces right through me&quot;) and a conversation in which her mother told her that she could not live her life &quot;with a hole running through her&quot;. On July 23, 1989, Love married Leaving Trains vocalist James Moreland in Las Vegas; the marriage was annulled the same year. She later said that Moreland was a transvestite and that they had married &quot;as a joke&quot;. After forming Hole, Love and Erlandson had a romantic relationship that lasted over a year.

In Hole&#x27;s formative stages, Love continued to work at strip clubs in Hollywood (including Jumbo&#x27;s Clown Room and the Seventh Veil), saving money to purchase backline equipment and a touring van, while rehearsing at a Hollywood studio loaned to her by the Red Hot Chili Peppers. Hole played their first show in November 1989 at Raji&#x27;s, a rock club in central Hollywood. Their debut single, &quot;Retard Girl&quot;, was issued in April 1990 through the Long Beach indie label Sympathy for the Record Industry and was played by Rodney Bingenheimer on local rock station KROQ. Hole appeared on the cover of &quot;Flipside&quot;, a Los Angeles-based punk fanzine. In early 1991, they released their second single, &quot;Dicknail&quot;, through Sub Pop Records.
With no wave, noise rock, and grindcore bands being major influences on Love, Hole&#x27;s first studio album, &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot;, captured an abrasive sound and contained disturbing, graphic lyrics, described by &quot;Q&quot; as &quot;confrontational [and] genuinely uninhibited&quot;. The record was released in September 1991 on Caroline Records, produced by Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth with assistant production from Gumball&#x27;s Don Fleming; Love and Gordon had met when Hole opened for Sonic Youth during their promotional tour for &quot;Goo&quot; at the Whisky a Go Go in November 1990. In early 1991, Love sent Gordon a personal letter asking her to produce the record for the band, to which she agreed.

&quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot; received generally positive critical reception from indie and punk rock critics and was named one of the 20 best albums of the year by &quot;Spin&quot;. It gained a following in the United Kingdom, charting at 59 on the UK Albums Chart, and its lead single, &quot;Teenage Whore&quot;, entered the UK Indie Chart at number one. The album&#x27;s feminist slant led many to tag the band as part of the riot grrrl movement, a movement with which Love did not associate. The band toured in support of the record, headlining with Mudhoney in Europe; in the United States, they opened for the Smashing Pumpkins, and performed at CBGB in New York City.

During the tour, Love briefly dated Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan and then the Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain. The journalist Michael Azerrad states that Love and Cobain met in 1989 at the Satyricon nightclub in Portland, Oregon. However, the Cobain biographer Charles Cross gives the date as February 12, 1990; Cross said that Cobain playfully wrestled Love to the floor after she said that he looked like Dave Pirner of Soul Asylum. According to Love, she met Cobain at a Dharma Bums show in Portland, while Love&#x27;s bandmate Eric Erlandson said that he and Love were introduced to Cobain in a parking lot after a concert at the Hollywood Palladium on May 17, 1991. In late 1991, Love and Cobain became re-acquainted through Jennifer Finch, one of Love&#x27;s friends and former bandmates. Love and Cobain were a couple by 1992.

=== 1992–1995: Marriage to Kurt Cobain, &quot;Live Through This&quot; and breakthrough ===
Shortly after completing the tour for &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot;, Love married Cobain on Waikiki Beach on February 24, 1992. She wore a satin and lace dress once owned by actress Frances Farmer, and Cobain wore plaid pajamas. During Love&#x27;s pregnancy, Hole recorded a cover of &quot;Over the Edge&quot; for a Wipers tribute album, and recorded their fourth single, &quot;Beautiful Son&quot;, which was released in April 1993. On August 18, 1992 the couple&#x27;s only child, a daughter, Frances Bean Cobain, was born in Los Angeles. They relocated to Carnation, Washington, and then Seattle.

Love&#x27;s first major media exposure came in a September 1992 profile with Cobain for &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; by Lynn Hirschberg, entitled &quot;Strange Love&quot;. Cobain had become a major public figure following the surprise success of Nirvana&#x27;s album &quot;Nevermind&quot;. Love was urged by her manager to participate in the cover story. During the prior year, Love and Cobain had developed a heroin addiction; the profile portrayed them in an unflattering light, and suggested that Love had been addicted to heroin during her pregnancy. The Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services investigated, and custody of Frances was temporarily awarded to Love&#x27;s sister Jaimee. Love said she was misquoted by Hirschberg, and that she had immediately quit heroin during her first trimester once she discovered she was pregnant. Love later said the article had serious implications for her marriage and Cobain&#x27;s mental state, suggesting it was a factor in his suicide two years later.
On September 8, 1993, Love and Cobain made their only public performance together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Hollywood, performing two acoustic duets of &quot;Pennyroyal Tea&quot; and &quot;Where Did You Sleep Last Night&quot;. Love also performed electric versions of two new Hole songs, &quot;Doll Parts&quot; and &quot;Miss World&quot;, both written for their upcoming second album. In October 1993, Hole recorded their second album, &quot;Live Through This&quot;, in Atlanta. The album featured a new lineup with bassist Kristen Pfaff and drummer Patty Schemel.

In April 1994, Cobain killed himself in the Seattle home he shared with Love, who was in rehab in Los Angeles at the time. In the following months, Love was rarely seen in public, staying at her home with friends and family. Cobain&#x27;s remains were cremated and his ashes divided into portions by Love, who kept some in a teddy bear and some in an urn. In June, she traveled to the Namgyal Buddhist Monastery in Ithaca, New York and had Cobain&#x27;s ashes ceremonially blessed by Buddhist monks. Another portion was mixed into clay and made into memorial sculptures.

&quot;Live Through This&quot; was released one week after Cobain&#x27;s death, on Geffen&#x27;s subsidiary label DGC. On June 16, Pfaff died of a heroin overdose in Seattle. For Hole&#x27;s impending tour, Love recruited the Canadian bassist Melissa Auf der Maur. Hole&#x27;s performance on August 26, 1994, at the Reading Festival—Love&#x27;s first public performance following Cobain&#x27;s death—was described by MTV as &quot;by turns macabre, frightening and inspirational&quot;. John Peel wrote in &quot;The Guardian&quot; that Love&#x27;s disheveled appearance &quot;would have drawn whistles of astonishment in Bedlam&quot;, and that her performance &quot;verged on the heroic ... Love steered her band through a set which dared you to pity either her recent history or that of the band ... The band teetered on the edge of chaos, generating a tension which I cannot remember having felt before from any stage.&quot;

&quot;Live Through This&quot; was certified platinum in April 1995 and received numerous accolades. The success combined with Cobain&#x27;s suicide produced publicity for Love, and she was featured on Barbara Walters&#x27; &quot;10 Most Fascinating People&quot; in 1995. Her erratic onstage behavior and various legal troubles during Hole&#x27;s tour compounded the media coverage of her. Hole performed a series of riotous concerts over the following year, with Love frequently appearing hysterical onstage, flashing crowds, stage diving, and getting into fights with audience members. One journalist reported that at the band&#x27;s show in Boston in December 1994: &quot;Love interrupted the music and talked about her deceased husband Kurt Cobain, and also broke out into Tourette syndrome-like rants. The music was great, but the raving was vulgar and offensive, and prompted some of the audience to shout back at her.&quot;

In January 1995, Love was arrested in Melbourne for disrupting a Qantas flight after getting into an argument with a stewardess. On July 4, 1995, at the Lollapalooza Festival in George, Washington, Love threw a lit cigarette at musician Kathleen Hanna before punching her in the face, alleging that she had made a joke about her daughter. She pleaded guilty to an assault charge and was sentenced to anger management classes. In November 1995, two male teenagers sued Love for allegedly punching them during a Hole concert in Orlando, Florida in March 1995. The judge dismissed the case on grounds that the teens &quot;weren&#x27;t exposed to any greater amount of violence than could reasonably be expected at an alternative rock concert&quot;. Love later said she had little memory of 1994 and 1995, as she had been using large quantities of heroin and Rohypnol at the time.

===1996–2002: Acting success and &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot;===
After Hole&#x27;s world tour concluded in 1996, Love made a return to acting, first in small roles in the Jean-Michel Basquiat biopic &quot;Basquiat&quot; and the drama &quot;Feeling Minnesota&quot; (1996), and then a starring role as Larry Flynt&#x27;s wife Althea in Miloš Forman&#x27;s critically acclaimed 1996 film &quot;The People vs. Larry Flynt&quot;. Love went through rehabilitation and quit using heroin at the insistence of Forman; she was ordered to take multiple urine tests under the supervision of Columbia Pictures while filming, and passed all of them. Despite Columbia Pictures&#x27; initial reluctance to hire Love due to her troubled past, her performance received acclaim, earning a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress, and a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress. Critic Roger Ebert called her work in the film &quot;quite a performance; Love proves she is not a rock star pretending to act, but a true actress.&quot; She won several other awards from various film critic associations for the film. During this time, Love maintained what the media noted as a more decorous public image, and she appeared in ad campaigns for Versace and in a &quot;Vogue Italia&quot; spread. Following the release of &quot;The People vs. Larry Flynt&quot;, she dated her co-star Edward Norton, with whom she remained until 1999.

In late 1997, Hole released the compilations &quot;My Body, the Hand Grenade&quot; and &quot;The First Session&quot;, both of which featured previously recorded material. Love attracted media attention in May 1998 after punching journalist Belissa Cohen at a party; the suit was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum. In September 1998, Hole released their third studio album, &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot;, which featured a stark power pop sound that contrasted with their earlier punk influences. Love divulged her ambition of making an album where &quot;art meets commerce ... there are no compromises made, it has commercial appeal, and it sticks to [our] original vision.&quot; She said she was influenced by Neil Young, Fleetwood Mac, and My Bloody Valentine when writing the album. Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan co-wrote several songs. &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot; was well received by critics; &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; called it &quot;accessible, fiery and intimate—often at the same time ... a basic guitar record that&#x27;s anything but basic.&quot; &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot; went multi-platinum, and topped &quot;Best of Year&quot; lists at &quot;Spin&quot; and &quot;The Village Voice&quot;. It garnered Hole&#x27;s only number-one single on the Modern Rock Tracks chart with &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot;. Hole promoted the album through MTV performances and at the 1998 Billboard Music Awards, and were nominated for three Grammy Awards at the 41st Grammy Awards ceremony.

Before the release of &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot;, Love and Fender designed a low-priced Squier brand guitar, the Vista Venus. The instrument featured a shape inspired by Mercury, a little-known independent guitar manufacturer, Stratocaster, and Rickenbacker&#x27;s solid body guitars. It had a single-coil and a humbucker pickup and was available in 6-string and 12-string versions. In an early 1999 interview, Love said about the Venus: &quot;I wanted a guitar that sounded really warm and pop, but which required just one box to go dirty ... And something that could also be your first band guitar. I didn&#x27;t want it all teched out. I wanted it real simple, with just one pickup switch.&quot;

Hole toured with Marilyn Manson on the Beautiful Monsters Tour in 1999, but dropped out after nine performances; Love and Manson disagreed over production costs, and Hole was forced to open for Manson under an agreement with Interscope Records. Hole resumed touring with Imperial Teen. Love later said Hole also abandoned the tour due to Manson and Korn&#x27;s (whom they also toured with in Australia) sexualized treatment of teenage female audience members. Love told interviewers at 99X.FM in Atlanta: &quot;What I really don&#x27;t like—there are certain girls that like us, or like me, who are really messed up ... they&#x27;re very young, and they do not need to be taken and raped, or filmed having enema contests ... [they were] going out into the audience and picking up fourteen and fifteen-year-old girls who obviously cut themselves, and then [I had] to see them in the morning ... it&#x27;s just uncool.&quot;

In 1999, Love was awarded an Orville H. Gibson award for Best Female Rock Guitarist. During this time, she starred opposite Jim Carrey as his partner Lynne Margulies in the Andy Kaufman biopic &quot;Man on the Moon&quot; (1999), followed by a role as William S. Burroughs&#x27;s wife Joan Vollmer in &quot;Beat&quot; (2000) alongside Kiefer Sutherland. Love was cast as the lead in John Carpenter&#x27;s sci-fi horror film &quot;Ghosts of Mars&quot;, but backed out after injuring her foot. She sued the ex-wife of her then-boyfriend, James Barber, whom Love alleged had caused the injury by running over her foot with her Volvo. The following year, she returned to film opposite Lili Taylor in &quot;Julie Johnson&quot; (2001), in which she played a woman who has a lesbian relationship; Love won an Outstanding Actress award at L.A.&#x27;s Outfest. She was then cast in the thriller &quot;Trapped&quot; (2002), alongside Kevin Bacon and Charlize Theron. The film was a box-office flop.

In the interim, Hole had become dormant. In March 2001, Love began a &quot;punk rock femme supergroup&quot;, Bastard, enlisting Schemel, Veruca Salt co-frontwoman Louise Post, and bassist Gina Crosley. Post recalled: &quot;[Love] was like, &#x27;Listen, you guys: I&#x27;ve been in my Malibu, manicure, movie-star world for two years, alright? I wanna make a record. And let&#x27;s leave all that grunge shit behind us, eh? We were being so improvisational, and singing together, and with a trust developing between us. It was the shit.&quot; The group recorded a demo tape, but by September 2001, Post and Crosley had left, with Post citing &quot;unhealthy and unprofessional working conditions&quot;. In May 2002, Hole announced their breakup amid continuing litigation with Universal Music Group over their record contract.

In 1997, Love and former Nirvana members Krist Novoselic and Dave Grohl formed a limited liability company, Nirvana LLC, to manage Nirvana&#x27;s business dealings. In June 2001, Love filed a lawsuit to dissolve it, blocking the release of unreleased Nirvana material and delaying the release of the Nirvana compilation &quot;With the Lights Out&quot;. Grohl and Novoselic sued Love, calling her &quot;irrational, mercurial, self-centered, unmanageable, inconsistent and unpredictable&quot;. She responded with a letter stating that &quot;Kurt Cobain was Nirvana&quot; and that she and his family were the &quot;rightful heirs&quot; to the Nirvana legacy.

===2003–2008: Solo work and legal troubles===
In February 2003, Love was arrested at Heathrow Airport for disrupting a flight and was banned from Virgin Airlines. In October, she was arrested in Los Angeles after breaking several windows of her producer and then-boyfriend James Barber&#x27;s home and was charged with being under the influence of a controlled substance; the ordeal resulted in her temporarily losing custody of her daughter.

After the breakup of Hole, Love began composing material with songwriter Linda Perry, and in July 2003 signed a contract with Virgin Records. She began recording her debut solo album, &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot;, in France shortly after. Virgin Records released &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot; in February 2004; it received mixed reviews. Charles Aaron of &quot;Spin&quot; called it a &quot;jaw-dropping act of artistic will and a fiery, proper follow-up to 1994&#x27;s &quot;Live Through This&quot;&quot; and awarded it eight out of ten, while Amy Phillips of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; wrote: &quot;[Love is] willing to act out the dream of every teenage brat who ever wanted to have a glamorous, high-profile hissyfit, and she turns those egocentric nervous breakdowns into art. Sure, the art becomes less compelling when you&#x27;ve been pulling the same stunts for a decade. But, honestly, is there anybody out there who fucks up better?&quot; The album sold fewer than 100,000 copies. Love later expressed regret over the record, blaming her drug problems at the time. Shortly after it was released, she told Kurt Loder on &quot;TRL&quot;: &quot;I cannot exist as a solo artist. It&#x27;s a joke.&quot;

On March 17, 2004, Love appeared on the &quot;Late Show with David Letterman&quot; to promote &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot;. Her appearance drew media coverage when she lifted her shirt multiple times, flashed Letterman, and stood on his desk. The &quot;New York Times&quot; wrote: &quot;The episode was not altogether surprising for Ms. Love, 39, whose most public moments have veered from extreme pathos—like the time she read the suicide note of her famous husband, Kurt Cobain, on MTV—to angry feminism to catfights to incoherent ranting.&quot; Hours later, in the early morning of March 18, Love was arrested in Manhattan for allegedly striking a fan with a microphone stand during a small concert in the East Village. She was released within hours and performed a scheduled concert the following evening at the Bowery Ballroom. Four days later, she called in multiple times to &quot;The Howard Stern Show&quot;, claiming in broadcast conversations with Stern that the incident had not occurred, and that actress Natasha Lyonne, who was at the concert, was told by the alleged victim that he had been paid $10,000 to file a false claim leading to Love&#x27;s arrest.

On July 9, 2004, her 40th birthday, Love was arrested for failing to make a court appearance for the March 2004 charges, and taken to Bellevue Hospital, allegedly incoherent, where she was placed on a 72-hour watch. According to police, she was believed to be a potential danger to herself, but deemed mentally sound and released to a rehab facility two days later. Amidst public criticism and press coverage, comedian Margaret Cho published an opinion piece, &quot;Courtney Deserves Better from Feminists&quot;, arguing that negative associations of Love with her drug and personal problems (including from feminists) overshadowed her music and wellbeing. Love pleaded guilty in October 2004 to disorderly conduct over the incident in East Village.
Love&#x27;s appearance as a roaster on the &quot;Comedy Central Roast&quot; of Pamela Anderson in August 2005, in which she appeared intoxicated and disheveled, attracted further media attention. One review said that Love &quot;acted as if she belonged in an institution&quot;. Six days after the broadcast, Love was sentenced to a 28-day lockdown rehab program for being under the influence of a controlled substance, violating her probation. To avoid jail time, she accepted an additional 180-day rehab sentence in September 2005. In November 2005, after completing the program, Love was discharged from the rehab center under the provision that she complete further outpatient rehab. In subsequent interviews, Love said she had been addicted to substances including prescription drugs, cocaine, and crack cocaine. She said she had been sober since completing rehabilitation in 2007, and cited her Soka Gakkai Buddhist practice (which she began in 1988) as integral to her sobriety.

In the midst of her legal troubles, Love had endeavors in writing and publishing. She co-wrote a semi-autobiographical manga, &quot;Princess Ai&quot; (Japanese: プリンセス·アイ物語), with Stu Levy, illustrated by Misaho Kujiradou and Ai Yazawa; it was released in three volumes in the United States and Japan between 2004 and 2006. In 2006, Love published a memoir, &quot;Dirty Blonde&quot;, and began recording her second solo album, &quot;How Dirty Girls Get Clean&quot;, collaborating again with Perry and Billy Corgan. Love had written several songs, including an anti-cocaine song titled &quot;Loser Dust&quot;, during her time in rehab in 2005. She told &quot;Billboard&quot;: &quot;My hand-eye coordination was so bad [after the drug use], I didn&#x27;t even know chords anymore. It was like my fingers were frozen. And I wasn&#x27;t allowed to make noise [in rehab] ... I never thought I would work again.&quot; Tracks and demos for the album leaked online in 2006, and a documentary, &quot;The Return of Courtney Love&quot;, detailing the making of the album, aired on the British television network More4 in the fall of that year. A rough acoustic version of &quot;Never Go Hungry Again&quot;, recorded during an interview for &quot;The Times&quot; in November, was also released. Incomplete audio clips of the song &quot;Samantha&quot;, originating from an interview with NPR, were distributed on the internet in 2007.

===2009–2012: Hole revival and visual art===

In March 2009, fashion designer Dawn Simorangkir brought a libel suit against Love concerning a defamatory post Love made on her Twitter account, which was eventually settled for $450,000. Several months later, in June 2009, &quot;NME&quot; published an article detailing Love&#x27;s plan to reunite Hole and release a new album, &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot;. In response, former Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson stated in &quot;Spin&quot; magazine that contractually no reunion could take place without his involvement; therefore &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot; would remain Love&#x27;s solo record, as opposed to a &quot;Hole&quot; record. Love responded to Erlandson&#x27;s comments in a Twitter post, claiming &quot;he&#x27;s out of his mind, Hole is my band, my name, and my Trademark&quot;. &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot; was released worldwide as a Hole album on April 27, 2010. For the new line-up, Love recruited guitarist Micko Larkin, Shawn Dailey (bass guitar), and Stu Fisher (drums, percussion). &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot; featured material written and recorded for Love&#x27;s unfinished solo album, &quot;How Dirty Girls Get Clean&quot;, including &quot;Pacific Coast Highway&quot;, &quot;Letter to God&quot;, &quot;Samantha&quot;, and &quot;Never Go Hungry&quot;, although they were re-produced in the studio with Larkin and engineer Michael Beinhorn. The album&#x27;s subject matter was largely centered on Love&#x27;s tumultuous life between 2003 and 2007, and featured a polished folk rock sound, and more acoustic guitar work than previous Hole albums.
The first single from &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot; was &quot;Skinny Little Bitch&quot;, released to promote the album in March 2010. The album received mixed reviews. Robert Sheffield of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; gave the album three out of five, saying Love &quot;worked hard on these songs, instead of just babbling a bunch of druggy bullshit and assuming people would buy it, the way she did on her 2004 flop, &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot;&quot;. Sal Cinquemani of &quot;Slant Magazine&quot; also gave the album three out of five: &quot;It&#x27;s Marianne Faithfull&#x27;s substance-ravaged voice that comes to mind most often while listening to songs like &#x27;Honey&#x27; and &#x27;For Once in Your Life&#x27;. The latter track is, in fact, one of Love&#x27;s most raw and vulnerable vocal performances to date ... the song offers a rare glimpse into the mind of a woman who, for the last 15 years, has been as famous for being a rock star as she&#x27;s been for being a victim.&quot; Love and the band toured internationally from 2010 into late 2012 promoting the record, with their pre-release shows in London and at South by Southwest receiving critical acclaim. In 2011, Love participated in &quot;Hit So Hard&quot;, a documentary chronicling bandmate Schemel&#x27;s time in Hole.

In May 2012, Love debuted an art collection at Fred Torres Collaborations in New York titled &quot;And She&#x27;s Not Even Pretty&quot;, which contained over 40 drawings and paintings by Love composed in ink, colored pencil, pastels, and watercolors. Later in the year, she collaborated with Michael Stipe on the track &quot;Rio Grande&quot; for Johnny Depp&#x27;s sea shanty album &quot;Son of Rogues Gallery&quot;, and in 2013, co-wrote and contributed vocals on &quot;Rat A Tat&quot; from Fall Out Boy&#x27;s album &quot;Save Rock and Roll&quot;, also appearing in the song&#x27;s music video.

===2013–2015: Return to acting; libel lawsuits===
After dropping the Hole name and performing as a solo artist in late 2012, Love appeared in spring 2013 advertisements for Yves Saint Laurent alongside Kim Gordon and Ariel Pink. Love completed a solo tour of North America in mid-2013, which was purported to be in promotion of an upcoming solo album; however, it was ultimately dubbed a &quot;greatest hits&quot; tour, and featured songs from Love&#x27;s and Hole&#x27;s back catalogue. Love told &quot;Billboard&quot; at the time that she had recorded eight songs in the studio.

Love was subject of a second landmark libel lawsuit brought against her in January 2014 by her former attorney Rhonda Holmes, who accused Love of online defamation, seeking $8 million in damages. It was the first case of alleged Twitter-based libel in U.S. history to make it to trial. The jury, however, found in Love&#x27;s favor. A subsequent defamation lawsuit filed by fashion designer Simorangkir in February 2014, however, resulted in Love being ordered to pay a further $350,000 in recompense.

On April 22, 2014, Love debuted the song &quot;You Know My Name&quot; on BBC Radio 6 to promote her tour of the United Kingdom. It was released as a double A-side single with the song &quot;Wedding Day&quot; on May 4, 2014, on her own label Cherry Forever Records via Kobalt Label Services. The tracks were produced by Michael Beinhorn, and feature Tommy Lee on drums. In an interview with the BBC, Love revealed that she and former Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson had reconciled, and had been rehearsing new material together, along with former bassist Melissa Auf der Maur and drummer Patty Schemel, though she did not confirm a reunion of the band. On May 1, 2014, in an interview with &quot;Pitchfork&quot;, Love commented further on the possibility of Hole reuniting, saying:
&quot;I&#x27;m not going to commit to it happening, because we want an element of surprise. There&#x27;s a lot of &quot;i&quot;s to be dotted and &quot;t&quot;s to be crossed.&quot;
Love was cast in several television series in supporting parts throughout 2014, including the FX series &quot;Sons of Anarchy&quot;, &quot;Revenge&quot;, and Lee Daniels&#x27; network series &quot;Empire&quot; in a recurring guest role as Elle Dallas. The track &quot;Walk Out on Me&quot;, featuring Love, was included on the &quot;&quot; album, which debuted at number 1 on the Billboard 200. Alexis Petridis of &quot;The Guardian&quot; praised the track, saying: &quot;The idea of Courtney Love singing a ballad with a group of gospel singers seems faintly terrifying ... The reality is brilliant. Love&#x27;s voice fits the careworn lyrics, effortlessly summoning the kind of ravaged darkness that Lana Del Rey nearly ruptures herself trying to conjure up.&quot;

In January 2015, Love starred in a New York City stage production, &quot;Kansas City Choir Boy&quot;, a &quot;pop opera&quot; conceived by and co-starring Todd Almond. Charles Isherwood of &quot;The New York Times&quot; praised her performance, noting a &quot;soft-edged and bewitching&quot; stage presence, and wrote: &quot;Her voice, never the most supple or rangy of instruments, retains the singular sound that made her an electrifying front woman for the band Hole: a single sustained noted can seem to simultaneously contain a plea, a wound and a threat.&quot; The show toured later in the year, with performances in Boston and Los Angeles. In April 2015, the journalist Anthony Bozza sued Love, alleging a contractual violation regarding his co-writing of her memoir. Love performed as the opening act for Lana Del Rey on her Endless Summer Tour for eight West Coast shows in May and June 2015. During her tenure, Love debuted the single &quot;Miss Narcissist&quot;, released on Wavves&#x27; independent label Ghost Ramp. She was also cast in a supporting role in James Franco&#x27;s film &quot;The Long Home&quot;, based on the novel by William Gay, her first film role in over ten years; as of 2022, it remains unreleased.

===2016–present: Fashion and forthcoming music===

In January 2016, Love released a clothing line in collaboration with Sophia Amoruso, &quot;Love, Courtney&quot;, featuring 18 pieces reflecting her personal style. In November 2016, she began filming the pilot for &quot;A Midsummer&#x27;s Nightmare&quot;, a Shakespeare anthology series adapted for Lifetime. She starred as Kitty Menendez in &quot;&quot;, a biopic television film based on the lives of Lyle and Erik Menendez, which premiered on Lifetime in June 2017.

In 2017, Love accompanied the museum director Nicholas Cullinan to the GQ Men of the Year awards at the Tate Modern, calling him her &quot;soulmate&quot; and her &quot;family for life&quot;.

In October 2017, shortly after the Harvey Weinstein scandal made news, a 2005 video of Love warning young actresses about Weinstein went viral. In the footage, while on the red carpet for the &quot;Comedy Central Roast of Pamela Anderson&quot;, Love was asked by Natasha Leggero if she had any advice for &quot;a young girl moving to Hollywood&quot;; she responded, &quot;If Harvey Weinstein invites you to a private party in the Four Seasons [hotel], don&#x27;t go.&quot; She later tweeted, &quot;Although I wasn&#x27;t one of his victims, I was eternally banned by [Creative Artists Agency] for speaking out.&quot;

In the same year, Love was cast in Justin Kelly&#x27;s biopic &quot;JT LeRoy&quot;, portraying a film producer opposite Laura Dern. In March 2018, she appeared in the music video for Marilyn Manson&#x27;s &quot;Tattooed in Reverse&quot;, and in April she appeared as a guest judge on &quot;RuPaul&#x27;s Drag Race&quot;. In December, Love was awarded a restraining order against Sam Lutfi, who had acted as her manager for the previous six years, alleging verbal abuse and harassment. Her daughter, Frances, and sister, Jaimee, were also awarded restraining orders against Lutfi. In January 2019, a Los Angeles County judge extended the three-year order to five years, citing Lutfi&#x27;s tendency to &quot;prey upon people&quot;.

On August 18, 2019, Love performed a solo set at the Yola Día festival in Los Angeles, which also featured performances by Cat Power and Lykke Li. On September 9, Love garnered press attention when she publicly criticized Joss Sackler, an heiress to the Sackler family OxyContin fortune, after she allegedly offered Love $100,000 to attend her fashion show during New York Fashion Week. In the same statement, Love indicated that she had relapsed into opioid addiction in 2018, stating that she had recently celebrated a year of sobriety. In October 2019, Love relocated from Los Angeles to London.

On November 21, 2019, Love recorded the song &quot;Mother&quot;, written and produced by Lawrence Rothman, as part of the soundtrack for the horror film &quot;The Turning&quot; (2020). In January 2020, she received the Icon Award at the &quot;NME&quot; Awards; &quot;NME&quot; described her as &quot;one of the most influential singers in alternative culture of the last 30 years&quot;. The following month, she confirmed she was writing a new record which she described as &quot;really sad ... [I&#x27;m] writing in minor chords, and that appeals to my sadness.&quot; In March 2021, Love said she had been hospitalized with acute anemia in August 2020, which had nearly killed her and reduced her weight to ; she made a full recovery.

In August 2022, Love revealed the completion of her memoir, &quot;The Girl with the Most Cake&quot;, after a nearly ten-year period of writing.

Love is featured as a guest vocalist on the track &quot;Song to the Siren&quot; by rapper 070 Shake, from her studio album &quot;Petrichor&quot;, which was released on November 15, 2024.

==Artistry==
===Influences===
Love has been candid about her diverse musical influences, the earliest being Patti Smith, the Runaways, and the Pretenders, artists she discovered while in juvenile hall as a young teenager. As a child, her first exposure to music was records that her parents received each month through Columbia Record Club. The first record Love owned was Leonard Cohen&#x27;s &quot;Songs of Leonard Cohen&quot; (1967), which she obtained from her mother: &quot;He was so lyric-conscious and morbid, and I was a pretty morbid kid&quot;, she recalled. As a teenager, she named Flipper, Kate Bush, Soft Cell, Joni Mitchell, Laura Nyro, Lou Reed, and Dead Kennedys among her favorite artists. While in Dublin at age fifteen, Love attended a Virgin Prunes concert, an event she credited as being a pivotal influence: &quot;I had never seen so much sex, snarl, poetry, evil, restraint, grace, filth, raw power and the very essence of rock and roll&quot;, she recalled. &quot;[I had seen] U2 [who] gave me lashes of love and inspiration, and a few nights later the Virgin Prunes fuckedmeup.&quot; Decades later, in 2009, Love introduced the band&#x27;s frontman Gavin Friday at a Carnegie Hall event, and performed a song with him.

Though often associated with punk music, Love has noted that her most significant musical influences have been post-punk and new wave artists. Commenting in 2021, Love said: Over the years, Love has also named several other new wave and post-punk bands as influences, including the Smiths, Siouxsie and the Banshees, Television, and Bauhaus.

Love&#x27;s diverse genre interests were illustrated in a 1991 interview with &quot;Flipside&quot;, in which she stated: &quot;There&#x27;s a part of me that wants to have a grindcore band and another that wants to have a Raspberries-type pop band.&quot; Discussing the abrasive sound of Hole&#x27;s debut album, she said she felt she had to &quot;catch up with all my hip peers who&#x27;d gone all indie on me, and who made fun of me for liking R.E.M. and The Smiths.&quot; She has also embraced the influence of experimental artists and punk rock groups, including Sonic Youth, Swans, Big Black, Diamanda Galás, the Germs, and the Stooges. While writing &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot;, she drew influence from Neil Young and My Bloody Valentine. She has also cited her contemporary PJ Harvey as an influence, saying: &quot;The one rock star that makes me know I&#x27;m shit is Polly Harvey. I&#x27;m nothing next to the purity that she experiences.&quot;

Literature and poetry have often been a major influence on her songwriting; Love said she had &quot;always wanted to be a poet, but there was no money in it.&quot; She has named the works of T. S. Eliot and Charles Baudelaire as influential, and referenced works by Dante Rossetti, William Shakespeare, Rudyard Kipling, and Anne Sexton in her lyrics.

===Musical style and lyrics===
Musically, Love&#x27;s work with Hole and her solo efforts have been characterized as alternative rock; Hole&#x27;s early material, however, was described by critics as being stylistically closer to grindcore and aggressive punk rock. &quot;Spin&quot;″s October 1991 review of Hole&#x27;s first album noted Love&#x27;s layering of harsh and abrasive riffs buried more sophisticated musical arrangements. In 1998, she stated that Hole had &quot;always been a pop band. We always had a subtext of pop. I always talked about it, if you go back ... what&#x27;ll sound like some weird Sonic Youth tuning back then to you was sounding like the Raspberries to me, in my demented pop framework.&quot;

Love&#x27;s lyrics are composed from a female&#x27;s point of view, and her lyrics have been described as &quot;literate and mordant&quot; and noted by scholars for &quot;articulating a third-wave feminist consciousness.&quot; Simon Reynolds, in reviewing Hole&#x27;s debut album, noted: &quot;Ms. Love&#x27;s songs explore the full spectrum of female emotions, from vulnerability to rage. The songs are fueled by adolescent traumas, feelings of disgust about the body, passionate friendships with women and the desire to escape domesticity. Her lyrical style could be described as emotional nudism.&quot; Journalist and critic Kim France, in critiquing Love&#x27;s lyrics, referred to her as a &quot;dark genius&quot; and likened her work to that of Anne Sexton.

Love has remarked that lyrics have always been the most important component of songwriting for her: &quot;The important thing for me ... is it has to look good on the page. I mean, you can love Led Zeppelin and not love their lyrics ... but I made a big effort in my career to have what&#x27;s on the page mean something.&quot; Common themes present in Love&#x27;s lyrics during her early career included body image, rape, suicide, conformity, pregnancy, prostitution, and death. In a 1991 interview with Everett True, she said: &quot;I try to place [beautiful imagery] next to fucked up imagery, because that&#x27;s how I view things ... I sometimes feel that no one&#x27;s taken the time to write about certain things in rock, that there&#x27;s a certain female point of view that&#x27;s never been given space.&quot;

Critics have noted that Love&#x27;s later musical work is more lyrically introspective. &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot; and &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot; are lyrically centered on celebrity life, Hollywood, and drug addiction, while continuing Love&#x27;s interest in vanity and body image. &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot; was lyrically reflective of Love&#x27;s past relationships and her struggle for sobriety, with the majority of its lyrics written while she was in rehab in 2006.

===Performance===

Love has a contralto vocal range. According to Love, she never wanted to be a singer, but rather aspired to be a skilled guitarist: &quot;I&#x27;m such a lazy bastard though that I never did that&quot;, she said. &quot;I was always the only person with the nerve to sing, and so I got stuck with it.&quot; She has been regularly noted by critics for her husky vocals as well as her &quot;banshee [-like]&quot; screaming abilities. Her vocals have been compared to those of Johnny Rotten, and David Fricke of &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; described them as &quot;lung-busting&quot; and &quot;a corrosive, lunatic wail&quot;. Upon the release of Hole&#x27;s 2010 album, &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot;, Amanda Petrusich of &quot;Pitchfork&quot; compared Love&#x27;s raspy, unpolished vocals to those of Bob Dylan. In 2023, &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; ranked Love at number 130 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.

She has played a variety of Fender guitars throughout her career, including a Jaguar and a vintage 1965 Jazzmaster; the latter was purchased by the Hard Rock Cafe and is on display in New York City. Between 1989 and 1991, Love primarily played a Rickenbacker 425 because she &quot;preferred the 3/4 neck&quot;, but she destroyed the guitar onstage at a 1991 concert opening for the Smashing Pumpkins. In the mid-1990s, she often played a guitar made by Mercury, an obscure company that manufactured custom guitars, as well as a Univox Hi-Flier. Fender&#x27;s Vista Venus, designed by Love in 1998, was partially inspired by Rickenbacker guitars as well as her Mercury. During tours after the release of &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot; (post-2010), Love has played a Rickenbacker 360 onstage. Her setup has included Fender tube gear, Matchless, Ampeg, Silvertone and a solid-state 1976 Randall Commander.

Love has referred to herself as &quot;a shit guitar player&quot;, further commenting in a 2014 interview: &quot;I can still write a song, but [the guitar playing] sounds like shit ... I used to be a good rhythm player but I am no longer dependable.&quot; Throughout her career, she has also garnered a reputation for unpredictable live shows. In the 1990s, her performances with Hole were characterized by confrontational behavior, with Love stage diving, smashing guitars or throwing them into the audience, wandering into the crowd at the end of sets, and engaging in sometimes incoherent rants. Critics and journalists have noted Love for her comical, often stream-of-consciousness-like stage banter. Music journalist Robert Hilburn wrote in 1993 that, &quot;rather than simply scripted patter, Love&#x27;s comments between songs [have] the natural feel of someone who is sharing her immediate feelings.&quot; In a review of a live performance published in 2010, it was noted that Love&#x27;s onstage &quot;one-liners [were] worthy of the Comedy Store.&quot;

==Philanthropy==
In 1993, Love and husband Kurt Cobain performed an acoustic set together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Los Angeles, which raised awareness and provided resources for victims of sexual abuse. In 2000, Love publicly advocated for reform of the record industry in a personal letter published by &quot;Salon&quot;. In the letter, Love said: &quot;It&#x27;s not piracy when kids swap music over the Internet using Napster or Gnutella or Freenet or iMesh or beaming their CDs into a My.MP3.com or MyPlay.com music locker. It&#x27;s piracy when those guys that run those companies make side deals with the cartel lawyers and label heads so that they can be &#x27;the label&#x27;s friend&#x27;, and not the artists&#x27;.&quot; In a subsequent interview with Carrie Fisher, she said that she was interested in starting a union for recording artists, and also discussed race relations in the music industry, advocating for record companies to &quot;put money back into the black community [whom] white people have been stealing from for years.&quot;

Love has been a long-standing supporter of LGBT causes. She has frequently collaborated with Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center, taking part in the center&#x27;s &quot;An Evening with Women&quot; events. The proceeds of the event help provide food and shelter for homeless youth; services for seniors; legal assistance; domestic violence services; health and mental health services, and cultural arts programs. Love participated with Linda Perry for the event in 2012, and performed alongside Aimee Mann and comedian Wanda Sykes. Speaking on her collaboration on the event, Love said: &quot;Seven thousand kids in Los Angeles a year go out on the street, and forty percent of those kids are gay, lesbian, or transgender. They come out to their parents, and become homeless ... for whatever reason, I don&#x27;t really know why, but gay men have a lot of foundations—I&#x27;ve played many of them—but the lesbian side of it doesn&#x27;t have as much money and/or donors, so we&#x27;re excited that this has grown to cover women and women&#x27;s affairs.&quot;

She has also contributed to AIDS organizations, partaking in benefits for amfAR and the RED Campaign. In May 2011, she donated six of her husband Cobain&#x27;s personal vinyl records for auction at Mariska Hargitay&#x27;s Joyful Heart Foundation event for victims of child abuse, rape, and domestic violence. She has also supported the Sophie Lancaster Foundation.

== Legacy ==

Love has had an impact on female-fronted alternative acts and performers. She has been cited as influential on young female instrumentalists in particular, having once infamously proclaimed: &quot;I want every girl in the world to pick up a guitar and start screaming ... I strap on that motherfucking guitar and you cannot fuck with me. That&#x27;s my feeling.&quot; In &quot;The Electric Guitar: A History of an American Icon&quot;, it is noted: 
With over 3 million records sold in the United States alone, Hole became one of the most successful rock bands of all time fronted by a woman. VH1 ranked Love 69 in their list of &quot;The 100 Greatest Women in Music History&quot; in 2012. In 2015, the &quot;Phoenix New Times&quot; declared Love the number one greatest female rock star of all time, writing: &quot;To build a perfect rock star, there are several crucial ingredients: musical talent, physical attractiveness, tumultuous relationships, substance abuse, and public meltdowns, just to name a few. These days, Love seems to have rebounded from her epic tailspin and has leveled out in a slightly more normal manner, but there&#x27;s no doubt that her life to date is the type of story people wouldn&#x27;t believe in a novel or a movie.&quot;

Among the alternative musicians who have cited Love as an influence are Scout Niblett; Brody Dalle of The Distillers; Dee Dee Penny of Dum Dum Girls; Florence Welch; Annie Hardy of Giant Drag; and Nine Black Alps. Contemporary female pop artists Lana Del Rey, Avril Lavigne, Tove Lo, and Sky Ferreira have also cited Love as an influence. Love has frequently been recognized as the most high-profile contributor of feminist music during the 1990s, and for &quot;subverting [the] mainstream expectations of how a woman should look, act, and sound.&quot; According to music journalist Maria Raha, &quot;Hole was the highest-profile female-fronted band of the &#x27;90s to openly and directly sing about feminism.&quot; Patti Smith, a major influence of Love&#x27;s, also praised her, saying: &quot;I hate genderizing things ... [but] when I heard Hole, I was amazed to hear a girl sing like that. Janis Joplin was her own thing; she was into Big Mama Thornton and Bessie Smith. But what Courtney Love does, I&#x27;d never heard a girl do that.&quot;

She has also been a gay icon since the mid-1990s, and has jokingly referred to her fanbase as consisting of &quot;females, gay guys, and a few advanced, evolved heterosexual men.&quot; Love&#x27;s aesthetic image, particularly in the early 1990s, also became influential and was dubbed &quot;kinderwhore&quot; by critics and media. The subversive fashion mainly consisted of vintage babydoll dresses accompanied by smeared makeup and red lipstick. MTV reporter Kurt Loder described Love as looking like &quot;a debauched rag doll&quot; onstage. Love later said she had been influenced by the fashion of Chrissy Amphlett of the Divinyls. Interviewed in 1994, Love commented &quot;I would like to think–in my heart of hearts–that I&#x27;m changing some psychosexual aspects of rock music. Not that I&#x27;m so desirable. I didn&#x27;t do the kinder-whore thing because I thought I was so hot. When I see the look used to make one more appealing, it pisses me off. When I started, it was a &quot;What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?&quot; thing. My angle was irony.&quot;

==Discography==
=== Solo discography ===
* &quot;America&#x27;s Sweetheart&quot; (2004)

=== with Hole ===

* &quot;Pretty on the Inside&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Live Through This&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Celebrity Skin&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Nobody&#x27;s Daughter&quot; (2010)

==Filmography==
* &quot;Sid and Nancy&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Straight to Hell&quot; (1987)
* &quot;The People vs. Larry Flynt&quot; (1996)
* &quot;200 Cigarettes&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Man on the Moon&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Julie Johnson&quot; (2001) 
* &quot;Trapped&quot; (2002)

==Bibliography==
* 
* 

==Footnotes==
==References==
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* 
* Works by or about Courtney Love (library search via WorldCat)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="0" end="22" title="Courtney Love" label="Courtney Michelle Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="24" end="27" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q222071" start="28" end="36" title="Courtney Love" label="Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="132" end="143" title="alternative rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="148" end="154" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="307" end="311" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="510" end="517" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="527" end="538" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="555" end="558" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q778865" start="1023" end="1031" title="Alex Cox" label="Alex Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q600950" start="1044" end="1057" title="Sid and Nancy" label="Sid and Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065276" start="1081" end="1097" title="Straight to Hell (film)" label="Straight to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351266" start="1170" end="1184" title="Eric Erlandson" label="Eric Erlandson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061242" start="1283" end="1303" title="Pretty on the Inside" label="Pretty on the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="1323" end="1333" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q946807" start="1369" end="1386" title="Live Through This" label="Live Through This"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503026" start="1437" end="1451" title="RIAA certification" label="multi-platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="1503" end="1521" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q436107" start="1556" end="1570" title="Althea Flynt" label="Althea Leasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q51525" start="1574" end="1586" title="Miloš Forman" label="Miloš Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q750077" start="1600" end="1626" title="The People vs. Larry Flynt" label="The People vs. Larry Flynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q859304" start="1739" end="1753" title="Celebrity Skin" label="Celebrity Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="1792" end="1805" title="Grammy Awards" label="Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125282" start="1914" end="1929" title="Man on the Moon (film)" label="Man on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217303" start="1953" end="1960" title="Trapped (2002 film)" label="Trapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948902" start="2020" end="2045" title="America&amp;#x27;s Sweetheart (Courtney Love album)" label="America&amp;#x27;s Sweetheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260022" start="2214" end="2228" title="drug rehabilitation" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713724" start="2315" end="2337" title="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q134556" start="2460" end="2467" title="single (music)" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q171254" start="2519" end="2534" title="Sons of Anarchy" label="Sons of Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="2551" end="2557" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="2701" end="2706" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q968900" start="2714" end="2725" title="Princess Ai" label="Princess Ai"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2782" end="2794" title="Dirty Blonde: The Diaries of Courtney Love" label="Dirty Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401259" start="2924" end="2955" title="Saint Francis Memorial Hospital" label="Saint Francis Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="2993" end="3008" title="Psychotherapy" label="psychotherapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551441" start="3009" end="3022" title="Linda Carroll" label="Linda Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q212533" start="3113" end="3126" title="Grateful Dead" label="Grateful Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q49575" start="3164" end="3179" title="Dizzy Gillespie" label="Dizzy Gillespie"/>
<link wikidata="Q49225" start="3212" end="3224" title="Reno, Nevada" label="Reno, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q134477" start="3342" end="3351" title="Paula Fox" label="Paula Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195125" start="3426" end="3431" title="Cubans" label="Cuban"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222191" start="3467" end="3493" title="The Last Train from Madrid" label="The Last Train from Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q110824076" start="3536" end="3551" title="Paul Hervey Fox" label="Paul Hervey Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431144" start="3570" end="3583" title="Faith Baldwin" label="Faith Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q104127" start="3594" end="3611" title="Douglas Fairbanks" label="Douglas Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350527" start="3613" end="3622" title="Phil Lesh" label="Phil Lesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892884" start="3770" end="3782" title="Pamela Moore (author)" label="Pamela Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3677376" start="3807" end="3831" title="Chocolates for Breakfast" label="Chocolates for Breakfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027700" start="4123" end="4137" title="Haight-Ashbury" label="Haight-Ashbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="4317" end="4320" title="Lysergic acid diethylamide" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474048" start="4576" end="4591" title="Marcola, Oregon" label="Marcola, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q438575" start="4619" end="4631" title="Mohawk River (Oregon)" label="Mohawk River"/>
<link wikidata="Q766145" start="4685" end="4705" title="University of Oregon" label="University of Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4819" end="4833" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q339747" start="4931" end="4937" title="hippie" label="hippie"/>
<link wikidata="Q828879" start="4968" end="4983" title="Gestalt therapy" label="Gestalt therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530992" start="5022" end="5033" title="Gender neutrality" label="gender-free"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="5139" end="5156" title="Montessori education" label="Montessori school"/>
<link wikidata="Q171224" start="5160" end="5174" title="Eugene, Oregon" label="Eugene, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q558571" start="5323" end="5325" title="Transendental meditation" label="TM"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="5439" end="5445" title="autism spectrum" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5458" end="5479" title="Sensory processing disorder#History" label="tactile defensiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q206687" start="5752" end="5758" title="Nelson, New Zealand" label="Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990438" start="5794" end="5818" title="Nelson College for Girls" label="Nelson College for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="5890" end="5898" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5762885" start="6066" end="6097" title="Hillcrest Youth Correctional Facility" label="Hillcrest Correctional Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q43919" start="6118" end="6123" title="Salem, Oregon" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="6191" end="6202" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q908458" start="6204" end="6216" title="the Runaways" label="the Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="6222" end="6236" title="the Pretenders" label="the Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473797" start="6311" end="6322" title="Foster care in the United States" label="foster care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266011" start="6367" end="6378" title="Emancipation of minors" label="emancipated"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977278" start="6656" end="6672" title="Mary&amp;#x27;s Club" label="Mary&amp;#x27;s Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="6923" end="6933" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771717" start="6972" end="6997" title="Portland State University" label="Portland State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893198" start="7185" end="7195" title="United States trust law" label="trust fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="7353" end="7368" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="7426" end="7444" title="honorary degree" label="honorary patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7894875" start="7465" end="7497" title="University Philosophical Society" label="University Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371735" start="7542" end="7553" title="Julian Cope" label="Julian Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971690" start="7557" end="7578" title="the Teardrop Explodes" label="the Teardrop Explodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742577" start="7933" end="7948" title="Pete de Freitas" label="Pete de Freitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q925641" start="7952" end="7975" title="Echo &amp;amp; the Bunnymen" label="Echo &amp;amp; the Bunnymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="8476" end="8489" title="Faith No More" label="Faith No More"/>
<link wikidata="Q983256" start="8663" end="8675" title="Roddy Bottum" label="Roddy Bottum"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="8836" end="8842" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689629" start="8858" end="8873" title="taxi dance hall" label="taxi dance hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="8877" end="8886" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="8927" end="8933" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="9000" end="9007" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="9419" end="9436" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389572" start="9510" end="9517" title="dry rot" label="dry rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124173" start="9765" end="9779" title="Sugar Babydoll" label="Sugar Babydoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q320499" start="9803" end="9816" title="Faith no More" label="Faith no More"/>
<link wikidata="Q243041" start="9872" end="9886" title="Siouxsie Sioux" label="Siouxsie Sioux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638175" start="9914" end="9926" title="Kat Bjelland" label="Kat Bjelland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426961" start="9934" end="9943" title="Satyricon (nightclub)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124173" start="9992" end="10004" title="Pagan Babies (band)" label="Pagan Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306650" start="10147" end="10161" title="Jennifer Finch" label="Jennifer Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154655" start="10174" end="10186" title="Janis Tanaka" label="Janis Tanaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="10435" end="10439" title="demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q797648" start="10555" end="10571" title="Babes in Toyland (band)" label="Babes in Toyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681044" start="10654" end="10666" title="Lori Barbero" label="Lori Barbero"/>
<link wikidata="Q586735" start="10770" end="10797" title="San Francisco Art Institute" label="San Francisco Art Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507723" start="10843" end="10856" title="George Kuchar" label="George Kuchar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="10967" end="10974" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="10985" end="11000" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q241669" start="11059" end="11072" title="Nancy Spungen" label="Nancy Spungen"/>
<link wikidata="Q47878" start="11080" end="11091" title="Sid Vicious" label="Sid Vicious"/>
<link wikidata="Q600950" start="11105" end="11118" title="Sid and Nancy" label="Sid and Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q778865" start="11182" end="11190" title="Alex Cox" label="Alex Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q27410" start="11266" end="11275" title="peep show" label="peep show"/>
<link wikidata="Q11259" start="11279" end="11291" title="Times Square" label="Times Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q44854" start="11296" end="11304" title="squatting" label="squatted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650212" start="11312" end="11322" title="ABC No Rio" label="ABC No Rio"/>
<link wikidata="Q56273725" start="11341" end="11353" title="Pyramid Club (New York)" label="Pyramid Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="11361" end="11373" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065276" start="11435" end="11451" title="Straight to Hell (film)" label="Straight to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="11468" end="11485" title="Spaghetti Western" label="Spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q310052" start="11495" end="11507" title="Joe Strummer" label="Joe Strummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q102711" start="11509" end="11522" title="Dennis Hopper" label="Dennis Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q450429" start="11528" end="11539" title="Grace Jones" label="Grace Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="11636" end="11647" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761448" start="11690" end="11724" title="Andy Warhol&amp;#x27;s Fifteen Minutes" label="Andy Warhol&amp;#x27;s Fifteen Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="11764" end="11771" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543410" start="11794" end="11812" title="I Wanna Be Sedated" label="I Wanna Be Sedated"/>
<link wikidata="Q587231" start="11896" end="11907" title="celebutante" label="celebutante"/>
<link wikidata="Q852693" start="12088" end="12099" title="McMinnville, Oregon" label="McMinnville"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="12157" end="12174" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528354" start="12482" end="12494" title="vision quest" label="vision quest"/>
<link wikidata="Q572821" start="12878" end="12887" title="Big Black" label="Big Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="12889" end="12900" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="12906" end="12919" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351266" start="12965" end="12979" title="Eric Erlandson" label="Eric Erlandson"/>
<link wikidata="Q507863" start="13061" end="13065" title="Gwar" label="Gwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q624790" start="13095" end="13099" title="Hole (band)" label="Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q48305" start="13118" end="13127" title="Euripides" label="Euripides"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="13140" end="13145" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746579" start="13369" end="13383" title="Leaving Trains" label="Leaving Trains"/>
<link wikidata="Q701040" start="13439" end="13447" title="annulment" label="annulled"/>
<link wikidata="Q486680" start="13498" end="13510" title="transvestism" label="transvestite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6310847" start="13748" end="13771" title="Jumbo&amp;#x27;s Clown Room" label="Jumbo&amp;#x27;s Clown Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q798454" start="13820" end="13828" title="backline (stage)" label="backline"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="13918" end="13939" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286133" start="13990" end="14001" title="Raji&amp;#x27;s" label="Raji&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395236" start="14063" end="14074" title="Retard Girl" label="Retard Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737528" start="14142" end="14174" title="Sympathy for the Record Industry" label="Sympathy for the Record Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356857" start="14193" end="14212" title="Rodney Bingenheimer" label="Rodney Bingenheimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191043" start="14235" end="14239" title="KROQ-FM" label="KROQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459731" start="14277" end="14285" title="Flipside (fanzine)" label="Flipside"/>
<link wikidata="Q181298" start="14318" end="14325" title="fanzine" label="fanzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395226" start="14383" end="14391" title="Dicknail" label="Dicknail"/>
<link wikidata="Q778673" start="14407" end="14422" title="Sub Pop Records" label="Sub Pop Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q823080" start="14429" end="14436" title="no wave" label="no wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q181861" start="14438" end="14448" title="noise rock" label="noise rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="14454" end="14463" title="grindcore" label="grindcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061242" start="14540" end="14560" title="Pretty on the Inside" label="Pretty on the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="14656" end="14657" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q264137" start="14769" end="14785" title="Caroline Records" label="Caroline Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="14799" end="14809" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q375128" start="14856" end="14863" title="Gumball (band)" label="Gumball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011916" start="14981" end="14984" title="Goo (album)" label="Goo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277567" start="14998" end="15012" title="Whisky a Go Go" label="Whisky a Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="15324" end="15328" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="15403" end="15418" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395018" start="15447" end="15460" title="Teenage Whore" label="Teenage Whore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1604413" start="15480" end="15494" title="UK Indie Chart" label="UK Indie Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q677542" start="15582" end="15592" title="riot grrrl" label="riot grrrl"/>
<link wikidata="Q898820" start="15707" end="15715" title="Mudhoney" label="Mudhoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="15769" end="15786" title="Smashing pumpkins" label="Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022965" start="15805" end="15809" title="CBGB" label="CBGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="15892" end="15904" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11649" start="15918" end="15925" title="Nirvana (band)" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8446" start="15935" end="15946" title="Kurt Cobain" label="Kurt Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q647640" start="15963" end="15978" title="Michael Azerrad" label="Michael Azerrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426961" start="16026" end="16035" title="Satyricon (nightclub)" label="Satyricon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572489" start="16098" end="16111" title="Charles R. Cross" label="Charles Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173317" start="16244" end="16255" title="Dave Pirner" label="Dave Pirner"/>
<link wikidata="Q512312" start="16259" end="16270" title="Soul Asylum" label="Soul Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269220" start="16311" end="16322" title="Dharma Bums (band)" label="Dharma Bums"/>
<link wikidata="Q4244839" start="16471" end="16490" title="Hollywood Palladium" label="Hollywood Palladium"/>
<link wikidata="Q10306650" start="16567" end="16581" title="Jennifer Finch" label="Jennifer Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q254861" start="16858" end="16871" title="Waikiki Beach" label="Waikiki Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q235103" start="16948" end="16962" title="Frances Farmer" label="Frances Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889932" start="17082" end="17088" title="Wipers (band)" label="Wipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325582" start="17144" end="17157" title="Beautiful Son" label="Beautiful Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q426999" start="17260" end="17279" title="Frances Bean Cobain" label="Frances Bean Cobain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191413" start="17324" end="17345" title="Carnation, Washington" label="Carnation, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="17460" end="17471" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q17444" start="17634" end="17643" title="Nevermind" label="Nevermind"/>
<link wikidata="Q25340025" start="17920" end="17974" title="Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services" label="Los Angeles Department of Children and Family Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="18161" end="18176" title="first trimester" label="first trimester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="18347" end="18374" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="his suicide two years later"/>
<link wikidata="Q286080" start="18520" end="18528" title="acoustic music" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773384" start="18544" end="18558" title="Pennyroyal Tea" label="Pennyroyal Tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q921000" start="18575" end="18605" title="Where Did You Sleep Last Night" label="Where Did You Sleep Last Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478034" start="18680" end="18690" title="Doll Parts" label="Doll Parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395396" start="18707" end="18717" title="Miss World (song)" label="Miss World"/>
<link wikidata="Q946807" start="18828" end="18845" title="Live Through This" label="Live Through This"/>
<link wikidata="Q240554" start="18910" end="18923" title="Kristen Pfaff" label="Kristen Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331185" start="18936" end="18949" title="Patty Schemel" label="Patty Schemel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616580" start="18967" end="18988" title="Suicide of Kurt Cobain" label="Cobain killed himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="19204" end="19212" title="cremation" label="cremated"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961691" start="19337" end="19363" title="Namgyal Monastery Institute of Buddhist Studies" label="Namgyal Buddhist Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q217346" start="19367" end="19383" title="Ithaca, New York" label="Ithaca, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q212699" start="19606" end="19612" title="Geffen Records" label="Geffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311775" start="19637" end="19640" title="DGC Records" label="DGC"/>
<link wikidata="Q254510" start="19766" end="19786" title="Melissa Auf der Maur" label="Melissa Auf der Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137962" start="19839" end="19855" title="Reading Festival" label="Reading Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="19940" end="19943" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q326542" start="20008" end="20017" title="John Peel" label="John Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="20033" end="20045" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q831377" start="20142" end="20148" title="Bethlem Royal Hospital" label="Bedlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q241365" start="20483" end="20501" title="Music recording sales certification" label="certified platinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q231417" start="20650" end="20665" title="Barbara Walters" label="Barbara Walters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859391" start="20678" end="20704" title="Barbara Walters&amp;#x27; 10 Most Fascinating People" label="10 Most Fascinating People"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069643" start="20975" end="20987" title="stage diving" label="stage diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="21225" end="21242" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Tourette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="21445" end="21451" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="21533" end="21554" title="Lollapalooza Festival" label="Lollapalooza Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519093" start="21558" end="21576" title="George, Washington" label="George, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q242608" start="21617" end="21631" title="Kathleen Hanna" label="Kathleen Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="21744" end="21751" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q574559" start="21780" end="21796" title="anger management" label="anger management"/>
<link wikidata="Q62947" start="22235" end="22243" title="Flunitrazepam" label="Rohypnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q155407" start="22427" end="22447" title="Jean-Michel Basquiat" label="Jean-Michel Basquiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q810441" start="22461" end="22469" title="Basquiat (film)" label="Basquiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937392" start="22496" end="22513" title="Feeling Minnesota" label="Feeling Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q223839" start="22556" end="22567" title="Larry Flynt" label="Larry Flynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q436107" start="22580" end="22586" title="Althea Flynt" label="Althea"/>
<link wikidata="Q51525" start="22590" end="22602" title="Miloš Forman" label="Miloš Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q750077" start="22647" end="22673" title="The People vs. Larry Flynt" label="The People vs. Larry Flynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="22835" end="22852" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="23026" end="23038" title="Golden Globe Award" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="23054" end="23066" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790297" start="23074" end="23136" title="New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="23145" end="23156" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="23498" end="23505" title="Versace" label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214381" start="23521" end="23533" title="Vogue Italia" label="Vogue Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q125904" start="23635" end="23648" title="Edward Norton" label="Edward Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708831" start="23737" end="23762" title="My Body, the Hand Grenade" label="My Body, the Hand Grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726599" start="23779" end="23796" title="The First Session" label="The First Session"/>
<link wikidata="Q859304" start="24075" end="24089" title="Celebrity Skin" label="Celebrity Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="24120" end="24129" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="24403" end="24413" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q841042" start="24434" end="24453" title="My Bloody Valentine (band)" label="My Bloody Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q311382" start="24505" end="24517" title="Billy Corgan" label="Billy Corgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="24605" end="24618" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="24879" end="24896" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025849" start="24958" end="24976" title="Modern Rock Tracks" label="Modern Rock Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325193" start="24994" end="25008" title="Celebrity Skin (song)" label="Celebrity Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392565" start="25081" end="25103" title="Billboard Music Awards" label="Billboard Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="25134" end="25146" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q990545" start="25155" end="25173" title="41st Annual Grammy Awards" label="41st Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="25244" end="25250" title="Fender Musical Instruments Corporation" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q901268" start="25273" end="25279" title="Squier" label="Squier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049994" start="25298" end="25309" title="Squier Venus" label="Vista Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208173" start="25412" end="25424" title="Fender Stratocaster" label="Stratocaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q41014" start="25430" end="25442" title="Rickenbacker" label="Rickenbacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q381651" start="25450" end="25460" title="solid body" label="solid body"/>
<link wikidata="Q516104" start="25497" end="25506" title="humbucker" label="humbucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q572648" start="25863" end="25876" title="pickup (music technology)" label="pickup switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q186327" start="25902" end="25916" title="Marilyn Manson" label="Marilyn Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205878" start="25924" end="25947" title="Beautiful Monsters Tour" label="Beautiful Monsters Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q231694" start="26110" end="26128" title="Interscope Records" label="Interscope Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660304" start="26156" end="26169" title="Imperial Teen" label="Imperial Teen"/>
<link wikidata="Q80304" start="26234" end="26238" title="Korn" label="Korn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957527" start="26371" end="26377" title="WWWQ-HD2" label="99X.FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q983557" start="26838" end="26855" title="Orville H. Gibson" label="Orville H. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40504" start="26933" end="26943" title="Jim Carrey" label="Jim Carrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q299983" start="26982" end="26994" title="Andy Kaufman" label="Andy Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125282" start="27008" end="27023" title="Man on the Moon (film)" label="Man on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="27060" end="27080" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q452819" start="27093" end="27105" title="Joan Vollmer" label="Joan Vollmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394835" start="27115" end="27119" title="Beat (2000 film)" label="Beat"/>
<link wikidata="Q103946" start="27143" end="27160" title="Kiefer Sutherland" label="Kiefer Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q95008" start="27191" end="27205" title="John Carpenter" label="John Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q261700" start="27238" end="27252" title="Ghosts of Mars" label="Ghosts of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q163810" start="27432" end="27437" title="Volvo" label="Volvo"/>
<link wikidata="Q233502" start="27489" end="27500" title="Lili Taylor" label="Lili Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160546" start="27510" end="27523" title="Julie Johnson (film)" label="Julie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127473" start="27651" end="27658" title="Outfest" label="Outfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q217303" start="27700" end="27707" title="Trapped (2002 film)" label="Trapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="27732" end="27743" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80046" start="27748" end="27763" title="Charlize Theron" label="Charlize Theron"/>
<link wikidata="Q215048" start="27889" end="27899" title="supergroup (music)" label="supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300681" start="27935" end="27946" title="Veruca Salt (band)" label="Veruca Salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688915" start="27961" end="27972" title="Louise Post" label="Louise Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="28575" end="28596" title="Universal Music Group" label="Universal Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q428798" start="28667" end="28682" title="Krist Novoselic" label="Krist Novoselic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12006" start="28687" end="28697" title="Dave Grohl" label="Dave Grohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q149789" start="28707" end="28732" title="limited liability company" label="limited liability company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140480" start="28952" end="28971" title="With the Lights Out" label="With the Lights Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="29368" end="29384" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="29429" end="29444" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q236125" start="29800" end="29811" title="Linda Perry" label="Linda Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="29853" end="29867" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948902" start="29917" end="29942" title="America&amp;#x27;s Sweetheart (Courtney Love album)" label="America&amp;#x27;s Sweetheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446871" start="30861" end="30871" title="Kurt Loder" label="Kurt Loder"/>
<link wikidata="Q637715" start="30881" end="30884" title="Total Request Live" label="TRL"/>
<link wikidata="Q858778" start="31002" end="31032" title="Late Show with David Letterman" label="Late Show with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q43405" start="31166" end="31173" title="Exhibitionism" label="flashed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="31674" end="31686" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q895431" start="31781" end="31796" title="Bowery Ballroom" label="Bowery Ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987626" start="31853" end="31874" title="The Howard Stern Show" label="The Howard Stern Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q234207" start="31982" end="31996" title="Natasha Lyonne" label="Natasha Lyonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894927" start="32271" end="32288" title="Bellevue Hospital" label="Bellevue Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q257243" start="32556" end="32568" title="Margaret Cho" label="Margaret Cho"/>
<link wikidata="Q816318" start="32833" end="32851" title="disorderly conduct" label="disorderly conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447768" start="32915" end="32922" title="Roast (comedy)" label="roaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285338" start="32936" end="32956" title="Comedy Central Roast" label="Comedy Central Roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q83325" start="32966" end="32981" title="Pamela Anderson" label="Pamela Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="33320" end="33329" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512965" start="33556" end="33566" title="Ambulatory care" label="outpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="33676" end="33683" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q330694" start="33689" end="33702" title="crack cocaine" label="crack cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11398042" start="33787" end="33807" title="Soka Gakkai International" label="Soka Gakkai Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="33992" end="33997" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q968900" start="34005" end="34016" title="Princess Ai" label="Princess Ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="34024" end="34032" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q234425" start="34098" end="34107" title="Ai Yazawa" label="Ai Yazawa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="34236" end="34248" title="Dirty Blonde: The Diaries of Courtney Love" label="Dirty Blonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="34530" end="34539" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760400" start="34863" end="34890" title="The Return of Courtney Love" label="The Return of Courtney Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219852" start="34973" end="34978" title="More4" label="More4"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="35107" end="35116" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408612" start="35196" end="35204" title="Samantha (Hole song)" label="Samantha"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="35247" end="35250" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="35400" end="35405" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="35470" end="35477" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="35572" end="35575" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713724" start="35677" end="35699" title="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="36038" end="36045" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838881" start="36283" end="36295" title="Micko Larkin" label="Micko Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q703637" start="36710" end="36726" title="Michael Beinhorn" label="Michael Beinhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="36859" end="36868" title="folk rock" label="folk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292951" start="37000" end="37019" title="Skinny Little Bitch" label="Skinny Little Bitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="37421" end="37435" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48280" start="37497" end="37515" title="Marianne Faithfull" label="Marianne Faithfull"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="38072" end="38090" title="South by Southwest" label="South by Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040692" start="38155" end="38166" title="Hit So Hard" label="Hit So Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q215182" start="38531" end="38544" title="Michael Stipe" label="Michael Stipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="38585" end="38596" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38627" end="38648" title="Rogue&amp;#x27;s Gallery: Pirate Ballads, Sea Songs, and Chanteys#Son of Rogues Gallery" label="Son of Rogues Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="38731" end="38743" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428054" start="38763" end="38781" title="Save Rock and Roll" label="Save Rock and Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282172" start="39010" end="39028" title="Yves Saint Laurent (brand)" label="Yves Saint Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q240570" start="39039" end="39049" title="Kim Gordon" label="Kim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q659238" start="39054" end="39064" title="Ariel Pink" label="Ariel Pink"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="39457" end="39462" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17024748" start="39969" end="39985" title="You Know My Name (Courtney Love song)" label="You Know My Name"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="39995" end="40006" title="BBC Radio 6" label="BBC Radio 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q16800797" start="40112" end="40123" title="Wedding Day (song)" label="Wedding Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995752" start="40190" end="40211" title="Kobalt Label Services" label="Kobalt Label Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q331748" start="40271" end="40280" title="Tommy Lee" label="Tommy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="40316" end="40319" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="40615" end="40624" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="40977" end="40979" title="FX Network" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q171254" start="40993" end="41008" title="Sons of Anarchy" label="Sons of Anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q663759" start="41022" end="41029" title="Revenge (TV series)" label="Revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q555460" start="41041" end="41052" title="Lee Daniels" label="Lee Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992512" start="41080" end="41086" title="Empire (2015 TV series)" label="Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="41122" end="41133" title="Empire (season 1)#Cast and characters" label="Elle Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="41262" end="41275" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721514" start="41277" end="41292" title="Alexis Petridis" label="Alexis Petridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="41302" end="41314" title="The Guardian (newspaper)" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q117286308" start="41723" end="41744" title="Kansas City Choir Boy" label="Kansas City Choir Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="41845" end="41863" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772146" start="42327" end="42340" title="Anthony Bozza" label="Anthony Bozza"/>
<link wikidata="Q37150" start="42463" end="42475" title="Lana Del Rey" label="Lana Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18622494" start="42483" end="42502" title="The Endless Summer Tour" label="Endless Summer Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q19954603" start="42601" end="42616" title="Miss Narcissist" label="Miss Narcissist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406448" start="42636" end="42642" title="Wavves" label="Wavves"/>
<link wikidata="Q306403" start="42721" end="42733" title="James Franco" label="James Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880878" start="42752" end="42765" title="The Long Home" label="The Long Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568651" start="42795" end="42806" title="William Gay (author)" label="William Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16145856" start="43003" end="43017" title="Sophia Amoruso" label="Sophia Amoruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q653916" start="43138" end="43143" title="television pilot" label="pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q83965684" start="43154" end="43182" title="A Midsummer&amp;#x27;s Nightmare (film)" label="A Midsummer&amp;#x27;s Nightmare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="43233" end="43241" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q899048" start="43337" end="43359" title="Lyle and Erik Menendez" label="Lyle and Erik Menendez"/>
<link wikidata="Q18753268" start="43450" end="43467" title="Nicholas Cullinan" label="Nicholas Cullinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q311249" start="43475" end="43500" title="GQ Men of the Year Awards" label="GQ Men of the Year awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q193375" start="43508" end="43519" title="Tate Modern" label="Tate Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q41832063" start="43631" end="43655" title="Harvey Weinstein sexual abuse cases" label="Harvey Weinstein scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285338" start="43794" end="43833" title="Comedy Central Roast of Pamela Anderson" label="Comedy Central Roast of Pamela Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966357" start="43859" end="43874" title="Natasha Leggero" label="Natasha Leggero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424786" start="44026" end="44038" title="Four Seasons (hotels)" label="Four Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002407" start="44163" end="44187" title="Creative Artists Agency" label="[Creative Artists Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560969" start="44249" end="44261" title="Justin Kelly (director)" label="Justin Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074033" start="44282" end="44290" title="JT LeRoy (film)" label="JT LeRoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q220901" start="44334" end="44344" title="Laura Dern" label="Laura Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581090" start="44425" end="44444" title="Tattooed in Reverse" label="Tattooed in Reverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q169844" start="44504" end="44527" title="RuPaul&amp;#x27;s Drag Race" label="RuPaul&amp;#x27;s Drag Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q593132" start="44567" end="44584" title="restraining order" label="restraining order"/>
<link wikidata="Q232348" start="45069" end="45078" title="Cat Power" label="Cat Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q270724" start="45083" end="45091" title="Lykke Li" label="Lykke Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q106824200" start="45168" end="45180" title="Joss Sackler" label="Joss Sackler"/>
<link wikidata="Q61911512" start="45200" end="45214" title="Sackler family" label="Sackler family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292472" start="45384" end="45391" title="relapse" label="relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201240" start="45635" end="45651" title="Lawrence Rothman" label="Lawrence Rothman"/>
<link wikidata="Q52151357" start="45705" end="45716" title="The Turning (2020 film)" label="The Turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637268" start="45783" end="45805" title="NME Awards" label="&amp;quot;NME&amp;quot; Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585587" start="46063" end="46074" title="minor chord" label="minor chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="46177" end="46183" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614550" start="46484" end="46501" title="Song to the Siren" label="Song to the Siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861040" start="46518" end="46527" title="070 Shake" label="070 Shake"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="46724" end="46735" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q908458" start="46737" end="46749" title="the Runaways" label="the Runaways"/>
<link wikidata="Q667389" start="46755" end="46769" title="the Pretenders" label="the Pretenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149730" start="46935" end="46955" title="Columbia House" label="Columbia Record Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="46989" end="47002" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q923550" start="47016" end="47038" title="Songs of Leonard Cohen" label="Songs of Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428959" start="47209" end="47216" title="Flipper (band)" label="Flipper"/>
<link wikidata="Q636" start="47218" end="47227" title="Kate Bush" label="Kate Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329303" start="47229" end="47238" title="Soft Cell" label="Soft Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q205721" start="47240" end="47253" title="Joni Mitchell" label="Joni Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q234861" start="47255" end="47265" title="Laura Nyro" label="Laura Nyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q189080" start="47267" end="47275" title="Lou Reed" label="Lou Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="47281" end="47294" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281958" start="47371" end="47384" title="Virgin Prunes" label="Virgin Prunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="47616" end="47618" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q707268" start="47789" end="47801" title="Gavin Friday" label="Gavin Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="47807" end="47820" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="47971" end="47980" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="47985" end="47993" title="new wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q180598" start="48138" end="48148" title="the Smiths" label="the Smiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q323834" start="48150" end="48175" title="Siouxsie and the Banshees" label="Siouxsie and the Banshees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160206" start="48177" end="48187" title="Television (band)" label="Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q180582" start="48193" end="48200" title="Bauhaus (band)" label="Bauhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q188534" start="48377" end="48386" title="grindcore" label="grindcore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715339" start="48425" end="48436" title="Raspberries (band)" label="Raspberries"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="48649" end="48655" title="R.E.M. (band)" label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="48770" end="48781" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q573017" start="48783" end="48788" title="Swans (band)" label="Swans"/>
<link wikidata="Q572821" start="48790" end="48799" title="Big Black" label="Big Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q233483" start="48801" end="48815" title="Diamanda Galás" label="Diamanda Galás"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850698" start="48821" end="48826" title="Germs (band)" label="Germs"/>
<link wikidata="Q208767" start="48832" end="48843" title="the Stooges" label="the Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q633" start="48911" end="48921" title="Neil Young" label="Neil Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q841042" start="48926" end="48945" title="My Bloody Valentine (band)" label="My Bloody Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q219772" start="48983" end="48992" title="PJ Harvey" label="PJ Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="49348" end="49359" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q501" start="49364" end="49382" title="Charles Baudelaire" label="Charles Baudelaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="49423" end="49437" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="49439" end="49458" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="49460" end="49475" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q270728" start="49481" end="49492" title="Anne Sexton" label="Anne Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="49626" end="49642" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="49764" end="49773" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914319" start="50420" end="50439" title="third-wave feminism" label="third-wave feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q202676" start="50461" end="50475" title="Simon Reynolds" label="Simon Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408628" start="50862" end="50872" title="Kim France" label="Kim France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="51193" end="51205" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417079" start="51504" end="51516" title="Everett True" label="Everett True"/>
<link wikidata="Q37137" start="52342" end="52351" title="contralto" label="contralto"/>
<link wikidata="Q273112" start="52719" end="52726" title="banshee" label="banshee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206488" start="52741" end="52750" title="screaming (music)" label="screaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q106662" start="52804" end="52817" title="Johnny Rotten" label="Johnny Rotten"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199458" start="53031" end="53047" title="Amanda Petrusich" label="Amanda Petrusich"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="53131" end="53140" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="53157" end="53170" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q175391" start="53285" end="53291" title="Fender Musical Instruments Corporation" label="Fender"/>
<link wikidata="Q775605" start="53335" end="53341" title="Fender Jaguar" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162697" start="53361" end="53371" title="Fender Jazzmaster" label="Jazzmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q918151" start="53405" end="53419" title="Hard Rock Cafe" label="Hard Rock Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41014" start="53503" end="53515" title="Rickenbacker" label="Rickenbacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052413" start="53785" end="53800" title="Univox Hi-Flier" label="Univox Hi-Flier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049994" start="53816" end="53827" title="Vista Venus" label="Vista Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935028" start="54026" end="54042" title="Rickenbacker 360" label="Rickenbacker 360"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786287" start="54093" end="54102" title="Matchless Amplifiers" label="Matchless"/>
<link wikidata="Q474442" start="54104" end="54109" title="Ampeg" label="Ampeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q670969" start="54369" end="54375" title="rhythm guitar" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520350" start="55207" end="55219" title="The Comedy Store" label="Comedy Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150423" start="55549" end="55554" title="Salon (website)" label="Salon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152674" start="55608" end="55614" title="music piracy" label="piracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q275141" start="55660" end="55667" title="Napster" label="Napster"/>
<link wikidata="Q49667" start="55671" end="55679" title="Gnutella" label="Gnutella"/>
<link wikidata="Q540" start="55683" end="55690" title="Freenet" label="Freenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050551" start="55694" end="55699" title="iMesh" label="iMesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362039" start="55728" end="55738" title="MP3.com" label="My.MP3.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q108941" start="56002" end="56015" title="Carrie Fisher" label="Carrie Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="56064" end="56069" title="trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089402" start="56112" end="56126" title="race relations" label="race relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q17884" start="56336" end="56340" title="LGBT" label="LGBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682231" start="56386" end="56420" title="Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center" label="Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q239587" start="56786" end="56796" title="Aimee Mann" label="Aimee Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q237194" start="56810" end="56821" title="Wanda Sykes" label="Wanda Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q592" start="56984" end="56987" title="gay" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="56989" end="56996" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q189125" start="57001" end="57012" title="transgender" label="transgender"/>
<link wikidata="Q208099" start="57019" end="57027" title="coming out of the closet" label="come out"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="57381" end="57385" title="HIV/AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3782571" start="57427" end="57432" title="amfAR, The Foundation for AIDS Research" label="amfAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q624601" start="57441" end="57453" title="Product Red" label="RED Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q275964" start="57551" end="57567" title="Mariska Hargitay" label="Mariska Hargitay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938066" start="57689" end="57716" title="Murder of Sophie Lancaster" label="Sophie Lancaster Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="58325" end="58328" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186938" start="58441" end="58458" title="Phoenix New Times" label="Phoenix New Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q273903" start="59061" end="59074" title="Scout Niblett" label="Scout Niblett"/>
<link wikidata="Q237922" start="59076" end="59087" title="Brody Dalle" label="Brody Dalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q913662" start="59091" end="59105" title="The Distillers" label="The Distillers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982240" start="59124" end="59137" title="Dum Dum Girls" label="Dum Dum Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272493" start="59139" end="59153" title="Florence Welch" label="Florence Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851669" start="59155" end="59166" title="Annie Hardy" label="Annie Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q933839" start="59170" end="59180" title="Giant Drag" label="Giant Drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141817" start="59186" end="59201" title="Nine Black Alps" label="Nine Black Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q37150" start="59235" end="59247" title="Lana Del Rey" label="Lana Del Rey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30449" start="59249" end="59262" title="Avril Lavigne" label="Avril Lavigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948790" start="59264" end="59271" title="Tove Lo" label="Tove Lo"/>
<link wikidata="Q291405" start="59277" end="59289" title="Sky Ferreira" label="Sky Ferreira"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59404" end="59418" title="Feminism#Music" label="feminist music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761515" start="59572" end="59582" title="Maria Raha" label="Maria Raha"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="59706" end="59717" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514" start="59884" end="59896" title="Janis Joplin" label="Janis Joplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q237527" start="59929" end="59946" title="Big Mama Thornton" label="Big Mama Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q93349" start="59951" end="59963" title="Bessie Smith" label="Bessie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q40221" start="60058" end="60066" title="gay icon" label="gay icon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146870" start="60330" end="60341" title="kinderwhore" label="kinderwhore"/>
<link wikidata="Q797901" start="60421" end="60429" title="babydoll" label="babydoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="60486" end="60489" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446871" start="60499" end="60509" title="Kurt Loder" label="Kurt Loder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659332" start="60641" end="60657" title="Chrissy Amphlett" label="Chrissy Amphlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663405" start="60665" end="60673" title="Divinyls" label="Divinyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q26644" start="61031" end="61063" title="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? (1962 film)" label="What Ever Happened to Baby Jane?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948902" start="61153" end="61178" title="America&amp;#x27;s Sweetheart (album)" label="America&amp;#x27;s Sweetheart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061242" start="61220" end="61240" title="Pretty on the Inside" label="Pretty on the Inside"/>
<link wikidata="Q946807" start="61262" end="61279" title="Live Through This" label="Live Through This"/>
<link wikidata="Q859304" start="61301" end="61315" title="Celebrity Skin" label="Celebrity Skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713724" start="61337" end="61359" title="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Daughter" label="Nobody&amp;#x27;s Daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q600950" start="61398" end="61411" title="Sid and Nancy" label="Sid and Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065276" start="61433" end="61449" title="Straight to Hell (film)" label="Straight to Hell"/>
<link wikidata="Q750077" start="61471" end="61497" title="The People vs. Larry Flynt" label="The People vs. Larry Flynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q40071" start="61519" end="61533" title="200 Cigarettes" label="200 Cigarettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125282" start="61555" end="61570" title="Man on the Moon (film)" label="Man on the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160546" start="61592" end="61605" title="Julie Johnson (film)" label="Julie Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217303" start="61628" end="61635" title="Trapped (2002 film)" label="Trapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q846596" start="61865" end="61873" title="WorldCat" label="WorldCat"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5657" wikidata="Q10862804" url="?curid=5657" title="Cow (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Cow]] most commonly refers to adult female cattle, and colloquially used to refer to cattle in general. 

Cow, cows or COW may also refer to:

==Science and technology==

* Cow, an adult female of several animals
* AT2018cow, a large astronomical explosion also known as &quot;The Cow&quot;
* Distillation cow, a piece of glassware that allows fractions to be collected without breaking vacuum
* Cell on wheels, a means of providing temporary mobile phone network coverage
* Copy-on-write, in computing

==Literature==
* &quot;Al-Baqara&quot;, the second and longest &quot;sura&quot; of the Qur&#x27;an, usually translated as &quot;The Cow&quot;
* &quot;Cows&quot;, a 1998 novel by Matthew Stokoe
* &quot;Cow&quot;, the English translation of Beat Sterchi&#x27;s novel &quot;Blösch&quot;
* &quot;Cows!&quot;, a children&#x27;s story from the &quot;Railway Series&quot; book &quot;Edward the Blue Engine&quot; by the Reverend Wilbert Awdry
* &quot;Cows&quot;, a poem from The Wiggles&#x27; album &quot;Big Red Car&quot;

==Film and television ==
* &quot;The Cow&quot; (1969 film), an Iranian film
* &quot;The Cow&quot; (1989 film), a Soviet animated short
* &quot;Cow&quot; (2009 film), a Chinese film
* &quot;Cow&quot; (2021 film), a British documentary film
* &quot;Cow&quot; (public service announcement), an anti texting while driving public service announcement
* &quot;Cows&quot; (TV series), a pilot and cancelled television sitcom produced by Eddie Izzard for Channel 4 in 1997
* Cow, a character in the animated series &quot;Cow and Chicken&quot;
* Computer Originated World, referring to the globe ID the BBC1 TV network used from 1985 to 1991

==Music==
* Cows (band), a noise rock band from Minneapolis
* &quot;Cow&quot; (demo), a 1987 EP by Inspiral Carpets
* &quot;Cows&quot;, a song by Grandaddy from their 1992 album &quot;Prepare to Bawl&quot;
* &quot;COW / Chill Out, World!&quot;, 2016 album by The Orb

==Other uses==
* Cerritos On Wheels, municipal bus service operated by the City of Cerritos, California, United States
* College of Wooster, liberal arts college in Wooster, Ohio, United States
* Cow Hell Swamp, Georgia, United States
* Crude oil washing
* Cows (ice cream), a Canadian ice cream brand
* Cowdenbeath railway station, Scotland, National Rail station code
* Cow, part of a cow–calf railroad locomotive set
* COWS, a mnemonic for Cold Opposite, Warm Same in the caloric reflex test

==See also==
* 
* &quot;Vacas&quot; (English: &quot;Cows&quot;), a 1991 Spanish film
* &quot;Kráva&quot; (English: The Cow), a 1994 Czech film by Karel Kachyňa
* Sacred cow (disambiguation)
* Cow Run (disambiguation)
* Cowes
* Kow (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10862804" start="0" end="7" title="Cow (disambiguation)" label="[[Cow]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862804" start="108" end="111" title="Cow (disambiguation)" label="Cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862804" start="113" end="117" title="Cow (disambiguation)" label="cows"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862804" start="121" end="124" title="Cow (disambiguation)" label="COW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834161" start="199" end="214" title="List of animal names" label="several animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q55195347" start="217" end="226" title="AT2018cow" label="AT2018cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q101017" start="295" end="311" title="Distillation cow" label="Distillation cow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3972190" start="398" end="412" title="Cell on wheels" label="Cell on wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131607" start="477" end="490" title="Copy-on-write" label="Copy-on-write"/>
<link wikidata="Q219675" start="529" end="538" title="Al-Baqara" label="Al-Baqara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388122" start="684" end="698" title="Matthew Stokoe" label="Matthew Stokoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q813089" start="745" end="757" title="Beat Sterchi" label="Beat Sterchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348667" start="850" end="864" title="The Railway Series" label="Railway Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906170" start="1003" end="1014" title="Big Red Car" label="Big Red Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214152" start="1049" end="1080" title="The Cow (1969 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Cow&amp;quot; (1969 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214131" start="1100" end="1131" title="The Cow (1989 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Cow&amp;quot; (1989 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179385" start="1159" end="1186" title="Cow (2009 film)" label="&amp;quot;Cow&amp;quot; (2009 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q107174808" start="1205" end="1232" title="Cow (2021 film)" label="&amp;quot;Cow&amp;quot; (2021 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179387" start="1263" end="1308" title="Cow (public service announcement)" label="&amp;quot;Cow&amp;quot; (public service announcement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179822" start="1370" end="1398" title="Cows (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Cows&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q719872" start="1535" end="1550" title="Cow and Chicken" label="Cow and Chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157462" start="1559" end="1584" title="Computer Originated World" label="Computer Originated World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520438" start="1668" end="1679" title="Cows (band)" label="Cows (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246868" start="1718" end="1740" title="Cow (demo)" label="&amp;quot;Cow&amp;quot; (demo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402313" start="1840" end="1855" title="Prepare to Bawl" label="Prepare to Bawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q26963052" start="1870" end="1893" title="COW / Chill Out, World!" label="COW / Chill Out, World!"/>
<link wikidata="Q575316" start="1941" end="1959" title="Cerritos On Wheels" label="Cerritos On Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109093" start="2045" end="2063" title="College of Wooster" label="College of Wooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q34662572" start="2120" end="2134" title="Cow Hell Swamp" label="Cow Hell Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228912" start="2161" end="2178" title="Crude oil washing" label="Crude oil washing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179824" start="2181" end="2197" title="Cows (ice cream)" label="Cows (ice cream)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677829" start="2228" end="2255" title="Cowdenbeath railway station" label="Cowdenbeath railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179381" start="2311" end="2319" title="cow–calf" label="cow–calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5023659" start="2399" end="2418" title="caloric reflex test" label="caloric reflex test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447932" start="2444" end="2449" title="Vacas" label="Vacas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729166" start="2566" end="2579" title="Karel Kachyňa" label="Karel Kachyňa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16882475" start="2582" end="2609" title="Sacred cow (disambiguation)" label="Sacred cow (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22349994" start="2612" end="2636" title="Cow Run (disambiguation)" label="Cow Run (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q587996" start="2639" end="2644" title="Cowes" label="Cowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434914" start="2647" end="2667" title="Kow (disambiguation)" label="Kow (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
