<doc id="5750" wikidata="Q1147152" url="?curid=5750" title="Cognitive behavioral therapy">
<text>Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) is a form of psychotherapy that aims to reduce symptoms of various mental health conditions, primarily depression, PTSD and anxiety disorders. Cognitive behavioral therapy focuses on challenging and changing cognitive distortions (such as thoughts, beliefs, and attitudes) and their associated behaviors to improve emotional regulation and develop personal coping strategies that target solving current problems. Though it was originally designed as an approach to treat depression, CBT is often prescribed for the evidence-informed treatment of many mental health and other conditions, including anxiety, substance use disorders, marital problems, ADHD, and eating disorders. CBT includes a number of cognitive or behavioral psychotherapies that treat defined psychopathologies using evidence-based techniques and strategies.

CBT is a common form of talk therapy based on the combination of the basic principles from behavioral and cognitive psychology. It is different from other approaches to psychotherapy, such as the psychoanalytic approach, where the therapist looks for the unconscious meaning behind the behaviors and then formulates a diagnosis. Instead, CBT is a &quot;problem-focused&quot; and &quot;action-oriented&quot; form of therapy, meaning it is used to treat specific problems related to a diagnosed mental disorder. The therapist&#x27;s role is to assist the client in finding and practicing effective strategies to address the identified goals and to alleviate symptoms of the disorder. CBT is based on the belief that thought distortions and maladaptive behaviors play a role in the development and maintenance of many psychological disorders and that symptoms and associated distress can be reduced by teaching new information-processing skills and coping mechanisms.

When compared to psychoactive medications, review studies have found CBT alone to be as effective for treating less severe forms of depression, and borderline personality disorder. Some research suggests that CBT is most effective when combined with medication for treating mental disorders, such as major depressive disorder. CBT is recommended as the first line of treatment for the majority of psychological disorders in children and adolescents, including aggression and conduct disorder. Researchers have found that other &quot;bona fide&quot; therapeutic interventions were equally effective for treating certain conditions in adults. Along with interpersonal psychotherapy (IPT), CBT is recommended in treatment guidelines as a psychosocial treatment of choice. Recommended by American Psychiatric Association, American Psychological Association, British National Health Service.

==History==

=== Philosophy ===
Precursors of certain fundamental aspects of CBT have been identified in various ancient philosophical traditions, particularly Stoicism. Stoic philosophers, particularly Epictetus, believed logic could be used to identify and discard false beliefs that lead to destructive emotions, which has influenced the way modern cognitive-behavioral therapists identify cognitive distortions that contribute to depression and anxiety. Aaron T. Beck&#x27;s original treatment manual for depression states, &quot;The philosophical origins of cognitive therapy can be traced back to the Stoic philosophers&quot;. Another example of Stoic influence on cognitive theorists is Epictetus on Albert Ellis. A key philosophical figure who influenced the development of CBT was John Stuart Mill through his creation of Associationism, a predecessor of classical conditioning and behavioral theory.

Principles originating from Buddhism have significantly impacted the evolution of various new forms of CBT, including dialectical behavior therapy, mindfulness-based cognitive therapy, spirituality-based CBT, and compassion-focused therapy.

The modern roots of CBT can be traced to the development of behavior therapy in the early 20th century, the development of cognitive therapy in the 1960s, and the subsequent merging of the two.

===Behavioral therapy===

Groundbreaking work in behaviorism began with John B. Watson and Rosalie Rayner&#x27;s studies of conditioning in 1920. Behaviorally-centered therapeutic approaches appeared as early as 1924 with Mary Cover Jones&#x27; work dedicated to the unlearning of fears in children. These were the antecedents of the development of Joseph Wolpe&#x27;s behavioral therapy in the 1950s. It was the work of Wolpe and Watson, which was based on Ivan Pavlov&#x27;s work on learning and conditioning, that influenced Hans Eysenck and Arnold Lazarus to develop new behavioral therapy techniques based on classical conditioning.

During the 1950s and 1960s, behavioral therapy became widely used by researchers in the United States, the United Kingdom, and South Africa. Their inspiration was by the behaviorist learning theory of Ivan Pavlov, John B. Watson, and Clark L. Hull.

In Britain, Joseph Wolpe, who applied the findings of animal experiments to his method of systematic desensitization, applied behavioral research to the treatment of neurotic disorders. Wolpe&#x27;s therapeutic efforts were precursors to today&#x27;s fear reduction techniques. British psychologist Hans Eysenck presented behavior therapy as a constructive alternative.

At the same time as Eysenck&#x27;s work, B. F. Skinner and his associates were beginning to have an impact with their work on operant conditioning. Skinner&#x27;s work was referred to as radical behaviorism and avoided anything related to cognition. However, Julian Rotter in 1954 and Albert Bandura in 1969 contributed to behavior therapy with their works on social learning theory by demonstrating the effects of cognition on learning and behavior modification. The work of Claire Weekes in dealing with anxiety disorders in the 1960s is also seen as a prototype of behavior therapy.

The emphasis on behavioral factors has been described as the &quot;first wave&quot; of CBT.

===Cognitive therapy===
One of the first therapists to address cognition in psychotherapy was Alfred Adler, notably with his idea of basic mistakes and how they contributed to creation of unhealthy behavioral and life goals.Abraham Low believed that someone&#x27;s thoughts were best changed by changing their actions. Adler and Low influenced the work of Albert Ellis, who developed the earliest cognitive-based psychotherapy called rational emotive behavioral therapy, or REBT. The first version of REBT was announced to the public in 1956.

In the late 1950s, Aaron T. Beck was conducting free association sessions in his psychoanalytic practice. During these sessions, Beck noticed that thoughts were not as unconscious as Freud had previously theorized, and that certain types of thinking may be the culprits of emotional distress. It was from this hypothesis that Beck developed cognitive therapy, and called these thoughts &quot;automatic thoughts&quot;. He first published his new methodology in 1967, and his first treatment manual in 1979. Beck has been referred to as &quot;the father of cognitive behavioral therapy&quot;.

It was these two therapies, rational emotive therapy, and cognitive therapy, that started the &quot;second wave&quot; of CBT, which emphasized cognitive factors.

===Merger of behavioral and cognitive therapies===
Although the early behavioral approaches were successful in many so-called neurotic disorders, they had little success in treating depression. Behaviorism was also losing popularity due to the cognitive revolution. The therapeutic approaches of Albert Ellis and Aaron T. Beck gained popularity among behavior therapists, despite the earlier behaviorist rejection of mentalistic concepts like thoughts and cognitions. Both of these systems included behavioral elements and interventions, with the primary focus being on problems in the present.

In initial studies, cognitive therapy was often contrasted with behavioral treatments to see which was most effective. During the 1980s and 1990s, cognitive and behavioral techniques were merged into cognitive behavioral therapy. Pivotal to this merging was the successful development of treatments for panic disorder by David M. Clark in the UK and David H. Barlow in the US.

Over time, cognitive behavior therapy came to be known not only as a therapy, but as an umbrella term for all cognitive-based psychotherapies. These therapies include, but are not limited to, REBT, cognitive therapy, acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior therapy, metacognitive therapy, metacognitive training, reality therapy/choice theory, cognitive processing therapy, EMDR, and multimodal therapy.

This blending of theoretical and technical foundations from both behavior and cognitive therapies constituted the &quot;third wave&quot; of CBT. The most prominent therapies of this third wave are dialectical behavior therapy and acceptance and commitment therapy. Despite the increasing popularity of third-wave treatment approaches, reviews of studies reveal there may be no difference in the effectiveness compared with non-third wave CBT for the treatment of depression.

==Medical uses==
In adults, CBT has been shown to be an effective part of treatment plans for anxiety disorders, body dysmorphic disorder, depression, eating disorders, chronic low back pain, personality disorders, psychosis, schizophrenia, substance use disorders, and bipolar disorder. It is also effective as part of treatment plans in the adjustment, depression, and anxiety associated with fibromyalgia, and as part of the treatment after spinal cord injuries.

In children or adolescents, CBT is an effective part of treatment plans for anxiety disorders, body dysmorphic disorder, depression and suicidality, eating disorders and obesity, obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD), and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), tic disorders, trichotillomania, and other repetitive behavior disorders. CBT has also been used to help improve a variety of childhood disorders, including depressive disorders and various anxiety disorders. CBT has shown to be the most effective intervention for people exposed to adverse childhood experiences in the form of abuse or neglect.

Criticism of CBT sometimes focuses on implementations (such as the UK IAPT) which may result initially in low quality therapy being offered by poorly trained practitioners. However, evidence supports the effectiveness of CBT for anxiety and depression.

Evidence suggests that the addition of hypnotherapy as an adjunct to CBT improves treatment efficacy for a variety of clinical issues.

The United Kingdom&#x27;s National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommends CBT in the treatment plans for a number of mental health difficulties, including PTSD, OCD, bulimia nervosa, and clinical depression.

===Depression and anxiety disorders===

Cognitive behavioral therapy has been shown as an effective treatment for clinical depression. Among psychotherapeutic approaches for major depressive disorder, cognitive behavioral therapy and interpersonal psychotherapy are recommended by clinical practice guidelines including The American Psychiatric Association Practice (APA) Guidelines (April 2000), and the APA endorsed Veteran Affairs clinical practice guideline.

CBT has been shown to be effective in the treatment of adults with anxiety disorders. There is also evidence that using CBT to treat children and adolescents with anxiety disorders was probably more effective (in the short term) than wait list or no treatment and more effective than attention control treatment approaches. Some meta-analyses find CBT more effective than psychodynamic therapy and equal to other therapies in treating anxiety and depression. A 2013 meta-analysis suggested that CBT, interpersonal therapy, and problem-solving therapy outperformed psychodynamic psychotherapy and behavioral activation in the treatment of depression. According to a 2004 review by INSERM of three methods, cognitive behavioral therapy was either proven or presumed to be an effective therapy on several mental disorders. This included depression, panic disorder, post-traumatic stress, and other anxiety disorders.

A systematic review of CBT in depression and anxiety disorders concluded that &quot;CBT delivered in primary care, especially including computer- or Internet-based self-help programs, is potentially more effective than usual care and could be delivered effectively by primary care therapists.&quot;

A 2024 systematic review found that exposure and response prevention (ERP), a specific form of cognitive behavioral therapy, is considered a first-line treatment for pediatric obsessive–compulsive disorder (OCD). Research indicates that ERP is effective in both in-person and remote settings, providing flexibility in treatment delivery without compromising efficacy.

====Theoretical approaches====
One etiological theory of depression is Aaron T. Beck&#x27;s cognitive theory of depression. His theory states that depressed people think the way they do because their thinking is biased towards negative interpretations. Beck&#x27;s theory rests on the aspect of cognitive behavioral therapy known as schemata. Schemata are the mental maps used to integrate new information into memories and to organize existing information in the mind. An example of a schema would be a person hearing the word &quot;dog&quot; and picturing different versions of the animal that they have grouped together in their mind. According to this theory, depressed people acquire a negative schema of the world in childhood and adolescence as an effect of stressful life events, and the negative schema is activated later in life when the person encounters similar situations.

Beck also described a negative cognitive triad. The cognitive triad is made up of the depressed individual&#x27;s negative evaluations of themselves, the world, and the future. Beck suggested that these negative evaluations derive from the negative schemata and cognitive biases of the person. According to this theory, depressed people have views such as &quot;I never do a good job&quot;, &quot;It is impossible to have a good day&quot;, and &quot;things will never get better&quot;. A negative schema helps give rise to the cognitive bias, and the cognitive bias helps fuel the negative schema. Beck further proposed that depressed people often have the following cognitive biases: arbitrary inference, selective abstraction, overgeneralization, magnification, and minimization. These cognitive biases are quick to make negative, generalized, and personal inferences of the self, thus fueling the negative schema.

On the other hand, a positive cognitive triad relates to a person&#x27;s positive evaluations of themself, the world, and the future. More specifically, a positive cognitive triad requires self-esteem when viewing oneself and hope for the future. A person with a positive cognitive triad has a positive schema used for viewing themself in addition to a positive schema for the world and for the future. Cognitive behavioral research suggests a positive cognitive triad bolsters resilience, or the ability to cope with stressful events. Increased levels of resilience is associated with greater resistance to depression.

Another major theoretical approach to cognitive behavioral therapy treatment is the concept of Locus of Control outlined in Julian Rotter&#x27;s Social Learning Theory. Locus of control refers to the degree to which an individual&#x27;s sense of control is either internal or external. An internal locus of control exists when an individual views an outcome of a particular action as being reliant on themselves and their personal attributes whereas an external locus of control exists when an individual views other&#x27;s or some outside, intangible force such as luck or fate as being responsible for the outcome of a particular action.

A basic concept in some CBT treatments used in anxiety disorders is &quot;in vivo&quot; exposure. CBT-exposure therapy refers to the direct confrontation of feared objects, activities, or situations by a patient. For example, a woman with PTSD who fears the location where she was assaulted may be assisted by her therapist in going to that location and directly confronting those fears. Likewise, a person with a social anxiety disorder who fears public speaking may be instructed to directly confront those fears by giving a speech. This &quot;two-factor&quot; model is often credited to O. Hobart Mowrer. Through exposure to the stimulus, this harmful conditioning can be &quot;unlearned&quot; (referred to as extinction and habituation).

CBT for children with phobias is normally delivered over multiple sessions, but one-session treatment has been shown to be equally effective and is cheaper.

====Specialized forms of CBT====
CBT-SP, an adaptation of CBT for suicide prevention (SP), was specifically designed for treating youths who are severely depressed and who have recently attempted suicide within the past 90 days, and was found to be effective, feasible, and acceptable.

Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT) is a specialist branch of CBT (sometimes referred to as contextual CBT). ACT uses mindfulness and acceptance interventions and has been found to have a greater longevity in therapeutic outcomes. In a study with anxiety, CBT and ACT improved similarly across all outcomes from pre- to post-treatment. However, during a 12-month follow-up, ACT proved to be more effective, showing that it is a highly viable lasting treatment model for anxiety disorders.

Computerized CBT (CCBT) has been proven to be effective by randomized controlled and other trials in treating depression and anxiety disorders, including children. Some research has found similar effectiveness to an intervention of informational websites and weekly telephone calls. CCBT was found to be equally effective as face-to-face CBT in adolescent anxiety.

====Combined with other treatments====
Studies have provided evidence that when examining animals and humans, that glucocorticoids may lead to a more successful extinction learning during exposure therapy for anxiety disorders. For instance, glucocorticoids can prevent aversive learning episodes from being retrieved and heighten reinforcement of memory traces creating a non-fearful reaction in feared situations. A combination of glucocorticoids and exposure therapy may be a better-improved treatment for treating people with anxiety disorders.

====Prevention====
For anxiety disorders, use of CBT with people at risk has significantly reduced the number of episodes of generalized anxiety disorder and other anxiety symptoms, and also given significant improvements in explanatory style, hopelessness, and dysfunctional attitudes. In another study, 3% of the group receiving the CBT intervention developed generalized anxiety disorder by 12 months postintervention compared with 14% in the control group. Individuals with subthreshold levels of panic disorder significantly benefitted from use of CBT. Use of CBT was found to significantly reduce social anxiety prevalence.

For depressive disorders, a stepped-care intervention (watchful waiting, CBT and medication if appropriate) achieved a 50% lower incidence rate in a patient group aged 75 or older. Another depression study found a neutral effect compared to personal, social, and health education, and usual school provision, and included a comment on potential for increased depression scores from people who have received CBT due to greater self recognition and acknowledgement of existing symptoms of depression and negative thinking styles. A further study also saw a neutral result. A meta-study of the Coping with Depression course, a cognitive behavioral intervention delivered by a psychoeducational method, saw a 38% reduction in risk of major depression.

===Bipolar disorder===
Many studies show CBT, combined with pharmacotherapy, is effective in improving depressive symptoms, mania severity and psychosocial functioning with mild to moderate effects, and that it is better than medication alone.

INSERM&#x27;s 2004 review found that CBT is an effective therapy for several mental disorders, including bipolar disorder. This included schizophrenia, depression, bipolar disorder, panic disorder, post-traumatic stress, anxiety disorders, bulimia, anorexia, personality disorders and alcohol dependency.

===Psychosis===
In long-term psychoses, CBT is used to complement medication and is adapted to meet individual needs. Interventions particularly related to these conditions include exploring reality testing, changing delusions and hallucinations, examining factors which precipitate relapse, and managing relapses. Meta-analyses confirm the effectiveness of metacognitive training (MCT) for the improvement of positive symptoms (e.g., delusions). 

For people at risk of psychosis, in 2014 the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) recommended preventive CBT.

===Schizophrenia===
INSERM&#x27;s 2004 review found that CBT is an effective therapy for several mental disorders, including schizophrenia.

A Cochrane review reported CBT had &quot;no effect on long‐term risk of relapse&quot; and no additional effect above standard care. A 2015 systematic review investigated the effects of CBT compared with other psychosocial therapies for people with schizophrenia and determined that there is no clear advantage over other, often less expensive, interventions but acknowledged that better quality evidence is needed before firm conclusions can be drawn.

===Addiction and substance use disorders===
====Pathological and problem gambling====
CBT is also used for pathological and problem gambling. The percentage of people who problem gamble is 1–3% around the world. Cognitive behavioral therapy develops skills for relapse prevention and someone can learn to control their mind and manage high-risk cases. There is evidence of efficacy of CBT for treating pathological and problem gambling at immediate follow up, however the longer term efficacy of CBT for it is currently unknown.

====Smoking cessation====
CBT looks at the habit of smoking cigarettes as a learned behavior, which later evolves into a coping strategy to handle daily stressors. Since smoking is often easily accessible and quickly allows the user to feel good, it can take precedence over other coping strategies, and eventually work its way into everyday life during non-stressful events as well. CBT aims to target the function of the behavior, as it can vary between individuals, and works to inject other coping mechanisms in place of smoking. CBT also aims to support individuals with strong cravings, which are a major reported reason for relapse during treatment.

A 2008 controlled study out of Stanford University School of Medicine suggested CBT may be an effective tool to help maintain abstinence. The results of 304 random adult participants were tracked over the course of one year. During this program, some participants were provided medication, CBT, 24-hour phone support, or some combination of the three methods. At 20 weeks, the participants who received CBT had a 45% abstinence rate, versus non-CBT participants, who had a 29% abstinence rate. Overall, the study concluded that emphasizing cognitive and behavioral strategies to support smoking cessation can help individuals build tools for long term smoking abstinence.

Mental health history can affect the outcomes of treatment. Individuals with a history of depressive disorders had a lower rate of success when using CBT alone to combat smoking addiction.

A 2019 Cochrane review was unable to find sufficient evidence to differentiate effects between CBT and hypnosis for smoking cessation and highlighted that a review of the current research showed variable results for both modalities.

====Substance use disorders====

Studies have shown CBT to be an effective treatment for substance use disorders. For individuals with substance use disorders, CBT aims to reframe maladaptive thoughts, such as denial, minimizing and catastrophizing thought patterns, with healthier narratives. Specific techniques include identifying potential triggers and developing coping mechanisms to manage high-risk situations. Research has shown CBT to be particularly effective when combined with other therapy-based treatments or medication.

INSERM&#x27;s 2004 review found that CBT is an effective therapy for several mental disorders, including alcohol dependency.

====Internet addiction====
Research has identified Internet addiction as a new clinical disorder that causes relational, occupational, and social problems. Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has been suggested as the treatment of choice for Internet addiction, and addiction recovery in general has used CBT as part of treatment planning.

===Eating disorders===
Though many forms of treatment can support individuals with eating disorders, CBT is proven to be a more effective treatment than medications and interpersonal psychotherapy alone. CBT aims to combat major causes of distress such as negative cognitions surrounding body weight, shape and size. CBT therapists also work with individuals to regulate strong emotions and thoughts that lead to dangerous compensatory behaviors. CBT is the first line of treatment for bulimia nervosa, and non-specific eating disorders. While there is evidence to support the efficacy of CBT for bulimia nervosa and binging, the evidence is somewhat variable and limited by small study sizes. INSERM&#x27;s 2004 review found that CBT is an effective therapy for several mental disorders, including bulimia and anorexia nervosa.

===With autistic adults===
Emerging evidence for cognitive behavioral interventions aimed at reducing symptoms of depression, anxiety, and obsessive-compulsive disorder in autistic adults without intellectual disability has been identified through a systematic review. While the research was focused on adults, cognitive behavioral interventions have also been beneficial to autistic children. A 2021 Cochrane review found limited evidence regarding the efficacy of CBT for obsessive-compulsive disorder in adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder stating a need for further study.

===Dementia and mild cognitive impairment===
A Cochrane review in 2022 found that adults with dementia and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who experience symptoms of depression may benefit from CBT, whereas other counselling or supportive interventions might not improve symptoms significantly. Across 5 different psychometric scales, where higher scores indicate severity of depression, adults receiving CBT reported somewhat lower mood scores than those receiving usual care for dementia and MCI overall. In this review, a sub-group analysis found clinically significant benefits only among those diagnosed with dementia, rather than MCI.

The likelihood of remission from depression also appeared to be 84% higher following CBT, though the evidence for this was less certain. Anxiety, cognition and other neuropsychiatric symptoms were not significantly improved following CBT, however this review did find moderate evidence of improved quality of life and daily living activity scores in those with dementia and MCI.

=== Post-traumatic stress ===
Cognitive behavioral therapy interventions may have some benefits for people who have post-traumatic stress related to surviving rape, sexual abuse, or sexual assault. There is strong evidence that CBT-exposure therapy can reduce PTSD symptoms and lead to the loss of a PTSD diagnosis. In addition, CBT has also been shown to be effective for post-traumatic stress disorder in very young children (3 to 6 years of age). There is lower quality evidence that CBT may be more effective than other psychotherapies in reducing symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder in children and adolescents.

===Other uses===
Evidence suggests a possible role for CBT in the treatment of attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), hypochondriasis, and bipolar disorder, but more study is needed and results should be interpreted with caution. Moderate evidence from a 2024 systematic review supports the effectiveness of CBT and neurofeedback as part of psychosocial interventions for improving ADHD symptoms in children and adolescents.

CBT has been studied as an aid in the treatment of anxiety associated with stuttering. Initial studies have shown CBT to be effective in reducing social anxiety in adults who stutter, but not in reducing stuttering frequency.

There is some evidence that CBT is superior in the long-term to benzodiazepines and the nonbenzodiazepines in the treatment and management of insomnia. Computerized CBT (CCBT) has been proven to be effective by randomized controlled and other trials in treating insomnia. Some research has found similar effectiveness to an intervention of informational websites and weekly telephone calls. CCBT was found to be equally effective as face-to-face CBT in insomnia.

A Cochrane review of interventions aimed at preventing psychological stress in healthcare workers found that CBT was more effective than no intervention but no more effective than alternative stress-reduction interventions.

Cochrane Reviews have found no convincing evidence that CBT training helps foster care providers manage difficult behaviors in the youths under their care, nor was it helpful in treating people who abuse their intimate partners.

CBT has been applied in both clinical and non-clinical environments to treat disorders such as personality disorders and behavioral problems. INSERM&#x27;s 2004 review found that CBT is an effective therapy for personality disorders.

CBT has been used with other researchers as well to minimize chronic pain and help relieve symptoms from those suffering from irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

====Individuals with medical conditions====
In the case of people with metastatic breast cancer, data is limited but CBT and other psychosocial interventions might help with psychological outcomes and pain management. A 2015 Cochrane review also found that CBT for symptomatic management of non-specific chest pain is probably effective in the short term. However, the findings were limited by small trials and the evidence was considered of questionable quality. Cochrane reviews have found no evidence that CBT is effective for tinnitus, although there appears to be an effect on management of associated depression and quality of life in this condition. CBT combined with hypnosis and distraction reduces self-reported pain in children.

There is limited evidence to support CBT&#x27;s use in managing the impact of multiple sclerosis, sleep disturbances related to aging, and dysmenorrhea, but more study is needed and results should be interpreted with caution.

Previously CBT has been considered as moderately effective for treating myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS), however a National Institutes of Health Pathways to Prevention Workshop stated that in respect of improving treatment options for ME/CFS that the modest benefit from cognitive behavioral therapy should be studied as an adjunct to other methods. The Centres for Disease Control advice on the treatment of ME/CFS makes no reference to CBT while the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence states that cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) has sometimes been assumed to be a cure for ME/CFS, however, it should only be offered to support people who live with ME/CFS to manage their symptoms, improve their functioning and reduce the distress associated with having a chronic illness.&quot;

===Age===
CBT is used to help people of all ages, but the therapy should be adjusted based on the age of the patient with whom the therapist is dealing. Older individuals in particular have certain characteristics that need to be acknowledged and the therapy altered to account for these differences thanks to age. Of the small number of studies examining CBT for the management of depression in older people, there is currently no strong support.

==Description==
Mainstream cognitive behavioral therapy assumes that changing maladaptive thinking leads to change in behavior and affect, but recent variants emphasize changes in one&#x27;s relationship to maladaptive thinking rather than changes in thinking itself.

===Cognitive distortions===
Therapists use CBT techniques to help people challenge their patterns and beliefs and replace errors in thinking, known as cognitive distortions with &quot;more realistic and effective thoughts, thus decreasing emotional distress and self-defeating behavior&quot;. Cognitive distortions can be either a pseudo-discrimination belief or an overgeneralization of something. CBT techniques may also be used to help individuals take a more open, mindful, and aware posture toward cognitive distortions so as to diminish their impact.

Mainstream CBT helps individuals replace &quot;maladaptive... coping skills, cognitions, emotions and behaviors with more adaptive ones&quot;, by challenging an individual&#x27;s way of thinking and the way that they react to certain habits or behaviors, but there is still controversy about the degree to which these traditional cognitive elements account for the effects seen with CBT over and above the earlier behavioral elements such as exposure and skills training.

===Assumptions===
Chaloult, Ngo, Cousineau and Goulet have attempted to identify the main assumptions of cognitive therapy used in CBT based on the research literature (Beck; Walen and Wessler; Beck, Emery and Greenberg, and Auger). They describe fourteen assumptions:
# Human emotions are primarily caused by people&#x27;s thoughts and perceptions rather than events.
# Events, thoughts, emotions, behaviors, and physiological reactions influence each other.
# Dysfunctional emotions are typically caused by unrealistic thoughts. Reducing dysfunctional emotions requires becoming aware of irrational thoughts and changing them.
# Human beings have an innate tendency to develop irrational thoughts. This tendency is reinforced by their environment.
# People are largely responsible for their own dysfunctional emotions, as they maintain and reinforce their own beliefs.
# Sustained effort is necessary to modify dysfunctional thoughts, emotions, and behaviors.
# Rational thinking usually causes a decrease in the frequency, intensity, and duration of dysfunctional emotions, rather than an absence of affect or feelings.
# A positive therapeutic relationship is essential to successful cognitive therapy.
# Cognitive therapy is based on a teacher-student relationship, where the therapist educates the client.
# Cognitive therapy uses Socratic questioning to challenge cognitive distortions.
# Homework is an essential aspect of cognitive therapy. It consolidates the skills learned in therapy.
# The cognitive approach is active, directed, and structured.
# Cognitive therapy is generally short.
# Cognitive therapy is based on predictable steps.

These steps largely involve learning about the CBT model; making links between thoughts, emotions, behaviors, and physiological reactions; noticing when dysfunctional emotions occur; learning to question the thoughts associated with these emotions; replacing irrational thoughts with others more grounded in reality; modifying behaviors based on new interpretations of events; and, in some cases, learning to recognize and change the major beliefs and attitudes underlying cognitive distortions.

Chaloult, Ngo, Cousineau and Goulet have also described the assumptions of behavioral therapy as used in CBT. They refer to the work of Agras, Prochaska and Norcross, and Kirk. The assumptions are:
# Behaviors play an essential role in the onset, perpetuation and exacerbation of psychopathology.
# Learning theory is key in understanding the treatment of mental illness, as behaviors can be learned and unlearned.
# A rigorous evaluation (applied behavior analysis) is essential at the start of treatment. It includes identifying behaviors; precipitating, moderating, and perpetuating factors; the consequences of the behaviors; avoidance, and personal resources.
# The effectiveness of the treatment is monitored throughout its duration.
# Behavior therapy is scientific and the different forms of treatment are evaluated with rigorous evidence.
# Behavior therapy is active, directed, and structured.

Together, these sets of assumptions cover the cognitive and behavioral aspects of CBT.

===Phases in therapy===
CBT can be seen as having six phases:
# Assessment or psychological assessment;
# Reconceptualization;
# Skills acquisition;
# Skills consolidation and application training;
# Generalization and maintenance;
# Post-treatment assessment follow-up.

These steps are based on a system created by Kanfer and Saslow. After identifying the behaviors that need changing, whether they be in excess or deficit, and treatment has occurred, the psychologist must identify whether or not the intervention succeeded. For example, &quot;If the goal was to decrease the behavior, then there should be a decrease relative to the baseline. If the critical behavior remains at or above the baseline, then the intervention has failed.&quot;

The steps in the assessment phase include:
# Identify critical behaviors;
# Determine whether critical behaviors are excesses or deficits;
# Evaluate critical behaviors for frequency, duration, or intensity (obtain a baseline);
# If excess, attempt to decrease frequency, duration, or intensity of behaviors; if deficits, attempt to increase behaviors.

The re-conceptualization phase makes up much of the &quot;cognitive&quot; portion of CBT.

===Delivery protocols===
There are different protocols for delivering cognitive behavioral therapy, with important similarities among them. Use of the term CBT may refer to different interventions, including &quot;self-instructions (e.g. distraction, imagery, motivational self-talk), relaxation and/or biofeedback, development of adaptive coping strategies (e.g. minimizing negative or self-defeating thoughts), changing maladaptive beliefs about pain, and goal setting&quot;. Treatment is sometimes manualized, with brief, direct, and time-limited treatments for individual psychological disorders that are specific technique-driven. CBT is used in both individual and group settings, and the techniques are often adapted for self-help applications. Some clinicians and researchers are cognitively oriented (e.g. cognitive restructuring), while others are more behaviorally oriented (e.g. &quot;in vivo&quot; exposure therapy). Interventions such as imaginal exposure therapy combine both approaches.

===Related techniques===
CBT may be delivered in conjunction with a variety of diverse but related techniques such as exposure therapy, stress inoculation, cognitive processing therapy, cognitive therapy, metacognitive therapy, metacognitive training, relaxation training, dialectical behavior therapy, and acceptance and commitment therapy. Some practitioners promote a form of mindful cognitive therapy which includes a greater emphasis on self-awareness as part of the therapeutic process.

==Methods of access==
===Therapist===
A typical CBT program would consist of face-to-face sessions between patient and therapist, made up of 6–18 sessions of around an hour each with a gap of 1–3 weeks between sessions. This initial program might be followed by some booster sessions, for instance after one month and three months. CBT has also been found to be effective if patient and therapist type in real time to each other over computer links.

Cognitive-behavioral therapy is most closely allied with the scientist–practitioner model in which clinical practice and research are informed by a scientific perspective, clear operationalization of the problem, and an emphasis on measurement, including measuring changes in cognition and behavior and the attainment of goals. These are often met through &quot;homework&quot; assignments in which the patient and the therapist work together to craft an assignment to complete before the next session. The completion of these assignments – which can be as simple as a person with depression attending some kind of social event – indicates a dedication to treatment compliance and a desire to change. The therapists can then logically gauge the next step of treatment based on how thoroughly the patient completes the assignment. Effective cognitive behavioral therapy is dependent on a therapeutic alliance between the healthcare practitioner and the person seeking assistance. Unlike many other forms of psychotherapy, the patient is very involved in CBT. For example, an anxious patient may be asked to talk to a stranger as a homework assignment, but if that is too difficult, he or she can work out an easier assignment first. The therapist needs to be flexible and willing to listen to the patient rather than acting as an authority figure.

=== Computerized or Internet-delivered (CCBT)===

Computerized cognitive behavioral therapy (CCBT) has been described by NICE as a &quot;generic term for delivering CBT via an interactive computer interface delivered by a personal computer, internet, or interactive voice response system&quot;, instead of face-to-face with a human therapist. It is also known as internet-delivered cognitive behavioral therapy or ICBT. CCBT has potential to improve access to evidence-based therapies, and to overcome the prohibitive costs and lack of availability sometimes associated with retaining a human therapist. In this context, it is important not to confuse CBT with &#x27;computer-based training&#x27;, which nowadays is more commonly referred to as e-Learning.

Although improvements in both research quality and treatment adherence is required before advocating for the global dissemination of CCBT, it has been found in meta-studies to be cost-effective and often cheaper than usual care, including for anxiety and PTSD. Studies have shown that individuals with social anxiety and depression experienced improvement with online CBT-based methods. A study assessing an online version of CBT for people with mild-to-moderate PTSD found that the online approach was as effective as, and cheaper than, the same therapy given face-to-face. A review of current CCBT research in the treatment of OCD in children found this interface to hold great potential for future treatment of OCD in youths and adolescent populations. Additionally, most internet interventions for post-traumatic stress disorder use CCBT. CCBT is also predisposed to treating mood disorders amongst non-heterosexual populations, who may avoid face-to-face therapy from fear of stigma. However presently CCBT programs seldom cater to these populations.

In February 2006 NICE recommended that CCBT be made available for use within the NHS across England and Wales for patients presenting with mild-to-moderate depression, rather than immediately opting for antidepressant medication, and CCBT is made available by some health systems. The 2009 NICE guideline recognized that there are likely to be a number of computerized CBT products that are useful to patients, but removed endorsement of any specific product.

===Smartphone app-delivered===
Another new method of access is the use of mobile app or smartphone applications to deliver self-help or guided CBT. Technology companies are developing mobile-based artificial intelligence chatbot applications in delivering CBT as an early intervention to support mental health, to build psychological resilience, and to promote emotional well-being. Artificial intelligence (AI) text-based conversational application delivered securely and privately over smartphone devices have the ability to scale globally and offer contextual and always-available support. Active research is underway including real-world data studies that measure effectiveness and engagement of text-based smartphone chatbot apps for delivery of CBT using a text-based conversational interface. Recent market research and analysis of over 500 online mental healthcare solutions identified 3 key challenges in this market: quality of the content, guidance of the user and personalisation.

A study compared CBT alone with a mindfulness-based therapy combined with CBT, both delivered via an app. It found that mindfulness-based self-help reduced the severity of depression more than CBT self-help in the short-term. Overall, NHS costs for the mindfulness approach were £500 less per person than for CBT.

===Reading self-help materials===
Enabling patients to read self-help CBT guides has been shown to be effective by some studies. However one study found a negative effect in patients who tended to ruminate, and another meta-analysis found that the benefit was only significant when the self-help was guided (e.g. by a medical professional).

===Group educational course===
Patient participation in group courses has been shown to be effective. In a meta-analysis reviewing evidence-based treatment of OCD in children, individual CBT was found to be more efficacious than group CBT.

==Types==
===Brief cognitive behavioral therapy===
Brief cognitive behavioral therapy (BCBT) is a form of CBT which has been developed for situations in which there are time constraints on the therapy sessions and specifically for those struggling with suicidal ideation and/or making suicide attempts. BCBT was based on Rudd&#x27;s proposed &quot;suicidal mode&quot;, an elaboration of Beck&#x27;s modal theory. BCBT takes place over a couple of sessions that can last up to 12 accumulated hours by design. This technique was first implemented and developed with soldiers on active duty by Dr. M. David Rudd to prevent suicide.

Breakdown of treatment
# Orientation
## Commitment to treatment
## Crisis response and safety planning
## Means restriction
## Survival kit
## Reasons for living card
## Model of suicidality
## Treatment journal
## Lessons learned
# Skill focus
## Skill development worksheets
## Coping cards
## Demonstration
## Practice
## Skill refinement
# Relapse prevention
## Skill generalization
## Skill refinement

===Cognitive emotional behavioral therapy===
Cognitive emotional behavioral therapy (CEBT) is a form of CBT developed initially for individuals with eating disorders but now used with a range of problems including anxiety, depression, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD), post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and anger problems. It combines aspects of CBT and dialectical behavioral therapy and aims to improve understanding and tolerance of emotions in order to facilitate the therapeutic process. It is frequently used as a &quot;pretreatment&quot; to prepare and better equip individuals for longer-term therapy.

===Structured cognitive behavioral training===
Structured cognitive-behavioral training (SCBT) is a cognitive-based process with core philosophies that draw heavily from CBT. Like CBT, SCBT asserts that behavior is inextricably related to beliefs, thoughts, and emotions. SCBT also builds on core CBT philosophy by incorporating other well-known modalities in the fields of behavioral health and psychology: most notably, Albert Ellis&#x27;s rational emotive behavior therapy. SCBT differs from CBT in two distinct ways. First, SCBT is delivered in a highly regimented format. Second, SCBT is a predetermined and finite training process that becomes personalized by the input of the participant. SCBT is designed to bring a participant to a specific result in a specific period of time. SCBT has been used to challenge addictive behavior, particularly with substances such as tobacco, alcohol and food, and to manage diabetes and subdue stress and anxiety. SCBT has also been used in the field of criminal psychology in the effort to reduce recidivism.

===Moral reconation therapy===
Moral reconation therapy, a type of CBT used to help felons overcome antisocial personality disorder (ASPD), slightly decreases the risk of further offending. It is generally implemented in a group format because of the risk of offenders with ASPD being given one-on-one therapy reinforces narcissistic behavioral characteristics, and can be used in correctional or outpatient settings. Groups usually meet weekly for two to six months.

===Stress inoculation training===
This type of therapy uses a blend of cognitive, behavioral, and certain humanistic training techniques to target the stressors of the client. This is usually used to help clients better cope with their stress or anxiety after stressful events. This is a three-phase process that trains the client to use skills that they already have to better adapt to their current stressors. The first phase is an interview phase that includes psychological testing, client self-monitoring, and a variety of reading materials. This allows the therapist to individually tailor the training process to the client. Clients learn how to categorize problems into emotion-focused or problem-focused so that they can better treat their negative situations. This phase ultimately prepares the client to eventually confront and reflect upon their current reactions to stressors, before looking at ways to change their reactions and emotions to their stressors. The focus is conceptualization.

The second phase emphasizes the aspect of skills acquisition and rehearsal that continues from the earlier phase of conceptualization. The client is taught skills that help them cope with their stressors. These skills are then practiced in the space of therapy. These skills involve self-regulation, problem-solving, interpersonal communication skills, etc.

The third and final phase is the application and following through of the skills learned in the training process. This gives the client opportunities to apply their learned skills to a wide range of stressors. Activities include role-playing, imagery, modeling, etc. In the end, the client will have been trained on a preventive basis to inoculate personal, chronic, and future stressors by breaking down their stressors into problems they will address in long-term, short-term, and intermediate coping goals.

===Activity-guided CBT: Group-knitting===

A recently developed group therapy model, based on CBT, integrates knitting into the therapeutic process and has been proven to yield reliable and promising results. The foundation for this novel approach to CBT is the frequently emphasized notion that therapy success depends on how embedded the therapy method is in the patients&#x27; natural routine. Similar to standard group-based CBT, patients meet once a week in a group of 10 to 15 patients and knit together under the instruction of a trained psychologist or mental health professional. Central for the therapy is the patient&#x27;s imaginative ability to assign each part of the wool to a certain thought. During the therapy, the wool is carefully knitted, creating a knitted piece of any form. This therapeutic process teaches the patient to meaningfully align thought, by (physically) creating a coherent knitted piece. Moreover, since CBT emphasizes the behavior as a result of cognition, the knitting illustrates how thoughts (which are tried to be imaginary tight to the wool) materialize into the reality surrounding us.

===Mindfulness-based cognitive behavioral hypnotherapy===
Mindfulness-based cognitive behavioral hypnotherapy (MCBH) is a form of CBT that focuses on awareness in a reflective approach, addressing subconscious tendencies. It is more the process that contains three phases for achieving wanted goals and integrates the principles of mindfulness and cognitive-behavioral techniques with the transformative potential of hypnotherapy.

===Unified Protocol===
The Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional Disorders (UP) is a form of CBT, developed by David H. Barlow and researchers at Boston University, that can be applied to a range of anxiety disorders. The rationale is that anxiety and depression disorders often occur together due to common underlying causes and can efficiently be treated together.

The UP includes a common set of components:

# Psycho-education
# Cognitive reappraisal
# Emotion regulation
# Changing behaviour

The UP has been shown to produce equivalent results to single-diagnosis protocols for specific disorders, such as OCD and social anxiety disorder.
Several studies have shown that the UP is easier to disseminate as compared to single-diagnosis protocols.

Culturally adapted CBT
The study of psychotherapy across races, religions, and cultures, or &quot;ethno-psycho-therapy&quot;, is a relatively new discipline

==Criticisms==
===Relative effectiveness===
The research conducted for CBT has been a topic of sustained controversy. While some researchers write that CBT is more effective than other treatments, many other researchers and practitioners have questioned the validity of such claims. For example, one study determined CBT to be superior to other treatments in treating anxiety and depression. However, researchers responding directly to that study conducted a re-analysis and found no evidence of CBT being superior to other bona fide treatments and conducted an analysis of thirteen other CBT clinical trials and determined that they failed to provide evidence of CBT superiority. In cases where CBT has been reported to be statistically better than other psychological interventions in terms of primary outcome measures, effect sizes were small and suggested that those differences were clinically meaningless and insignificant. Moreover, on secondary outcomes (i.e., measures of general functioning) no significant differences have been typically found between CBT and other treatments.

A major criticism has been that clinical studies of CBT efficacy (or any psychotherapy) are not double-blind (i.e., either the subjects or the therapists in psychotherapy studies are not blind to the type of treatment). They may be single-blinded, i.e. the rater may not know the treatment the patient received, but neither the patients nor the therapists are blinded to the type of therapy given (two out of three of the persons involved in the trial, i.e., all of the persons involved in the treatment, are unblinded). The patient is an active participant in correcting negative distorted thoughts, thus quite aware of the treatment group they are in.

The importance of double-blinding was shown in a meta-analysis that examined the effectiveness of CBT when placebo control and blindness were factored in. Pooled data from published trials of CBT in schizophrenia, major depressive disorder (MDD), and bipolar disorder that used controls for non-specific effects of intervention were analyzed. This study concluded that CBT is no better than non-specific control interventions in the treatment of schizophrenia and does not reduce relapse rates; treatment effects are small in treatment studies of MDD, and it is not an effective treatment strategy for prevention of relapse in bipolar disorder. For MDD, the authors note that the pooled effect size was very low.

===Declining effectiveness===
Additionally, a 2015 meta-analysis revealed that the positive effects of CBT on depression have been declining since 1977. The overall results showed two different declines in effect sizes: 1) an overall decline between 1977 and 2014, and 2) a steeper decline between 1995 and 2014. Additional sub-analysis revealed that CBT studies where therapists in the test group were instructed to adhere to the Beck CBT manual had a steeper decline in effect sizes since 1977 than studies where therapists in the test group were instructed to use CBT without a manual. The authors reported that they were unsure why the effects were declining but did list inadequate therapist training, failure to adhere to a manual, lack of therapist experience, and patients&#x27; hope and faith in its efficacy waning as potential reasons. The authors did mention that the current study was limited to depressive disorders only.

===High drop-out rates===
Furthermore, other researchers write that CBT studies have high drop-out rates compared to other treatments. One meta-analysis found that CBT drop-out rates were 17% higher than those of other therapies. This high drop-out rate is also evident in the treatment of several disorders, particularly the eating disorder anorexia nervosa, which is commonly treated with CBT. Those treated with CBT have a high chance of dropping out of therapy before completion and reverting to their anorexia behaviors.

Other researchers analyzing treatments for youths who self-injure found similar drop-out rates in CBT and DBT groups. In this study, the researchers analyzed several clinical trials that measured the efficacy of CBT administered to youths who self-injure. The researchers concluded that none of them were found to be efficacious.

===Philosophical concerns with CBT methods===
The methods employed in CBT research have not been the only criticisms; some individuals have called its theory and therapy into question.

Slife and Williams write that one of the hidden assumptions in CBT is that of determinism, or the absence of free will. They argue that CBT holds that external stimuli from the environment enter the mind, causing different thoughts that cause emotional states: nowhere in CBT theory is agency, or free will, accounted for.

Another criticism of CBT theory, especially as applied to major depressive disorder (MDD), is that it confounds the symptoms of the disorder with its causes.

===Side effects===
CBT is generally regarded as having very few if any side effects. Calls have been made by some for more appraisal of possible side effects of CBT. Many randomized trials of psychological interventions like CBT do not monitor potential harms to the patient. In contrast, randomized trials of pharmacological interventions are much more likely to take adverse effects into consideration.

A 2017 meta-analysis revealed that adverse events are not common in children receiving CBT and, furthermore, that CBT is associated with fewer dropouts than either placebo or medications. Nevertheless, CBT therapists do sometimes report &#x27;unwanted events&#x27; and side effects in their outpatients with &quot;negative wellbeing/distress&quot; being the most frequent.

===Socio-political concerns===
The writer and group analyst Farhad Dalal questions the socio-political assumptions behind the introduction of CBT. According to one reviewer, Dalal connects the rise of CBT with &quot;the parallel rise of neoliberalism, with its focus on marketization, efficiency, quantification and managerialism&quot;, and he questions the scientific basis of CBT, suggesting that &quot;the &#x27;science&#x27; of psychological treatment is often less a scientific than a political contest&quot;. In his book, Dalal also questions the ethical basis of CBT.

==Society and culture==
The UK&#x27;s National Health Service announced in 2008 that more therapists would be trained to provide CBT at government expense as part of an initiative called Improving Access to Psychological Therapies (IAPT). The NICE said that CBT would become the mainstay of treatment for non-severe depression, with medication used only in cases where CBT had failed. Therapists complained that the data does not fully support the attention and funding CBT receives. Psychotherapist and professor Andrew Samuels stated that this constitutes &quot;a coup, a power play by a community that has suddenly found itself on the brink of corralling an enormous amount of money ... Everyone has been seduced by CBT&#x27;s apparent cheapness.&quot;

The UK Council for Psychotherapy issued a press release in 2012 saying that the IAPT&#x27;s policies were undermining traditional psychotherapy and criticized proposals that would limit some approved therapies to CBT, claiming that they restricted patients to &quot;a watered-down version of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), often delivered by very lightly trained staff&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies (ABCT)
* British Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapies
* National Association of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapists
* International Association of Cognitive Psychotherapy
* Information on Research-based CBT Treatments</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="0" end="28" title="Cognitive behavioral therapy" label="Cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="30" end="33" title="Cognitive behavioral therapy" label="CBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="48" end="61" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="150" end="154" title="PTSD" label="PTSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914540" start="243" end="264" title="cognitive distortions" label="cognitive distortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267800" start="350" end="370" title="emotional regulation" label="emotional regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759895" start="392" end="409" title="Coping" label="coping strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="506" end="516" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="586" end="599" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="632" end="639" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="684" end="688" title="Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="694" end="709" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="887" end="899" title="Psychotherapy" label="talk therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="954" end="964" title="Behaviorism" label="behavioral"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="969" end="989" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="1032" end="1045" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="1059" end="1073" title="psychoanalytic" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="1356" end="1371" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914540" start="1577" end="1596" title="Cognitive distortion" label="thought distortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864574" start="1601" end="1612" title="maladaptive" label="maladaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="1678" end="1700" title="psychological disorder" label="psychological disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706669" start="1846" end="1869" title="psychoactive medication" label="psychoactive medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q208166" start="1977" end="2008" title="borderline personality disorder" label="borderline personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="2129" end="2154" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q596474" start="2304" end="2320" title="conduct disorder" label="conduct disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155736" start="2362" end="2371" title="bona fide" label="bona fide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707774" start="2481" end="2508" title="interpersonal psychotherapy" label="interpersonal psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="2613" end="2645" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q466587" start="2647" end="2681" title="American Psychological Association" label="American Psychological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="2683" end="2714" title="National Health Service" label="British National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="2877" end="2885" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q183144" start="2920" end="2929" title="Epictetus" label="Epictetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q302849" start="3175" end="3188" title="Aaron T. Beck" label="Aaron T. Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q183144" start="3411" end="3420" title="Epictetus" label="Epictetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313931" start="3424" end="3436" title="Albert Ellis" label="Albert Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50020" start="3507" end="3523" title="John Stuart Mill" label="John Stuart Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144192" start="3548" end="3562" title="Associationism" label="Associationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="3581" end="3603" title="classical conditioning" label="classical conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3656" end="3664" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="3746" end="3774" title="dialectical behavior therapy" label="dialectical behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q341031" start="3776" end="3811" title="mindfulness-based cognitive therapy" label="mindfulness-based cognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q18348595" start="3841" end="3867" title="compassion-focused therapy" label="compassion-focused therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16262180" start="3930" end="3946" title="behavior therapy" label="behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693745" start="3993" end="4010" title="cognitive therapy" label="cognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="4114" end="4125" title="behaviorism" label="behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217477" start="4137" end="4151" title="John B. Watson" label="John B. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112302" start="4156" end="4170" title="Rosalie Rayner" label="Rosalie Rayner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733744" start="4287" end="4303" title="Mary Cover Jones" label="Mary Cover Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q565495" start="4414" end="4426" title="Joseph Wolpe" label="Joseph Wolpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="4523" end="4534" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Ivan Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q58632" start="4593" end="4605" title="Hans Eysenck" label="Hans Eysenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q694785" start="4610" end="4624" title="Arnold Lazarus" label="Arnold Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="4679" end="4701" title="classical conditioning" label="classical conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="4874" end="4885" title="Behaviorism" label="behaviorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="4905" end="4916" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Ivan Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q217477" start="4918" end="4932" title="John B. Watson" label="John B. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q28882" start="4938" end="4951" title="Clark L. Hull" label="Clark L. Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q565495" start="4966" end="4978" title="Joseph Wolpe" label="Joseph Wolpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614702" start="5044" end="5070" title="systematic desensitization" label="systematic desensitization"/>
<link wikidata="Q58632" start="5253" end="5265" title="Hans Eysenck" label="Hans Eysenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q213195" start="5366" end="5379" title="B. F. Skinner" label="B. F. Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="5451" end="5471" title="operant conditioning" label="operant conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3622161" start="5512" end="5531" title="radical behaviorism" label="radical behaviorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372204" start="5584" end="5597" title="Julian Rotter" label="Julian Rotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q153753" start="5610" end="5624" title="Albert Bandura" label="Albert Bandura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337214" start="5685" end="5707" title="social learning theory" label="social learning theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125352" start="5801" end="5814" title="Claire Weekes" label="Claire Weekes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152393" start="6099" end="6111" title="Alfred Adler" label="Alfred Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q835792" start="6138" end="6152" title="Classical Adlerian psychology" label="basic mistakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q480528" start="6229" end="6240" title="Abraham Low" label="Abraham Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q313931" start="6361" end="6373" title="Albert Ellis" label="Albert Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133018" start="6439" end="6474" title="Rational emotive behavior therapy" label="rational emotive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302849" start="6568" end="6581" title="Aaron T. Beck" label="Aaron T. Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054460" start="6597" end="6613" title="Free association (psychology)" label="free association"/>
<link wikidata="Q41630" start="6630" end="6644" title="Psychoanalysis" label="psychoanalytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="6732" end="6737" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693745" start="6890" end="6907" title="cognitive therapy" label="cognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181032" start="7430" end="7448" title="neurotic disorders" label="neurotic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="7486" end="7496" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756506" start="7548" end="7568" title="cognitive revolution" label="cognitive revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q313931" start="7600" end="7612" title="Albert Ellis (psychologist)" label="Albert Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q302849" start="7617" end="7630" title="Aaron T. Beck" label="Aaron T. Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983667" start="7721" end="7732" title="Mentalism (psychology)" label="mentalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q741713" start="8203" end="8217" title="panic disorder" label="panic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236904" start="8221" end="8235" title="David M. Clark" label="David M. Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q12405796" start="8250" end="8265" title="David H. Barlow" label="David H. Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133018" start="8470" end="8474" title="Rational emotive behavior therapy" label="REBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693745" start="8476" end="8493" title="cognitive therapy" label="cognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q424533" start="8495" end="8528" title="acceptance and commitment therapy" label="acceptance and commitment therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="8530" end="8558" title="dialectical behavior therapy" label="dialectical behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21011288" start="8560" end="8581" title="metacognitive therapy" label="metacognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856066" start="8583" end="8605" title="metacognitive training" label="metacognitive training"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527304" start="8607" end="8622" title="reality therapy" label="reality therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104045" start="8623" end="8636" title="Glasser&amp;#x27;s choice theory" label="choice theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141234" start="8638" end="8666" title="cognitive processing therapy" label="cognitive processing therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385716" start="8668" end="8672" title="Eye movement desensitization and reprocessing" label="EMDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418787" start="8678" end="8696" title="multimodal therapy" label="multimodal therapy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8764" end="8772" title="Behaviour therapy#&amp;quot;Third generation&amp;quot;" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="8896" end="8924" title="dialectical behavior therapy" label="dialectical behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q424533" start="8929" end="8962" title="acceptance and commitment therapy" label="acceptance and commitment therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q544006" start="9269" end="9285" title="anxiety disorder" label="anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q844590" start="9288" end="9312" title="body dysmorphic disorder" label="body dysmorphic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="9314" end="9324" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="9326" end="9341" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q852163" start="9352" end="9365" title="low back pain" label="low back pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q270673" start="9367" end="9387" title="personality disorder" label="personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="9390" end="9399" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="9401" end="9414" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632070" start="9416" end="9438" title="substance use disorder" label="substance use disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q540571" start="9570" end="9582" title="fibromyalgia" label="fibromyalgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415275" start="9619" end="9639" title="Spinal cord injury" label="spinal cord injuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="9778" end="9789" title="Suicidal ideation" label="suicidality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="9812" end="9819" title="obesity" label="obesity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="9821" end="9850" title="obsessive–compulsive disorder" label="obsessive–compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="9862" end="9892" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077139" start="9901" end="9913" title="tic disorder" label="tic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q608259" start="9916" end="9932" title="trichotillomania" label="trichotillomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q105821669" start="10184" end="10213" title="adverse childhood experiences" label="adverse childhood experiences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007878" start="10318" end="10322" title="Improving Access to Psychological Therapies" label="IAPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121481" start="10541" end="10553" title="hypnotherapy" label="hypnotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="10664" end="10713" title="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence" label="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="10775" end="10788" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="10824" end="10839" title="bulimia nervosa" label="bulimia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="10845" end="10864" title="clinical depression" label="clinical depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="11041" end="11066" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707774" start="11101" end="11128" title="interpersonal psychotherapy" label="interpersonal psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="11191" end="11223" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707774" start="11831" end="11852" title="interpersonal therapy" label="interpersonal therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610385" start="11858" end="11881" title="problem-solving therapy" label="problem-solving therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891605" start="11927" end="11948" title="behavioral activation" label="behavioral activation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474517" start="12011" end="12017" title="INSERM" label="INSERM"/>
<link wikidata="Q12135" start="12133" end="12148" title="mental disorder" label="mental disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="12165" end="12175" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q741713" start="12177" end="12191" title="panic disorder" label="panic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="12193" end="12214" title="Post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="12248" end="12265" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q446198" start="12582" end="12620" title="Exposure and response prevention (ERP) therapy" label="exposure and response prevention (ERP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q156318" start="12950" end="12961" title="Etiology" label="etiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q302849" start="12986" end="12999" title="Aaron T. Beck" label="Aaron T. Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051200" start="13248" end="13256" title="Schema (psychology)" label="schemata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051200" start="13401" end="13407" title="Schema (psychology)" label="schema"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878587" start="13833" end="13848" title="Beck&amp;#x27;s cognitive triad" label="cognitive triad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917080" start="14487" end="14506" title="arbitrary inference" label="arbitrary inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546821" start="14508" end="14529" title="selective abstraction" label="selective abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12498580" start="14570" end="14582" title="Minimisation (psychology)" label="minimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q10981881" start="14909" end="14920" title="self-esteem" label="self-esteem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105337" start="15198" end="15208" title="Psychological resilience" label="resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="15328" end="15338" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q534589" start="15436" end="15452" title="Locus of control" label="Locus of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337214" start="15465" end="15508" title="Social learning theory" label="Julian Rotter&amp;#x27;s Social Learning Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q446198" start="16070" end="16078" title="Exposure therapy" label="exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672039" start="16572" end="16588" title="Orval Hobart Mowrer" label="O. Hobart Mowrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385098" start="16695" end="16705" title="Extinction (psychology)" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136816" start="16710" end="16721" title="habituation" label="habituation"/>
<link wikidata="Q424533" start="17170" end="17203" title="Acceptance and commitment therapy" label="Acceptance and commitment therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q422549" start="18145" end="18159" title="glucocorticoid" label="glucocorticoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="20084" end="20089" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474517" start="20205" end="20211" title="INSERM" label="INSERM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="20357" end="20367" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="20369" end="20385" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q741713" start="20387" end="20401" title="panic disorder" label="panic disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="20403" end="20424" title="Post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="20445" end="20452" title="bulimia" label="bulimia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="20454" end="20462" title="Anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="20490" end="20508" title="Alcoholism" label="alcohol dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="20540" end="20549" title="Psychosis" label="psychoses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856066" start="20869" end="20891" title="metacognitive training" label="metacognitive training"/>
<link wikidata="Q170082" start="20982" end="20991" title="psychosis" label="psychosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="21008" end="21064" title="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence" label="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474517" start="21114" end="21120" title="INSERM" label="INSERM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1504425" start="21374" end="21391" title="systematic review" label="systematic review"/>
<link wikidata="Q748309" start="21795" end="21828" title="problem gambling" label="pathological and problem gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474517" start="24509" end="24515" title="INSERM" label="INSERM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="24614" end="24632" title="Alcoholism" label="alcohol dependency"/>
<link wikidata="Q831735" start="24686" end="24704" title="Internet addiction disorder" label="Internet addiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25019" end="25028" title="Eating disorder#Treatment" label="treatment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25461" end="25476" title="Bulimia nervosa#Psychotherapy" label="bulimia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474517" start="25669" end="25675" title="INSERM" label="INSERM"/>
<link wikidata="Q64513386" start="25774" end="25781" title="bulimia" label="bulimia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="25786" end="25802" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="25977" end="25985" title="Autism spectrum" label="autistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83030" start="26478" end="26486" title="dementia" label="dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472703" start="26491" end="26522" title="Mild cognitive impairment" label="mild cognitive impairment (MCI)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133848" start="26934" end="26956" title="clinically significant" label="clinically significant"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="28109" end="28149" title="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder" label="attention deficit hyperactivity disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q105434" start="28158" end="28173" title="hypochondriasis" label="hypochondriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410145" start="28381" end="28393" title="psychosocial" label="psychosocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q186676" start="28541" end="28551" title="stuttering" label="stuttering"/>
<link wikidata="Q83871" start="28757" end="28771" title="benzodiazepine" label="benzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262284" start="28781" end="28798" title="nonbenzodiazepine" label="nonbenzodiazepine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="28835" end="28843" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869874" start="29146" end="29154" title="insomnia" label="insomnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430789" start="29457" end="29468" title="foster care" label="foster care"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="29580" end="29585" title="Domestic violence" label="abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474517" start="29754" end="29760" title="INSERM" label="INSERM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088113" start="29908" end="29920" title="chronic pain" label="chronic pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q838966" start="29973" end="29997" title="irritable bowel syndrome" label="irritable bowel syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859063" start="30077" end="30101" title="metastatic breast cancer" label="metastatic breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105202" start="30470" end="30486" title="Cochrane Collaboration" label="Cochrane reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q192309" start="30536" end="30544" title="tinnitus" label="tinnitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="30825" end="30843" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q816422" start="30886" end="30898" title="dysmenorrhea" label="dysmenorrhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q209733" start="31046" end="31096" title="myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome" label="myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="31117" end="31146" title="National Institutes of Health" label="National Institutes of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="31356" end="31383" title="Centres for Disease Control" label="Centres for Disease Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="31454" end="31503" title="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence" label="National Institute for Health and Care Excellence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864574" start="32329" end="32340" title="maladaptive" label="maladaptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q9332" start="32369" end="32377" title="behavior" label="behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q159904" start="32382" end="32388" title="Affect (psychology)" label="affect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914540" start="32671" end="32692" title="cognitive distortions" label="cognitive distortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926165" start="34888" end="34908" title="Socratic questioning" label="Socratic questioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q168338" start="35998" end="36013" title="behaviorism" label="Learning theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q621607" start="36139" end="36164" title="applied behavior analysis" label="applied behavior analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633203" start="36770" end="36794" title="psychological assessment" label="psychological assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q170084" start="36892" end="36906" title="Generalization" label="Generalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q864329" start="38187" end="38198" title="biofeedback" label="biofeedback"/>
<link wikidata="Q199027" start="38342" end="38354" title="goal setting" label="goal setting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498453" start="38612" end="38621" title="self-help" label="self-help"/>
<link wikidata="Q849826" start="38699" end="38722" title="cognitive restructuring" label="cognitive restructuring"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="38781" end="38788" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q446198" start="38795" end="38811" title="exposure therapy" label="exposure therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q446198" start="39006" end="39022" title="exposure therapy" label="exposure therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105337" start="39024" end="39042" title="stress inoculation" label="stress inoculation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141234" start="39044" end="39072" title="cognitive processing therapy" label="cognitive processing therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13693745" start="39074" end="39091" title="cognitive therapy" label="cognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21011288" start="39093" end="39114" title="metacognitive therapy" label="metacognitive therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856066" start="39116" end="39138" title="metacognitive training" label="metacognitive training"/>
<link wikidata="Q955260" start="39140" end="39159" title="relaxation training" label="relaxation training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="39161" end="39189" title="dialectical behavior therapy" label="dialectical behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q424533" start="39195" end="39228" title="acceptance and commitment therapy" label="acceptance and commitment therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433846" start="39894" end="39922" title="scientist–practitioner model" label="scientist–practitioner model"/>
<link wikidata="Q286017" start="40011" end="40029" title="operationalization" label="operationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q12453" start="40065" end="40076" title="measurement" label="measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503831" start="40154" end="40158" title="goal" label="goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786460" start="40195" end="40203" title="Homework in psychotherapy" label="homework"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424027" start="40719" end="40739" title="Therapeutic relationship" label="therapeutic alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="41301" end="41305" title="National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence" label="NICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068473" start="41925" end="41935" title="e-Learning" label="e-Learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q48799203" start="42713" end="42770" title="Internet Interventions for Posttraumatic Stress" label="internet interventions for post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="43076" end="43079" title="National Health Service" label="NHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q620615" start="43530" end="43540" title="mobile app" label="mobile app"/>
<link wikidata="Q870780" start="43677" end="43684" title="chatbot" label="chatbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="43752" end="43765" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105337" start="43776" end="43800" title="psychological resilience" label="psychological resilience"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981051" start="43817" end="43837" title="emotional well-being" label="emotional well-being"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="43839" end="43862" title="Artificial intelligence" label="Artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q100998908" start="45943" end="45956" title="M. David Rudd" label="M. David Rudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2292472" start="46322" end="46329" title="Relapse" label="Relapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="46600" end="46607" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="46609" end="46619" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="46621" end="46650" title="obsessive compulsive disorder" label="obsessive compulsive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="46658" end="46688" title="post-traumatic stress disorder" label="post-traumatic stress disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="46747" end="46777" title="dialectical behavioral therapy" label="dialectical behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="47378" end="47395" title="behavioral health" label="behavioral health"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="47400" end="47410" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q313931" start="47426" end="47438" title="Albert Ellis" label="Albert Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133018" start="47446" end="47479" title="rational emotive behavior therapy" label="rational emotive behavior therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="47889" end="47896" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="47921" end="47929" title="diabetes" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139238" start="48001" end="48020" title="criminal psychology" label="criminal psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="48158" end="48189" title="antisocial personality disorder" label="antisocial personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q12405796" start="52098" end="52113" title="David H. Barlow" label="David H. Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="52133" end="52150" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q113561123" start="52288" end="52312" title="Transdiagnostic process" label="common underlying causes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178190" start="52600" end="52603" title="OCD" label="OCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q281928" start="52608" end="52631" title="social anxiety disorder" label="social anxiety disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q41112" start="54843" end="54856" title="schizophrenia" label="schizophrenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="54858" end="54883" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="54895" end="54911" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287978" start="55564" end="55575" title="effect size" label="effect size"/>
<link wikidata="Q373822" start="56621" end="56636" title="eating disorder" label="eating disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131749" start="56637" end="56653" title="anorexia nervosa" label="anorexia nervosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208421" start="56928" end="56931" title="Dialectical behavioral therapy" label="DBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q131133" start="57417" end="57428" title="determinism" label="determinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9476" start="57448" end="57457" title="free will" label="free will"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="58839" end="58852" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q282750" start="58918" end="58931" title="managerialism" label="managerialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16251481" start="59216" end="59239" title="National Health Service (England)" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007878" start="59365" end="59408" title="Improving Access to Psychological Therapies" label="Improving Access to Psychological Therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3425168" start="59421" end="59425" title="National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence" label="NICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758499" start="59692" end="59706" title="Andrew Samuels" label="Andrew Samuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099799" start="59939" end="59967" title="UK Council for Psychotherapy" label="UK Council for Psychotherapy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5751" wikidata="Q7850" url="?curid=5751" title="Chinese language">
<text>Chinese ( or ) is a group of languages spoken natively by the ethnic Han Chinese majority and many minority ethnic groups in China, as well as by various communities of the Chinese diaspora. Approximately 1.35 billion people, or 17% of the global population, speak a variety of Chinese as their first language.
Chinese languages form the Sinitic branch of the Sino-Tibetan language family. The spoken varieties of Chinese are usually considered by native speakers to be dialects of a single language. However, their lack of mutual intelligibility means they are sometimes considered to be separate languages in a family. Investigation of the historical relationships among the varieties of Chinese is ongoing. Currently, most classifications posit 7 to 13 main regional groups based on phonetic developments from Middle Chinese, of which the most spoken by far is Mandarin with 66%, or around 800 million speakers, followed by Min (75 million, e.g. Southern Min), Wu (74 million, e.g. Shanghainese), and Yue (68 million, e.g. Cantonese). These branches are unintelligible to each other, and many of their subgroups are unintelligible with the other varieties within the same branch (e.g. Southern Min). There are, however, transitional areas where varieties from different branches share enough features for some limited intelligibility, including New Xiang with Southwestern Mandarin, Xuanzhou Wu Chinese with Lower Yangtze Mandarin, Jin with Central Plains Mandarin and certain divergent dialects of Hakka with Gan. All varieties of Chinese are tonal at least to some degree, and are largely analytic.

The earliest attested written Chinese consists of the oracle bone inscriptions created during the Shang dynasty . The phonetic categories of Old Chinese can be reconstructed from the rhymes of ancient poetry. During the Northern and Southern period, Middle Chinese went through several sound changes and split into several varieties following prolonged geographic and political separation. The &quot;Qieyun&quot;, a rhyme dictionary, recorded a compromise between the pronunciations of different regions. The royal courts of the Ming and early Qing dynasties operated using a koiné language known as &quot;Guanhua&quot;, based on the Nanjing dialect of Mandarin.

Standard Chinese is an official language of both the People&#x27;s Republic of China and the Republic of China (Taiwan), one of the four official languages of Singapore, and one of the six official languages of the United Nations. Standard Chinese is based on the Beijing dialect of Mandarin and was first officially adopted in the 1930s. The language is written primarily using a logography of Chinese characters, largely shared by readers who may otherwise speak mutually unintelligible varieties. Since the 1950s, the use of simplified characters has been promoted by the government of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, with Singapore officially adopting them in 1976. Traditional characters are used in Taiwan, Hong Kong, Macau, and among Chinese-speaking communities overseas.

== Classification ==
Linguists classify all varieties of Chinese as part of the Sino-Tibetan language family, together with Burmese, Tibetan and many other languages spoken in the Himalayas and the Southeast Asian Massif. Although the relationship was first proposed in the early 19th century and is now broadly accepted, reconstruction of Sino-Tibetan is much less developed than that of families such as Indo-European or Austroasiatic. Difficulties have included the great diversity of the languages, the lack of inflection in many of them, and the effects of language contact. In addition, many of the smaller languages are spoken in mountainous areas that are difficult to reach and are often also sensitive border zones. Without a secure reconstruction of Proto-Sino-Tibetan, the higher-level structure of the family remains unclear. A top-level branching into Chinese and Tibeto-Burman languages is often assumed, but has not been convincingly demonstrated.

== History ==

The first written records appeared over 3,000 years ago during the Shang dynasty. As the language evolved over this period, the various local varieties became mutually unintelligible. In reaction, central governments have repeatedly sought to promulgate a unified standard.

=== Old and Middle Chinese ===
The earliest examples of Old Chinese are divinatory inscriptions on oracle bones dated to , during the Late Shang. The next attested stage came from inscriptions on bronze artifacts dating to the Western Zhou period (1046–771 BCE), the &quot;Classic of Poetry&quot; and portions of the &quot;Book of Documents&quot; and &quot;I Ching&quot;. Scholars have attempted to reconstruct the phonology of Old Chinese by comparing later varieties of Chinese with the rhyming practice of the &quot;Classic of Poetry&quot; and the phonetic elements found in the majority of Chinese characters. Although many of the finer details remain unclear, most scholars agree that Old Chinese differs from Middle Chinese in lacking retroflex and palatal obstruents but having initial consonant clusters of some sort, and in having voiceless nasals and liquids. Most recent reconstructions also describe an atonal language with consonant clusters at the end of the syllable, developing into tone distinctions in Middle Chinese. Several derivational affixes have also been identified, but the language lacks inflection, and indicated grammatical relationships using word order and grammatical particles.

Middle Chinese was the language used during Northern and Southern dynasties and the Sui, Tang, and Song dynasties (6th–10th centuries). It can be divided into an early period, reflected by the &quot;Qieyun&quot; rhyme dictionary (601), and a late period in the 10th century, reflected by rhyme tables such as the constructed by ancient Chinese philologists as a guide to the &quot;Qieyun&quot; system. These works define phonological categories but with little hint of what sounds they represent. Linguists have identified these sounds by comparing the categories with pronunciations in modern varieties of Chinese, borrowed Chinese words in Japanese, Vietnamese, and Korean, and transcription evidence. The resulting system is very complex, with a large number of consonants and vowels, but they are probably not all distinguished in any single dialect. Most linguists now believe it represents a diasystem encompassing 6th-century northern and southern standards for reading the classics.

=== Classical and vernacular written forms ===

The complex relationship between spoken and written Chinese is an example of diglossia: as spoken, Chinese varieties have evolved at different rates, while the written language used throughout China changed comparatively little, crystallizing into a prestige form known as Classical or Literary Chinese. Literature written distinctly in the Classical form began to emerge during the Spring and Autumn period. Its use in writing remained nearly universal until the late 19th century, culminating with the widespread adoption of written vernacular Chinese with the May Fourth Movement beginning in 1919.

=== Rise of northern dialects ===
After the fall of the Northern Song dynasty and subsequent reign of the Jurchen Jin and Mongol Yuan dynasties in northern China, a common speech (now called Old Mandarin) developed based on the dialects of the North China Plain around the capital.
The 1324 &quot;Zhongyuan Yinyun&quot; was a dictionary that codified the rhyming conventions of new &quot;sanqu&quot; verse form in this language.
Together with the slightly later &quot;Menggu Ziyun&quot;, this dictionary describes a language with many of the features characteristic of modern Mandarin dialects.

Until the early 20th century, most Chinese people only spoke their local variety. Thus, as a practical measure, officials of the Ming and Qing dynasties carried out the administration of the empire using a common language based on Mandarin varieties, known as . For most of this period, this language was a koiné based on dialects spoken in the Nanjing area, though not identical to any single dialect. By the middle of the 19th century, the Beijing dialect had become dominant and was essential for any business with the imperial court.

In the 1930s, a standard national language (), was adopted. After much dispute between proponents of northern and southern dialects and an abortive attempt at an artificial pronunciation, the National Language Unification Commission finally settled on the Beijing dialect in 1932. The People&#x27;s Republic founded in 1949 retained this standard but renamed it . The national language is now used in education, the media, and formal situations in both mainland China and Taiwan.

In Hong Kong and Macau, Cantonese is the dominant spoken language due to cultural influence from Guangdong immigrants and colonial-era policies, and is used in education, media, formal speech, and everyday life—though Mandarin is increasingly taught in schools due to the mainland&#x27;s growing influence.

=== Influence ===

Historically, the Chinese language has spread to its neighbors through a variety of means. Northern Vietnam was incorporated into the Han dynasty (202 BCE220 CE) in 111 BCE, marking the beginning of a period of Chinese control that ran almost continuously for a millennium. The Four Commanderies of Han were established in northern Korea in the 1st century BCE but disintegrated in the following centuries. Chinese Buddhism spread over East Asia between the 2nd and 5th centuries CE, and with it the study of scriptures and literature in Literary Chinese. Later, strong central governments modeled on Chinese institutions were established in Korea, Japan, and Vietnam, with Literary Chinese serving as the language of administration and scholarship, a position it would retain until the late 19th century in Korea and (to a lesser extent) Japan, and the early 20th century in Vietnam. Scholars from different lands could communicate, albeit only in writing, using Literary Chinese.

Although they used Chinese solely for written communication, each country had its own tradition of reading texts aloud using what are known as Sino-Xenic pronunciations. Chinese words with these pronunciations were also extensively imported into the Korean, Japanese and Vietnamese languages, and today comprise over half of their vocabularies. This massive influx led to changes in the phonological structure of the languages, contributing to the development of moraic structure in Japanese and the disruption of vowel harmony in Korean.

Borrowed Chinese morphemes have been used extensively in all these languages to coin compound words for new concepts, in a similar way to the use of Latin and Ancient Greek roots in European languages. Many new compounds, or new meanings for old phrases, were created in the late 19th and early 20th centuries to name Western concepts and artifacts. These coinages, written in shared Chinese characters, have then been borrowed freely between languages. They have even been accepted into Chinese, a language usually resistant to loanwords, because their foreign origin was hidden by their written form. Often different compounds for the same concept were in circulation for some time before a winner emerged, and sometimes the final choice differed between countries. The proportion of vocabulary of Chinese origin thus tends to be greater in technical, abstract, or formal language. For example, in Japan, Sino-Japanese words account for about 35% of the words in entertainment magazines, over half the words in newspapers, and 60% of the words in science magazines.

Vietnam, Korea, and Japan each developed writing systems for their own languages, initially based on Chinese characters, but later replaced with the alphabet for Korean and supplemented with syllabaries for Japanese, while Vietnamese continued to be written with the complex script. However, these were limited to popular literature until the late 19th century. Today Japanese is written with a composite script using both Chinese characters called kanji, and kana. Korean is written exclusively with hangul in North Korea, although knowledge of the supplementary Chinese characters called hanja is still required, and hanja are increasingly rarely used in South Korea. As a result of its historical colonization by France, Vietnamese now uses the Latin-based Vietnamese alphabet.

English words of Chinese origin include &quot;tea&quot; from Hokkien , &quot;dim sum&quot; from Cantonese , and &quot;kumquat&quot; from Cantonese .

== Varieties ==
The sinologist Jerry Norman has estimated that there are hundreds of mutually unintelligible varieties of Chinese. These varieties form a dialect continuum, in which differences in speech generally become more pronounced as distances increase, though the rate of change varies immensely. Generally, mountainous South China exhibits more linguistic diversity than the North China Plain. Until the late 20th century, Chinese emigrants to Southeast Asia and North America came from southeast coastal areas, where Min, Hakka, and Yue dialects were spoken. Specifically, most Chinese immigrants to North America until the mid-20th century spoke Taishanese, a variety of Yue from a small coastal area around Taishan, Guangdong.

In parts of South China, the dialect of a major city may be only marginally intelligible to its neighbors. For example, Wuzhou and Taishan are located approximately and away from Guangzhou respectively, but the Yue variety spoken in Wuzhou is more similar to the Guangzhou dialect than is Taishanese. Wuzhou is located directly upstream from Guangzhou on the Pearl River, whereas Taishan is to Guangzhou&#x27;s southwest, with the two cities separated by several river valleys. In parts of Fujian, the speech of some neighbouring counties or villages is mutually unintelligible.

=== Grouping ===
Local varieties of Chinese are conventionally classified into seven dialect groups, largely based on the different evolution of Middle Chinese voiced initials:
* Mandarin, including Standard Chinese, the Beijing dialect, Sichuanese, and also the Dungan language spoken in Central Asia
* Wu, including Shanghainese, Suzhounese, and Wenzhounese
* Gan
* Xiang
* Min, including Fuzhounese, Hainanese, Hokkien and Teochew
* Hakka
* Yue, including Cantonese and Taishanese

The classification of Li Rong, which is used in the &quot;Language Atlas of China&quot; (1987), distinguishes three further groups:
* Jin, previously included in Mandarin.
* Huizhou, previously included in Wu.
* Pinghua, previously included in Yue.

Some varieties remain unclassified, including the Danzhou dialect on Hainan, Waxianghua spoken in western Hunan, and Shaozhou Tuhua spoken in northern Guangdong.

=== Standard Chinese ===

Standard Chinese is the standard language of China (where it is called ) and Taiwan, and one of the four official languages of Singapore (where it is called either or ). Standard Chinese is based on the Beijing dialect of Mandarin. The governments of both China and Taiwan intend for speakers of all Chinese speech varieties to use it as a common language of communication. Therefore, it is used in government agencies, in the media, and as a language of instruction in schools.

Diglossia is common among Chinese speakers. For example, a Shanghai resident may speak both Standard Chinese and Shanghainese; if they grew up elsewhere, they are also likely fluent in the dialect of their home region. In addition to Standard Chinese, a majority of Taiwanese people also speak Taiwanese Hokkien (also called ), Hakka, or an Austronesian language. A speaker in Taiwan may mix pronunciations and vocabulary from Standard Chinese and other languages of Taiwan in everyday speech. In part due to traditional cultural ties with Guangdong, Cantonese is used as an everyday language in Hong Kong and Macau.

=== Nomenclature ===
The designation of various Chinese branches remains controversial. Some linguists and most ordinary Chinese people consider all the spoken varieties as one single language, as speakers share a common national identity and a common written form. Others instead argue that it is inappropriate to refer to major branches of Chinese such as Mandarin, Wu, and so on as &quot;dialects&quot; because the mutual unintelligibility between them is too great. However, calling major Chinese branches &quot;languages&quot; would also be wrong under the same criterion, since a branch such as Wu, itself contains many mutually unintelligible varieties, and could not be properly called a single language.

There are also viewpoints pointing out that linguists often ignore mutual intelligibility when varieties share intelligibility with a central variety (i.e. prestige variety, such as Standard Mandarin), as the issue requires some careful handling when mutual intelligibility is inconsistent with language identity.

The Chinese government&#x27;s official Chinese designation for the major branches of Chinese is , whereas the more closely related varieties within these are called .

Because of the difficulties involved in determining the difference between language and dialect, other terms have been proposed. These include &quot;topolect&quot;, &quot;lect&quot;, &quot;vernacular&quot;, &quot;regional&quot;, and &quot;variety&quot;.

== Phonology ==
Syllables in the Chinese languages have some unique characteristics. They are tightly related to the morphology and also to the characters of the writing system, and phonologically they are structured according to fixed rules.

The structure of each syllable consists of a nucleus that has a vowel (which can be a monophthong, diphthong, or even a triphthong in certain varieties), preceded by an onset (a single consonant, or consonant + glide; a zero onset is also possible), and followed (optionally) by a coda consonant; a syllable also carries a tone. There are some instances where a vowel is not used as a nucleus. An example of this is in Cantonese, where the nasal sonorant consonants and can stand alone as their own syllable.

In Mandarin much more than in other spoken varieties, most syllables tend to be open syllables, meaning they have no coda (assuming that a final glide is not analyzed as a coda), but syllables that do have codas are restricted to nasals , , , the retroflex approximant , and voiceless stops , , , or . Some varieties allow most of these codas, whereas others, such as Standard Chinese, are limited to only , , and .

The number of sounds in the different spoken dialects varies, but in general, there has been a tendency to a reduction in sounds from Middle Chinese. The Mandarin dialects in particular have experienced a dramatic decrease in sounds and so have far more polysyllabic words than most other spoken varieties. The total number of syllables in some varieties is therefore only about a thousand, including tonal variation, which is only about an eighth as many as English.

=== Tones ===
All varieties of spoken Chinese use tones to distinguish words. A few dialects of north China may have as few as three tones, while some dialects in south China have up to 6 or 12 tones, depending on how one counts. One exception from this is Shanghainese which has reduced the set of tones to a two-toned pitch accent system much like modern Japanese.

A very common example used to illustrate the use of tones in Chinese is the application of the four tones of Standard Chinese, along with the neutral tone, to the syllable . The tones are exemplified by the following five Chinese words:

In contrast, Standard Cantonese has six tones. Historically, finals that end in a stop consonant were considered to be &quot;checked tones&quot; and thus counted separately for a total of nine tones. However, they are considered to be duplicates in modern linguistics and are no longer counted as such:
== Grammar ==

Chinese is often described as a &#x27;monosyllabic&#x27; language. However, this is only partially correct. It is largely accurate when describing Old and Middle Chinese; in Classical Chinese, around 90% of words consist of a single character that corresponds one-to-one with a &quot;morpheme&quot;, the smallest unit of meaning in a language. In modern varieties, it usually remains the case that morphemes are monosyllabic—in contrast, English has many multi-syllable morphemes, both bound and free, such as &#x27;seven&#x27;, &#x27;elephant&#x27;, &#x27;para-&#x27; and &#x27;-able&#x27;. Some of the more conservative modern varieties, usually found in the south, have largely monosyllabic , especially with basic vocabulary. However, most nouns, adjectives, and verbs in modern Mandarin are disyllabic. A significant cause of this is phonetic erosion: sound changes over time have steadily reduced the number of possible syllables in the language&#x27;s inventory. In modern Mandarin, there are only around 1,200 possible syllables, including the tonal distinctions, compared with about 5,000 in Vietnamese (still a largely monosyllabic language), and over 8,000 in English.

Most modern varieties tend to form new words through polysyllabic compounds. In some cases, monosyllabic words have become disyllabic formed from different characters without the use of compounding, as in from ; this is especially common in Jin varieties. This phonological collapse has led to a corresponding increase in the number of homophones. As an example, the small &quot;Langenscheidt Pocket Chinese Dictionary&quot; lists six words that are commonly pronounced as in Standard Chinese:
In modern spoken Mandarin, however, tremendous ambiguity would result if all of these words could be used as-is. The 20th century Yuen Ren Chao poem &quot;Lion-Eating Poet in the Stone Den&quot; exploits this, consisting of 92 characters all pronounced . As such, most of these words have been replaced in speech, if not in writing, with less ambiguous disyllabic compounds. Only the first one, , normally appears in monosyllabic form in spoken Mandarin; the rest are normally used in the polysyllabic forms of

respectively. In each, the homophone was disambiguated by the addition of another morpheme, typically either a near-synonym or some sort of generic word (e.g. &#x27;head&#x27;, &#x27;thing&#x27;), the purpose of which is to indicate which of the possible meanings of the other, homophonic syllable is specifically meant.

However, when one of the above words forms part of a compound, the disambiguating syllable is generally dropped and the resulting word is still disyllabic. For example, alone, and not , appears in compounds as meaning &#x27;stone&#x27; such as , , , , and . Although many single-syllable morphemes () can stand alone as individual words, they more often than not form multi-syllable compounds known as , which more closely resembles the traditional Western notion of a word. A Chinese can consist of more than one character–morpheme, usually two, but there can be three or more.

Examples of Chinese words of more than two syllables include , , and .

All varieties of modern Chinese are analytic languages: they depend on syntax (word order and sentence structure), rather than inflectional morphology (changes in the form of a word), to indicate a word&#x27;s function within a sentence. In other words, Chinese has very few grammatical inflections—it possesses no tenses, no voices, no grammatical number, and only a few articles. They make heavy use of grammatical particles to indicate aspect and mood. In Mandarin, this involves the use of particles such as , , and .

Chinese has a subject–verb–object word order, and like many other languages of East Asia, makes frequent use of the topic–comment construction to form sentences. Chinese also has an extensive system of classifiers and measure words, another trait shared with neighboring languages such as Japanese and Korean. Other notable grammatical features common to all the spoken varieties of Chinese include the use of serial verb construction, pronoun dropping, and the related subject dropping. Although the grammars of the spoken varieties share many traits, they do possess differences.

== Vocabulary ==
The entire Chinese character corpus since antiquity comprises well over 50,000 characters, of which only roughly 10,000 are in use and only about 3,000 are frequently used in Chinese media and newspapers. However, Chinese characters should not be confused with Chinese words. Because most Chinese words are made up of two or more characters, there are many more Chinese words than characters. A more accurate equivalent for a Chinese character is the morpheme, as characters represent the smallest grammatical units with individual meanings in the Chinese language.

Estimates of the total number of Chinese words and lexicalized phrases vary greatly. The &quot;Hanyu Da Zidian&quot;, a compendium of Chinese characters, includes 54,678 head entries for characters, including oracle bone versions. The &quot;Zhonghua Zihai&quot; (1994) contains 85,568 head entries for character definitions and is the largest reference work based purely on character and its literary variants. The CC-CEDICT project (2010) contains 97,404 contemporary entries including idioms, technology terms, and names of political figures, businesses, and products. The 2009 version of the Webster&#x27;s Digital Chinese Dictionary (WDCD), based on CC-CEDICT, contains over 84,000 entries.

The most comprehensive pure linguistic Chinese-language dictionary, the 12-volume &quot;Hanyu Da Cidian&quot;, records more than 23,000 head Chinese characters and gives over 370,000 definitions. The 1999 revised &quot;Cihai&quot;, a multi-volume encyclopedic dictionary reference work, gives 122,836 vocabulary entry definitions under 19,485 Chinese characters, including proper names, phrases, and common zoological, geographical, sociological, scientific, and technical terms.

The 2016 edition of &quot;Xiandai Hanyu Cidian&quot;, an authoritative one-volume dictionary on modern standard Chinese language as used in mainland China, has 13,000 head characters and defines 70,000 words.

=== Loanwords ===
Like many other languages, Chinese has absorbed a sizable number of loanwords from other cultures. Most Chinese words are formed out of native Chinese morphemes, including words describing imported objects and ideas. However, direct phonetic borrowing of foreign words has gone on since ancient times.

Some early Indo-European loanwords in Chinese have been proposed, notably , , and perhaps , , , and .
Ancient words borrowed from along the Silk Road during the Old Chinese period include , , and . Some words were borrowed from Buddhist scriptures, including and . Other words came from nomadic peoples to the north, such as . Words borrowed from the peoples along the Silk Road, such as , generally have Persian etymologies. Buddhist terminology is generally derived from Sanskrit or Pali, the liturgical languages of northern India. Words borrowed from the nomadic tribes of the Gobi, Mongolian or northeast regions generally have Altaic etymologies, such as , the Chinese lute, or , but from exactly which source is not always clear.

=== Modern borrowings ===
Modern neologisms are primarily translated into Chinese in one of three ways: free translation (calques), phonetic translation (by sound), or a combination of the two. Today, it is much more common to use existing Chinese morphemes to coin new words to represent imported concepts, such as technical expressions and international scientific vocabulary, wherein the Latin and Greek components are usually converted one-for-one into the corresponding Chinese characters. The word &#x27;telephone&#x27; was initially loaned phonetically as (; Shanghainese )—this word was widely used in Shanghai during the 1920s, but the later , built out of native Chinese morphemes became prevalent. Other examples include
Occasionally, compromises between the transliteration and translation approaches become accepted, such as from + . Sometimes translations are designed so that they sound like the original while incorporating Chinese morphemes (phono-semantic matching), such as for the video game character &#x27;Mario&#x27;. This is often done for commercial purposes, for example for &#x27;Pentium&#x27; and for &#x27;Subway&#x27;.

Foreign words, mainly proper nouns, continue to enter the Chinese language by transcription according to their pronunciations. This is done by employing Chinese characters with similar pronunciations. For example, &#x27;Israel&#x27; becomes , and &#x27;Paris&#x27; becomes . A rather small number of direct transliterations have survived as common words, including , , , , , and . The bulk of these words were originally coined in Shanghai during the early 20th century and later loaned from there into Mandarin, hence their Mandarin pronunciations occasionally being quite divergent from the English. For example, in Shanghainese and sound more like their English counterparts. Cantonese differs from Mandarin with some transliterations, such as and .

Western foreign words representing Western concepts have influenced Chinese since the 20th century through transcription. From French, and were borrowed for &#x27;ballet&#x27; and &#x27;champagne&#x27; respectively; was borrowed from Italian &#x27;coffee&#x27;. The influence of English is particularly pronounced: from the early 20th century, many English words were borrowed into Shanghainese, such as and the aforementioned . Later, American soft power gave rise to , , and . Contemporary colloquial Cantonese has distinct loanwords from English, such as , , , and . With the rising popularity of the Internet, there is a current vogue in China for coining English transliterations, for example, , , and . In Taiwan, some of these transliterations are different, such as and for &#x27;blog&#x27;.

Another result of English influence on Chinese is the appearance of so-called spelled with letters from the English alphabet. These have appeared in colloquial usage, as well as in magazines and newspapers, and on websites and television:
Since the 20th century, another source of words has been kanji: Japan re-molded European concepts and inventions into , and many of these words have been re-loaned into modern Chinese. Other terms were coined by the Japanese by giving new senses to existing Chinese terms or by referring to expressions used in classical Chinese literature. For example, ; in Japanese, which in the original Chinese meant &#x27;the workings of the state&#x27;, narrowed to &#x27;economy&#x27; in Japanese; this narrowed definition was then re-imported into Chinese. As a result, these terms are virtually indistinguishable from native Chinese words: indeed, there is some dispute over some of these terms as to whether the Japanese or Chinese coined them first. As a result of this loaning, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese share a corpus of linguistic terms describing modern terminology, paralleling the similar corpus of terms built from Greco-Latin and shared among European languages.

== Writing system ==

The Chinese orthography centers on Chinese characters, which are written within imaginary square blocks, traditionally arranged in vertical columns, read from top to bottom down a column, and right to left across columns, despite alternative arrangement with rows of characters from left to right within a row and from top to bottom across rows (like English and other Western writing systems) having become more popular since the 20th century. Chinese characters denote morphemes independent of phonetic variation in different languages. Thus the character is pronounced as in Standard Chinese, in Cantonese and in Hokkien, a form of Min.

Most modern written Chinese is in the form of written vernacular Chinese, based on spoken Standard Chinese, regardless of dialectical background. Written vernacular Chinese largely replaced Literary Chinese in the early 20th century as the country&#x27;s standard written language. However, vocabularies from different Chinese-speaking areas have diverged, and the divergence can be observed in written Chinese.

Due to the divergence of variants, some unique morphemes are not found in Standard Chinese. Characters rarely used in Standard Chinese have also been created or inherited from archaic literary standards to represent these unique morphemes. For example, characters like and are actively used in Cantonese and Hakka, while being archaic or unused in standard written Chinese. The most prominent example of a non-Standard Chinese orthography is Written Cantonese, which is used in tabloids and on the internet among Cantonese speakers in Hong Kong and elsewhere.

Chinese had no uniform system of phonetic transcription until the mid-20th century, although enunciation patterns were recorded in early rhyme dictionaries and dictionaries. Early Indian translators, working in Sanskrit and Pali, were the first to attempt to describe the sounds and enunciation patterns of Chinese in a foreign language. After the 15th century, the efforts of Jesuits and Western court missionaries resulted in some Latin character transcription/writing systems, based on various variants of Chinese languages. Some of these Latin character-based systems are still being used to write various Chinese variants in the modern era.

In Hunan, women in certain areas write their local Chinese language variant in Nüshu, a syllabary derived from Chinese characters. The Dungan language, considered by many a dialect of Mandarin, is nowadays written in Cyrillic and was previously written in the Arabic script. The Dungan people are primarily Muslim and live mainly in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Russia; many Hui people, living mainly in China, also speak the language.

=== Chinese characters ===


Each Chinese character represents a monosyllabic Chinese word or morpheme. In 100 CE, the famed Han dynasty scholar Xu Shen classified characters into six categories: pictographs, simple ideographs, compound ideographs, phonetic loans, phonetic compounds, and derivative characters. Only 4% were categorized as pictographs, including many of the simplest characters, such as , , , and . Between 80% and 90% were classified as phonetic compounds such as , combining a phonetic component with a semantic component of the radical , a reduced form of . Almost all characters created since have been made using this format. The 18th-century &quot;Kangxi Dictionary&quot; classified characters under a now-common set of 214 radicals.

Modern characters are styled after the regular script. Various other written styles are also used in Chinese calligraphy, including seal script, cursive script and clerical script. Calligraphy artists can write in Traditional and Simplified characters, but they tend to use Traditional characters for traditional art.

There are currently two systems for Chinese characters. Traditional characters, used in Hong Kong, Taiwan, Macau, and many overseas Chinese-speaking communities, largely take their form from received character forms dating back to the late Han dynasty and standardized during the Ming. Simplified characters, introduced by the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) in 1954 to promote mass literacy, simplifies most complex traditional glyphs to fewer strokes, especially by adopting common cursive shorthand variants and merging characters with similar pronunciations to the one with the least strokes, among other methods. Singapore, which has a large Chinese community, was the second nation to officially adopt simplified characters—first by creating its own simplified characters, then by adopting entirely the PRC simplified characters. It has also become the de facto standard for younger ethnic Chinese in Malaysia.

The Internet provides practice reading each of these systems, and most Chinese readers are capable of, if not necessarily comfortable with, reading the alternative system through experience and guesswork.

A well-educated Chinese reader today recognizes approximately 4,000 to 6,000 characters; approximately 3,000 characters are required to read a mainland newspaper. The PRC defines literacy amongst workers as a knowledge of 2,000 characters, though this would be only functional literacy. School children typically learn around 2,000 characters whereas scholars may memorize up to 10,000. A large unabridged dictionary like the &quot;Kangxi&quot; dictionary, contains over 40,000 characters, including obscure, variant, rare, and archaic characters; fewer than a quarter of these characters are now commonly used.

=== Romanization ===

Romanization is the process of transcribing a language into the Latin script. There are many systems of romanization for the Chinese varieties, due to the lack of a native phonetic transcription until modern times. Chinese is first known to have been written in Latin characters by Western Christian missionaries in the 16th century.

Today the most common romanization for Standard Chinese is Hanyu Pinyin, introduced in 1956 by the PRC, and later adopted by Singapore and Taiwan. Pinyin is almost universally employed now for teaching standard spoken Chinese in schools and universities across the Americas, Australia, and Europe. Chinese parents also use Pinyin to teach their children the sounds and tones of new words. In school books that teach Chinese, the pinyin romanization is often shown below a picture of the thing the word represents, with the Chinese character alongside.

The second-most common romanization system, the Wade–Giles, was invented by Thomas Wade in 1859 and modified by Herbert Giles in 1892. As this system approximates the phonology of Mandarin Chinese into English consonants and vowels–it is largely an anglicization, it may be particularly helpful for beginner Chinese speakers of an English-speaking background. Wade–Giles was found in academic use in the United States, particularly before the 1980s, and was widely used in Taiwan until 2009.

When used within European texts, the tone transcriptions in both pinyin and Wade–Giles are often left out for simplicity; Wade–Giles&#x27;s extensive use of apostrophes is also usually omitted. Thus, most Western readers will be much more familiar with &quot;Beijing&quot; than they will be with (pinyin), and with than (Wade–Giles). This simplification presents syllables as homophones which are not, and therefore exaggerates the number of homophones almost by a factor of four.

For comparison:
Other systems include Gwoyeu Romatzyh, the French EFEO, the Yale system (invented for use by US troops during World War II), as well as distinct systems for the phonetic requirements of Cantonese, Min Nan, Hakka, and other varieties.

=== Other phonetic transcriptions ===
Chinese varieties have been phonetically transcribed into many other writing systems over the centuries. The &#x27;Phags-pa script, for example, has been very helpful in reconstructing the pronunciations of premodern forms of Chinese. Bopomofo (or &quot;zhuyin&quot;) is a semi-syllabary that is still widely used in Taiwan to aid standard pronunciation. There are also at least two systems of cyrillization for Chinese. The most widespread is the Palladius system.

== As a foreign language ==

With the growing importance and influence of China&#x27;s economy globally, Standard Chinese instruction has been gaining popularity in schools throughout East Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Western world.

Besides Mandarin, Cantonese is the only other Chinese language that is widely taught as a foreign language, largely due to the economic and cultural influence of Hong Kong and its widespread usage among significant Overseas Chinese communities.

In 1991, there were 2,000 foreign learners taking China&#x27;s official Chinese Proficiency Test, called Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi (HSK), comparable to the English Cambridge Certificate, but by 2005 the number of candidates had risen sharply to 117,660 and in 2010 to 750,000.

== See also ==
* &quot;Chengyu&quot;
* Chinese computational linguistics
* Chinese exclamative particles
* Chinese honorifics
* Chinese language law
* Chinese numerals
* Chinese punctuation
* Chinese word-segmented writing
* Classical Chinese grammar
* Han unification
* Languages of China
* North American Conference on Chinese Linguistics
* Protection of the varieties of Chinese

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* On the history of the standardization of Mandarin as the Chinese primary national dialect.
* 
* 

== External links ==


* Classical Chinese texts – Chinese Text Project
* Marjorie Chan&#x27;s ChinaLinks at the Ohio State University with hundreds of links to Chinese related web pages. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="0" end="7" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="29" end="37" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="69" end="80" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q476256" start="94" end="121" title="List of ethnic groups in China" label="many minority ethnic groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="125" end="130" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="173" end="189" title="Chinese diaspora" label="Chinese diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="267" end="285" title="variety of Chinese" label="variety of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="295" end="309" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33857" start="338" end="352" title="Sinitic languages" label="Sinitic branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="360" end="381" title="Sino-Tibetan language" label="Sino-Tibetan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="470" end="477" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="524" end="546" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="613" end="619" title="Language family" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="813" end="827" title="Middle Chinese" label="Middle Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="864" end="872" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56504" start="927" end="930" title="Min Chinese" label="Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="949" end="961" title="Southern Min" label="Southern Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290" start="964" end="966" title="Wu Chinese" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36718" start="985" end="997" title="Shanghainese" label="Shanghainese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="1004" end="1007" title="Yue Chinese" label="Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="1026" end="1035" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012696" start="1348" end="1357" title="New Xiang" label="New Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609239" start="1363" end="1384" title="Southwestern Mandarin" label="Southwestern Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939756" start="1386" end="1405" title="Xuanzhou Wu Chinese" label="Xuanzhou Wu Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128953" start="1411" end="1433" title="Lower Yangtze Mandarin" label="Lower Yangtze Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56479" start="1435" end="1438" title="Jin Chinese" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048775" start="1444" end="1467" title="Central Plains Mandarin" label="Central Plains Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="1502" end="1507" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q33475" start="1513" end="1516" title="Gan Chinese" label="Gan"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="1547" end="1552" title="Tone (linguistics)" label="tonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q209544" start="1594" end="1602" title="Analytic language" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="1627" end="1642" title="written Chinese" label="written Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476695" start="1659" end="1683" title="oracle bone inscriptions" label="oracle bone inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="1703" end="1716" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q35137" start="1746" end="1757" title="Old Chinese" label="Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="1825" end="1853" title="Northern and Southern period" label="Northern and Southern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q754984" start="1891" end="1903" title="sound change" label="sound change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271885" start="2005" end="2011" title="Qieyun" label="Qieyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191807" start="2021" end="2037" title="rhyme dictionary" label="rhyme dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="2149" end="2163" title="Qing dynasties" label="Qing dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q778873" start="2181" end="2195" title="koiné language" label="koiné language"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948482" start="2211" end="2218" title="Mandarin (late imperial lingua franca)" label="Guanhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681098" start="2239" end="2254" title="Nanjing dialect" label="Nanjing dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="2269" end="2285" title="Standard Chinese" label="Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="2322" end="2353" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="2362" end="2379" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980106" start="2406" end="2437" title="Languages of Singapore" label="official languages of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2511187" start="2458" end="2498" title="official languages of the United Nations" label="official languages of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147606" start="2533" end="2548" title="Beijing dialect" label="Beijing dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q138659" start="2650" end="2660" title="logography" label="logography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="2664" end="2682" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="2797" end="2818" title="simplified characters" label="simplified characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="2944" end="2966" title="Traditional characters" label="Traditional characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="3032" end="3052" title="Overseas Chinese" label="communities overseas"/>
<link wikidata="Q45961" start="3135" end="3163" title="Sino-Tibetan language family" label="Sino-Tibetan language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9228" start="3179" end="3186" title="Burmese language" label="Burmese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641150" start="3188" end="3195" title="Tibetic languages" label="Tibetan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="3235" end="3244" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569300" start="3253" end="3275" title="Southeast Asian Massif" label="Southeast Asian Massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="3461" end="3474" title="Indo-European" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q33199" start="3478" end="3491" title="Austroasiatic" label="Austroasiatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="3570" end="3580" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q34064" start="3933" end="3956" title="Tibeto-Burman languages" label="Tibeto-Burman languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="4102" end="4115" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q283127" start="4409" end="4420" title="oracle bone" label="oracle bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325593" start="4444" end="4454" title="Late Shang" label="Late Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q917520" start="4490" end="4522" title="Chinese bronze inscriptions" label="inscriptions on bronze artifacts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069609" start="4537" end="4549" title="Western Zhou" label="Western Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q465108" start="4583" end="4600" title="Classic of Poetry" label="Classic of Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q875313" start="4633" end="4650" title="Book of Documents" label="Book of Documents"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="4667" end="4674" title="I Ching" label="I Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083651" start="4725" end="4749" title="phonology of Old Chinese" label="phonology of Old Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q957073" start="5103" end="5120" title="consonant cluster" label="consonant cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="5309" end="5313" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q728001" start="5354" end="5372" title="derivational affix" label="derivational affix"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="5425" end="5435" title="inflection" label="inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="5498" end="5518" title="grammatical particle" label="grammatical particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q49696" start="5566" end="5597" title="Northern and Southern dynasties" label="Northern and Southern dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="5606" end="5609" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="5611" end="5615" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="5621" end="5625" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271885" start="5721" end="5727" title="Qieyun" label="Qieyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346092" start="5810" end="5821" title="rhyme table" label="rhyme table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="6116" end="6136" title="varieties of Chinese" label="varieties of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11565510" start="6138" end="6160" title="Sino-Xenic vocabularies" label="borrowed Chinese words"/>
<link wikidata="Q641404" start="6420" end="6429" title="diasystem" label="diasystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q59203" start="6639" end="6648" title="diglossia" label="diglossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37041" start="6835" end="6864" title="Classical Chinese" label="Classical or Literary Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q185047" start="6945" end="6969" title="Spring and Autumn period" label="Spring and Autumn period"/>
<link wikidata="Q783605" start="7089" end="7115" title="written vernacular Chinese" label="written vernacular Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="7125" end="7144" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="7221" end="7234" title="Northern Song" label="Northern Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="7279" end="7282" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="7294" end="7298" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q837169" start="7356" end="7368" title="Old Mandarin" label="Old Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q147304" start="7409" end="7426" title="North China Plain" label="North China Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670736" start="7462" end="7478" title="Zhongyuan Yinyun" label="Zhongyuan Yinyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763598" start="7553" end="7558" title="sanqu" label="sanqu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816990" start="7633" end="7645" title="Menggu Ziyun" label="Menggu Ziyun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="7890" end="7894" title="Ming" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="7899" end="7903" title="Qing" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10948482" start="7967" end="8010" title="Mandarin (late imperial lingua franca)" label="common language based on Mandarin varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q778873" start="8068" end="8073" title="koiné" label="koiné"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="8106" end="8113" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="8316" end="8342" title="Standard Chinese" label="standard national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079254" start="8492" end="8532" title="National Languages Committee" label="National Language Unification Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="8784" end="8793" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="8798" end="8803" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="9242" end="9253" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q403827" start="9309" end="9334" title="Chinese domination of Vietnam" label="period of Chinese control"/>
<link wikidata="Q706841" start="9386" end="9410" title="Four Commanderies of Han" label="Four Commanderies of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="9515" end="9531" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Chinese Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11565510" start="10234" end="10259" title="Sino-Xenic pronunciations" label="Sino-Xenic pronunciations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9176" start="10341" end="10347" title="Korean language" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="10349" end="10357" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9199" start="10362" end="10372" title="Vietnamese language" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q521164" start="10554" end="10560" title="moraic" label="moraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="10605" end="10618" title="vowel harmony" label="vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="10780" end="10785" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="10790" end="10803" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222379" start="11538" end="11557" title="Sino-Japanese words" label="Sino-Japanese words"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="11801" end="11819" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q82772" start="12149" end="12154" title="kanji" label="kanji"/>
<link wikidata="Q485619" start="12290" end="12295" title="hanja" label="hanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q622712" start="12460" end="12479" title="Vietnamese alphabet" label="Vietnamese alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378459" start="12482" end="12513" title="List of English words of Chinese origin" label="English words of Chinese origin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="12543" end="12550" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q339836" start="12559" end="12566" title="dim sum" label="dim sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122903" start="12600" end="12607" title="kumquat" label="kumquat"/>
<link wikidata="Q379803" start="12663" end="12675" title="Jerry Norman (sinologist)" label="Jerry Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="12786" end="12803" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q147304" start="13015" end="13032" title="North China Plain" label="North China Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208940" start="13288" end="13298" title="Taishanese" label="Taishanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q164904" start="13350" end="13368" title="Taishan, Guangdong" label="Taishan, Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q571652" start="13491" end="13497" title="Wuzhou" label="Wuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="13550" end="13559" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q201463" start="13730" end="13741" title="Pearl River" label="Pearl River"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="13861" end="13867" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016252" start="14096" end="14110" title="Middle Chinese" label="Middle Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="14130" end="14138" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="14150" end="14166" title="Standard Chinese" label="Standard Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147606" start="14172" end="14187" title="Beijing dialect" label="Beijing dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278732" start="14189" end="14199" title="Sichuanese Mandarin" label="Sichuanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33050" start="14214" end="14229" title="Dungan language" label="Dungan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="14240" end="14252" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34290" start="14255" end="14257" title="Wu Chinese" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q36718" start="14269" end="14281" title="Shanghainese" label="Shanghainese"/>
<link wikidata="Q831744" start="14283" end="14293" title="Suzhounese" label="Suzhounese"/>
<link wikidata="Q710218" start="14299" end="14310" title="Wenzhounese" label="Wenzhounese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33475" start="14313" end="14316" title="Gan Chinese" label="Gan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220" start="14319" end="14324" title="Xiang Chinese" label="Xiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q56504" start="14327" end="14330" title="Min Chinese" label="Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q35571" start="14342" end="14352" title="Fuzhounese" label="Fuzhounese"/>
<link wikidata="Q934541" start="14354" end="14363" title="Hainanese" label="Hainanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="14365" end="14372" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="14377" end="14384" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="14387" end="14392" title="Hakka Chinese" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="14395" end="14398" title="Yue Chinese" label="Yue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208940" start="14424" end="14434" title="Taishanese" label="Taishanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11097081" start="14458" end="14465" title="Li Rong (linguist)" label="Li Rong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262345" start="14494" end="14517" title="Language Atlas of China" label="Language Atlas of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q56479" start="14570" end="14573" title="Jin Chinese" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56546" start="14610" end="14617" title="Huizhou Chinese" label="Huizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735715" start="14648" end="14655" title="Pinghua" label="Pinghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578935" start="14736" end="14751" title="Danzhou dialect" label="Danzhou dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="14755" end="14761" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252191" start="14763" end="14773" title="Waxianghua" label="Waxianghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="14792" end="14797" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920769" start="14803" end="14817" title="Shaozhou Tuhua" label="Shaozhou Tuhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="14837" end="14846" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="14899" end="14916" title="standard language" label="standard language"/>
<link wikidata="Q59203" start="15355" end="15364" title="Diglossia" label="Diglossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36718" start="15468" end="15480" title="Shanghainese" label="Shanghainese"/>
<link wikidata="Q707133" start="15621" end="15637" title="Taiwanese people" label="Taiwanese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q36778" start="15649" end="15666" title="Taiwanese Hokkien" label="Taiwanese Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q33375" start="15683" end="15688" title="Hakka language" label="Hakka"/>
<link wikidata="Q49228" start="15696" end="15717" title="Austronesian language" label="Austronesian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390617" start="15809" end="15828" title="languages of Taiwan" label="languages of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="15895" end="15904" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="15951" end="15960" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="15965" end="15970" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="17341" end="17345" title="lect" label="lect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="17359" end="17369" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q770220" start="17383" end="17391" title="Regional language" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="17409" end="17416" title="language variety" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q38311" start="17542" end="17552" title="Morphology (linguistics)" label="morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="17607" end="17621" title="phonologically" label="phonologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="17714" end="17721" title="syllable nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36244" start="17733" end="17738" title="vowel" label="vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q932126" start="17755" end="17766" title="monophthong" label="monophthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q102532" start="17768" end="17777" title="diphthong" label="diphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q912128" start="17789" end="17799" title="triphthong" label="triphthong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="17838" end="17843" title="syllable onset" label="onset"/>
<link wikidata="Q38035" start="17854" end="17863" title="consonant" label="consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="17880" end="17885" title="semivowel" label="glide"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="17950" end="17954" title="syllable coda" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q833734" start="17992" end="17996" title="tone (linguistics)" label="tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441804" start="19385" end="19397" title="pitch accent" label="pitch accent"/>
<link wikidata="Q51597" start="19753" end="19767" title="stop consonant" label="stop consonant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147018" start="19796" end="19808" title="checked tone" label="checked tone"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="20273" end="20281" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q119039690" start="20475" end="20489" title="Bound and free morphemes" label="bound and free"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358208" start="20828" end="20844" title="phonetic erosion" label="phonetic erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="21236" end="21245" title="compound word" label="compounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q221079" start="21506" end="21515" title="homophone" label="homophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q557556" start="21794" end="21807" title="Yuen Ren Chao" label="Yuen Ren Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059120" start="21819" end="21852" title="Lion-Eating Poet in the Stone Den" label="Lion-Eating Poet in the Stone Den"/>
<link wikidata="Q209544" start="23186" end="23203" title="analytic language" label="analytic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="23221" end="23227" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="23277" end="23300" title="inflectional morphology" label="inflectional morphology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207857" start="23425" end="23447" title="grammatical inflection" label="grammatical inflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="23465" end="23471" title="tenses" label="tenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q211101" start="23476" end="23482" title="grammatical voice" label="voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="23487" end="23505" title="grammatical number" label="grammatical number"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="23522" end="23530" title="Article (grammar)" label="articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q184943" start="23555" end="23575" title="grammatical particle" label="grammatical particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208084" start="23589" end="23595" title="grammatical aspect" label="aspect"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="23600" end="23604" title="grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="23687" end="23717" title="subject–verb–object word order" label="subject–verb–object word order"/>
<link wikidata="Q933845" start="23789" end="23802" title="topic–comment" label="topic–comment"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="23875" end="23886" title="classifier (linguistics)" label="classifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916780" start="23891" end="23903" title="measure word" label="measure word"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062216" start="24083" end="24107" title="serial verb construction" label="serial verb construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q661936" start="24109" end="24125" title="pro-drop language" label="pronoun dropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982067" start="24143" end="24159" title="null subject language" label="subject dropping"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442751" start="24935" end="24950" title="Hanyu Da Zidian" label="Hanyu Da Zidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067497" start="25081" end="25095" title="Zhonghua Zihai" label="Zhonghua Zihai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931247" start="25255" end="25264" title="CC-CEDICT" label="CC-CEDICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138917" start="25624" end="25639" title="Hanyu Da Cidian" label="Hanyu Da Cidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q645819" start="25755" end="25760" title="Cihai" label="Cihai"/>
<link wikidata="Q14480933" start="26043" end="26063" title="Xiandai Hanyu Cidian" label="Xiandai Hanyu Cidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q103808" start="26313" end="26321" title="loanword" label="loanword"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="26688" end="26697" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="27021" end="27029" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="27033" end="27037" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q42070" start="27129" end="27133" title="Gobi" label="Gobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q37845" start="27181" end="27187" title="Altaic" label="Altaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="27408" end="27414" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128781" start="27454" end="27478" title="phono-semantic matching" label="a combination of the two"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400055" start="27628" end="27663" title="international scientific vocabulary" label="international scientific vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128781" start="28245" end="28268" title="phono-semantic matching" label="phono-semantic matching"/>
<link wikidata="Q12379" start="28314" end="28319" title="Mario" label="Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q214314" start="28393" end="28400" title="Pentium" label="Pentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q244457" start="28421" end="28427" title="Subway (restaurant)" label="Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q147276" start="28458" end="28469" title="proper noun" label="proper noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143951" start="29635" end="29645" title="soft power" label="soft power"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="31247" end="31258" title="orthography" label="orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="31270" end="31288" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q43249" start="31706" end="31714" title="morpheme" label="morpheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q783605" start="31922" end="31948" title="written vernacular Chinese" label="written vernacular Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472605" start="32731" end="32748" title="Written Cantonese" label="Written Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191807" start="32987" end="33005" title="rhyme dictionaries" label="rhyme dictionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="33061" end="33069" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="33074" end="33078" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="33500" end="33505" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56436" start="33576" end="33581" title="Nüshu" label="Nüshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182133" start="33585" end="33594" title="syllabary" label="syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33050" start="33632" end="33647" title="Dungan language" label="Dungan language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="33714" end="33722" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="33757" end="33770" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="33776" end="33789" title="Dungan people" label="Dungan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="33871" end="33881" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q559731" start="34078" end="34085" title="Xu Shen" label="Xu Shen"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="34129" end="34139" title="pictograph" label="pictograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q138619" start="34149" end="34158" title="ideograph" label="ideograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q849778" start="34481" end="34488" title="Radical (Chinese character)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q850590" start="34604" end="34621" title="Kangxi Dictionary" label="Kangxi Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196029" start="34730" end="34744" title="regular script" label="regular script"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498317" start="34792" end="34811" title="Chinese calligraphy" label="Chinese calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208842" start="34823" end="34834" title="seal script" label="seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q607543" start="34836" end="34850" title="cursive script (East Asia)" label="cursive script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073960" start="34855" end="34870" title="clerical script" label="clerical script"/>
<link wikidata="Q178528" start="35066" end="35088" title="Traditional characters" label="Traditional characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q185614" start="35296" end="35317" title="Simplified characters" label="Simplified characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q36975" start="35445" end="35450" title="glyph" label="glyph"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="35508" end="35517" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q391025" start="35755" end="35793" title="Singapore Chinese characters" label="creating its own simplified characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q913489" start="36283" end="36301" title="Newspapers of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="mainland newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q976327" start="36775" end="36787" title="Romanization" label="Romanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="36839" end="36851" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q908467" start="37065" end="37087" title="Christianity in China" label="Christian missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="37169" end="37181" title="Hanyu Pinyin" label="Hanyu Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208442" start="37711" end="37721" title="Wade–Giles" label="Wade–Giles"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="37912" end="37925" title="anglicization" label="anglicization"/>
<link wikidata="Q24438" start="38676" end="38691" title="Gwoyeu Romatzyh" label="Gwoyeu Romatzyh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274518" start="38704" end="38708" title="EFEO Chinese transcription" label="EFEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983810" start="38714" end="38725" title="Yale romanization of Mandarin" label="Yale system"/>
<link wikidata="Q822836" start="39036" end="39057" title="&amp;#x27;Phags-pa script" label="&amp;#x27;Phags-pa script"/>
<link wikidata="Q198269" start="39162" end="39170" title="Bopomofo" label="Bopomofo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3781304" start="39200" end="39214" title="semi-syllabary" label="semi-syllabary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654890" start="39321" end="39334" title="cyrillization" label="cyrillization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234239" start="39375" end="39391" title="Palladius system" label="Palladius system"/>
<link wikidata="Q535477" start="39980" end="40001" title="Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi" label="Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q259641" start="40035" end="40056" title="University of Cambridge ESOL examination" label="Cambridge Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28060424" start="40172" end="40179" title="Chengyu" label="Chengyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841819" start="40188" end="40221" title="Chinese computational linguistics" label="Chinese computational linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100768" start="40224" end="40253" title="Chinese exclamative particles" label="Chinese exclamative particles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100800" start="40256" end="40274" title="Chinese honorifics" label="Chinese honorifics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872016" start="40277" end="40297" title="Chinese language law" label="Chinese language law"/>
<link wikidata="Q683566" start="40300" end="40316" title="Chinese numerals" label="Chinese numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092208" start="40319" end="40338" title="Chinese punctuation" label="Chinese punctuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q120798919" start="40341" end="40371" title="Chinese word-segmented writing" label="Chinese word-segmented writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128264" start="40374" end="40399" title="Classical Chinese grammar" label="Classical Chinese grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q14629298" start="40402" end="40417" title="Han unification" label="Han unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q835866" start="40420" end="40438" title="Languages of China" label="Languages of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053755" start="40441" end="40489" title="North American Conference on Chinese Linguistics" label="North American Conference on Chinese Linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085007" start="40492" end="40530" title="Protection of the varieties of Chinese" label="Protection of the varieties of Chinese"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5759" wikidata="Q193756" url="?curid=5759" title="Complex analysis">
<text>Complex analysis, traditionally known as the theory of functions of a complex variable, is the branch of mathematical analysis that investigates functions of complex numbers. It is helpful in many branches of mathematics, including algebraic geometry, number theory, analytic combinatorics, and applied mathematics, as well as in physics, including the branches of hydrodynamics, thermodynamics, quantum mechanics, and twistor theory. By extension, use of complex analysis also has applications in engineering fields such as nuclear, aerospace, mechanical and electrical engineering.

As a differentiable function of a complex variable is equal to the sum function given by its Taylor series (that is, it is analytic), complex analysis is particularly concerned with analytic functions of a complex variable, that is, &quot;holomorphic functions&quot;. 
The concept can be extended to functions of several complex variables.

== History ==

Complex analysis is one of the classical branches in mathematics, with roots in the 18th century and just prior. Important mathematicians associated with complex numbers include Euler, Gauss, Riemann, Cauchy, Gösta Mittag-Leffler, Weierstrass, and many more in the 20th century. Complex analysis, in particular the theory of conformal mappings, has many physical applications and is also used throughout analytic number theory. In modern times, it has become very popular through a new boost from complex dynamics and the pictures of fractals produced by iterating holomorphic functions. Another important application of complex analysis is in string theory which examines conformal invariants in quantum field theory.

== Complex functions ==

A complex function is a function from complex numbers to complex numbers. In other words, it is a function that has a (not necessarily proper) subset of the complex numbers as a domain and the complex numbers as a codomain. Complex functions are generally assumed to have a domain that contains a nonempty open subset of the complex plane.

For any complex function, the values formula_1 from the domain and their images formula_2 in the range may be separated into real and imaginary parts:

: formula_3

where formula_4 are all real-valued.

In other words, a complex function formula_5 may be decomposed into

: formula_6 and formula_7

i.e., into two real-valued functions (formula_8, formula_9) of two real variables (formula_10, formula_11).

Similarly, any complex-valued function on an arbitrary set (is isomorphic to, and therefore, in that sense, it) can be considered as an ordered pair of two real-valued functions: or, alternatively, as a vector-valued function from into formula_12

Some properties of complex-valued functions (such as continuity) are nothing more than the corresponding properties of vector valued functions of two real variables. Other concepts of complex analysis, such as differentiability, are direct generalizations of the similar concepts for real functions, but may have very different properties. In particular, every differentiable complex function is analytic (see next section), and two differentiable functions that are equal in a neighborhood of a point are equal on the intersection of their domain (if the domains are connected). The latter property is the basis of the principle of analytic continuation which allows extending every real analytic function in a unique way for getting a complex analytic function whose domain is the whole complex plane with a finite number of curve arcs removed. Many basic and special complex functions are defined in this way, including the complex exponential function, complex logarithm functions, and trigonometric functions.

== Holomorphic functions ==

Complex functions that are differentiable at every point of an open subset formula_13 of the complex plane are said to be &quot;holomorphic on&quot; In the context of complex analysis, the derivative of formula_14 at formula_15 is defined to be

: formula_16

Superficially, this definition is formally analogous to that of the derivative of a real function. However, complex derivatives and differentiable functions behave in significantly different ways compared to their real counterparts. In particular, for this limit to exist, the value of the difference quotient must approach the same complex number, regardless of the manner in which we approach formula_15 in the complex plane. Consequently, complex differentiability has much stronger implications than real differentiability. For instance, holomorphic functions are infinitely differentiable, whereas the existence of the &quot;n&quot;th derivative need not imply the existence of the (&quot;n&quot; + 1)th derivative for real functions. Furthermore, all holomorphic functions satisfy the stronger condition of analyticity, meaning that the function is, at every point in its domain, locally given by a convergent power series. In essence, this means that functions holomorphic on formula_13 can be approximated arbitrarily well by polynomials in some neighborhood of every point in formula_13. This stands in sharp contrast to differentiable real functions; there are infinitely differentiable real functions that are &quot;nowhere&quot; analytic; see .

Most elementary functions, including the exponential function, the trigonometric functions, and all polynomial functions, extended appropriately to complex arguments as functions are holomorphic over the entire complex plane, making them &quot;entire&quot; &quot;functions&quot;, while rational functions formula_20, where &quot;p&quot; and &quot;q&quot; are polynomials, are holomorphic on domains that exclude points where &quot;q&quot; is zero. Such functions that are holomorphic everywhere except a set of isolated points are known as &quot;meromorphic functions&quot;. On the other hand, the functions and formula_21 are not holomorphic anywhere on the complex plane, as can be shown by their failure to satisfy the Cauchy–Riemann conditions (see below).

An important property of holomorphic functions is the relationship between the partial derivatives of their real and imaginary components, known as the Cauchy–Riemann conditions. If formula_5, defined by where is holomorphic on a region then for all formula_23,
:formula_24
In terms of the real and imaginary parts of the function, &quot;u&quot; and &quot;v&quot;, this is equivalent to the pair of equations formula_25 and formula_26, where the subscripts indicate partial differentiation. However, the Cauchy–Riemann conditions do not characterize holomorphic functions, without additional continuity conditions (see Looman–Menchoff theorem).

Holomorphic functions exhibit some remarkable features. For instance, Picard&#x27;s theorem asserts that the range of an entire function can take only three possible forms: or formula_27 for some In other words, if two distinct complex numbers formula_1 and formula_29 are not in the range of an entire function then formula_14 is a constant function. Moreover, a holomorphic function on a connected open set is determined by its restriction to any nonempty open subset.

==Conformal map==
== Major results ==

One of the central tools in complex analysis is the line integral. The line integral around a closed path of a function that is holomorphic everywhere inside the area bounded by the closed path is always zero, as is stated by the Cauchy integral theorem. The values of such a holomorphic function inside a disk can be computed by a path integral on the disk&#x27;s boundary (as shown in Cauchy&#x27;s integral formula). Path integrals in the complex plane are often used to determine complicated real integrals, and here the theory of residues among others is applicable (see methods of contour integration). A &quot;pole&quot; (or isolated singularity) of a function is a point where the function&#x27;s value becomes unbounded, or &quot;blows up&quot;. If a function has such a pole, then one can compute the function&#x27;s residue there, which can be used to compute path integrals involving the function; this is the content of the powerful residue theorem. The remarkable behavior of holomorphic functions near essential singularities is described by Picard&#x27;s theorem. Functions that have only poles but no essential singularities are called meromorphic. Laurent series are the complex-valued equivalent to Taylor series, but can be used to study the behavior of functions near singularities through infinite sums of more well understood functions, such as polynomials.

A bounded function that is holomorphic in the entire complex plane must be constant; this is Liouville&#x27;s theorem. It can be used to provide a natural and short proof for the fundamental theorem of algebra which states that the field of complex numbers is algebraically closed.

If a function is holomorphic throughout a connected domain then its values are fully determined by its values on any smaller subdomain. The function on the larger domain is said to be analytically continued from its values on the smaller domain. This allows the extension of the definition of functions, such as the Riemann zeta function, which are initially defined in terms of infinite sums that converge only on limited domains to almost the entire complex plane. Sometimes, as in the case of the natural logarithm, it is impossible to analytically continue a holomorphic function to a non-simply connected domain in the complex plane but it is possible to extend it to a holomorphic function on a closely related surface known as a Riemann surface.

All this refers to complex analysis in one variable. There is also a very rich theory of complex analysis in more than one complex dimension in which the analytic properties such as power series expansion carry over whereas most of the geometric properties of holomorphic functions in one complex dimension (such as conformality) do not carry over. The Riemann mapping theorem about the conformal relationship of certain domains in the complex plane, which may be the most important result in the one-dimensional theory, fails dramatically in higher dimensions.

A major application of certain complex spaces is in quantum mechanics as wave functions.

== See also ==
* Complex geometry
* Hypercomplex analysis
* Vector calculus
* List of complex analysis topics
* Monodromy theorem
* Real analysis
* Riemann–Roch theorem
* Runge&#x27;s theorem

== References ==
== Sources ==
* Ablowitz, M. J. &amp; A. S. Fokas, &quot;Complex Variables: Introduction and Applications&quot; (Cambridge, 2003).
* Ahlfors, L., &quot;Complex Analysis&quot; (McGraw-Hill, 1953).
* Cartan, H., &quot;Théorie élémentaire des fonctions analytiques d&#x27;une ou plusieurs variables complexes.&quot; (Hermann, 1961). English translation, &quot;Elementary Theory of Analytic Functions of One or Several Complex Variables.&quot; (Addison-Wesley, 1963).
* Carathéodory, C., &quot;Funktionentheorie.&quot; (Birkhäuser, 1950). English translation, &quot;Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable&quot; (Chelsea, 1954). [2 volumes.]
* Carrier, G. F., M. Krook, &amp; C. E. Pearson, &quot;Functions of a Complex Variable: Theory and Technique.&quot; (McGraw-Hill, 1966).
* Conway, J. B., &quot;Functions of One Complex Variable.&quot; (Springer, 1973).
* Fisher, S., &quot;Complex Variables.&quot; (Wadsworth &amp; Brooks/Cole, 1990).
* Forsyth, A., &quot;Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable&quot; (Cambridge, 1893).
* Freitag, E. &amp; R. Busam, &quot;Funktionentheorie&quot;. (Springer, 1995). English translation, &quot;Complex Analysis&quot;. (Springer, 2005).
* Goursat, E., &quot;Cours d&#x27;analyse mathématique, tome 2&quot;. (Gauthier-Villars, 1905). English translation, &quot;A course of mathematical analysis, vol. 2, part 1: Functions of a complex variable&quot;. (Ginn, 1916).
* Henrici, P., &quot;Applied and Computational Complex Analysis&quot; (Wiley). [Three volumes: 1974, 1977, 1986.]
* Kreyszig, E., &quot;Advanced Engineering Mathematics.&quot; (Wiley, 1962).
* Lavrentyev, M. &amp; B. Shabat, &quot;Методы теории функций комплексного переменного.&quot; (&quot;Methods of the Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable&quot;). (1951, in Russian).
* Markushevich, A. I., &quot;Theory of Functions of a Complex Variable&quot;, (Prentice-Hall, 1965). [Three volumes.]
* Marsden &amp; Hoffman, &quot;Basic Complex Analysis.&quot; (Freeman, 1973).
* Needham, T., &quot;Visual Complex Analysis.&quot; (Oxford, 1997). http://usf.usfca.edu/vca/
* Remmert, R., &quot;Theory of Complex Functions&quot;. (Springer, 1990).
* Rudin, W., &quot;Real and Complex Analysis.&quot; (McGraw-Hill, 1966).
* Shaw, W. T., &quot;Complex Analysis with Mathematica&quot; (Cambridge, 2006).
* Stein, E. &amp; R. Shakarchi, &quot;Complex Analysis.&quot; (Princeton, 2003).
* Sveshnikov, A. G. &amp; A. N. Tikhonov, &quot;Теория функций комплексной переменной.&quot; (Nauka, 1967). English translation, &quot;The Theory Of Functions Of A Complex Variable&quot; (MIR, 1978).
* Titchmarsh, E. C., &quot;The Theory of Functions.&quot; (Oxford, 1932).
* Wegert, E., &quot;Visual Complex Functions&quot;. (Birkhäuser, 2012).
* Whittaker, E. T. &amp; G. N. Watson, &quot;A Course of Modern Analysis.&quot; (Cambridge, 1902). 3rd ed. (1920)

== External links ==

* Wolfram Research&#x27;s MathWorld Complex Analysis Page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="0" end="16" title="Complex analysis" label="Complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="45" end="86" title="Complex analysis" label="theory of functions of a complex variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="105" end="126" title="mathematical analysis" label="mathematical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="145" end="154" title="Function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="158" end="173" title="complex numbers" label="complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180969" start="232" end="250" title="algebraic geometry" label="algebraic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="252" end="265" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985062" start="267" end="289" title="analytic combinatorics" label="analytic combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="295" end="314" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="330" end="337" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="365" end="378" title="hydrodynamics" label="hydrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11473" start="380" end="394" title="thermodynamics" label="thermodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="396" end="413" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q279082" start="419" end="433" title="twistor theory" label="twistor theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q83504" start="525" end="532" title="nuclear engineering" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798668" start="534" end="543" title="aerospace engineering" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="545" end="555" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="560" end="582" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="590" end="613" title="differentiable function" label="differentiable function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474614" start="652" end="664" title="Function series" label="sum function"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="678" end="691" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751162" start="708" end="716" title="Analyticity of holomorphic functions" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="767" end="784" title="analytic function" label="analytic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="824" end="844" title="holomorphic function" label="holomorphic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052951" start="885" end="923" title="functions of several complex variables" label="functions of several complex variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="1119" end="1124" title="Euler" label="Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="1126" end="1131" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="1133" end="1140" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8814" start="1142" end="1148" title="Cauchy" label="Cauchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q357154" start="1150" end="1170" title="Gösta Mittag-Leffler" label="Gösta Mittag-Leffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57103" start="1172" end="1183" title="Weierstrass" label="Weierstrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="1266" end="1283" title="conformal mapping" label="conformal mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q10843274" start="1345" end="1367" title="analytic number theory" label="analytic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q264224" start="1438" end="1454" title="complex dynamics" label="complex dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="1475" end="1482" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="1506" end="1527" title="holomorphic functions" label="holomorphic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="1585" end="1598" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q54505" start="1638" end="1658" title="quantum field theory" label="quantum field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="1710" end="1718" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="1724" end="1738" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q192439" start="1864" end="1870" title="Domain of a function" label="domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q199006" start="1900" end="1908" title="codomain" label="codomain"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="1992" end="2003" title="open subset" label="open subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q328998" start="2011" end="2024" title="complex plane" label="complex plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2152" end="2156" title="Real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="2161" end="2170" title="Imaginary number" label="imaginary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="2490" end="2493" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q189112" start="2498" end="2508" title="isomorphic" label="isomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="2571" end="2583" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189500" start="2591" end="2611" title="real-valued function" label="real-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375954" start="2638" end="2660" title="vector-valued function" label="vector-valued function"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="2736" end="2746" title="continuous function" label="continuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="2893" end="2910" title="differentiability" label="differentiability"/>
<link wikidata="Q207476" start="3044" end="3075" title="holomorphic function" label="differentiable complex function"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="3079" end="3087" title="analytic function" label="analytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="3161" end="3173" title="neighborhood (mathematics)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="3251" end="3260" title="connected space" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q485287" start="3316" end="3337" title="analytic continuation" label="analytic continuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="3372" end="3389" title="analytic function" label="analytic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="3510" end="3519" title="arc (geometry)" label="curve arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q867707" start="3545" end="3552" title="special functions" label="special"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3610" end="3638" title="exponential function#Complex plane" label="complex exponential function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520206" start="3640" end="3667" title="complex logarithm" label="complex logarithm functions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3673" end="3696" title="trigonometric functions#In the complex plane" label="trigonometric functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q783507" start="3755" end="3769" title="differentiable" label="differentiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="3791" end="3802" title="open set" label="open subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q868473" start="4556" end="4581" title="infinitely differentiable" label="infinitely differentiable"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="4801" end="4812" title="analytic function" label="analyticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="5287" end="5307" title="exponential function" label="exponential function"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="5313" end="5335" title="trigonometric function" label="trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="5346" end="5366" title="polynomial" label="polynomial functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q622741" start="6160" end="6185" title="Cauchy–Riemann conditions" label="Cauchy–Riemann conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11235244" start="6238" end="6244" title="Region (mathematics)" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309760" start="6627" end="6650" title="Looman–Menchoff theorem" label="Looman–Menchoff theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668861" start="6724" end="6745" title="Picard theorem" label="Picard&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q467699" start="7217" end="7230" title="line integral" label="line integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q834025" start="7395" end="7418" title="Cauchy integral theorem" label="Cauchy integral theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q913764" start="7552" end="7582" title="Cauchy&amp;#x27;s integral formula" label="Cauchy&amp;#x27;s integral formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q753375" start="7700" end="7707" title="residue (complex analysis)" label="residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q856103" start="7741" end="7771" title="methods of contour integration" label="methods of contour integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297037" start="7797" end="7817" title="isolated singularity" label="isolated singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q830513" start="8111" end="8126" title="residue theorem" label="residue theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8222" end="8243" title="Picard theorem#Big Picard" label="Picard&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876526" start="8283" end="8306" title="Essential singularity" label="essential singularities"/>
<link wikidata="Q217616" start="8318" end="8329" title="meromorphic" label="meromorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q425432" start="8331" end="8345" title="Laurent series" label="Laurent series"/>
<link wikidata="Q131187" start="8383" end="8396" title="Taylor series" label="Taylor series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267362" start="8549" end="8565" title="bounded function" label="bounded function"/>
<link wikidata="Q576478" start="8640" end="8664" title="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem (complex analysis)" label="Liouville&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q192760" start="8726" end="8756" title="Fundamental Theorem of Algebra" label="fundamental theorem of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="8779" end="8784" title="field (mathematics)" label="field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047547" start="8807" end="8827" title="algebraically closed field" label="algebraically closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491995" start="8872" end="8881" title="Connected space" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q485287" start="9014" end="9036" title="analytic continuation" label="analytically continued"/>
<link wikidata="Q187235" start="9146" end="9167" title="Riemann zeta function" label="Riemann zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q204037" start="9330" end="9347" title="natural logarithm" label="natural logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q753035" start="9566" end="9581" title="Riemann surface" label="Riemann surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052951" start="9673" end="9724" title="Function of several complex variables" label="complex analysis in more than one complex dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q206925" start="9766" end="9778" title="power series" label="power series"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="9900" end="9912" title="conformality" label="conformality"/>
<link wikidata="Q927051" start="9937" end="9960" title="Riemann mapping theorem" label="Riemann mapping theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q190056" start="10178" end="10191" title="Complex Hilbert space" label="complex space"/>
<link wikidata="Q944" start="10199" end="10216" title="quantum mechanics" label="quantum mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362761" start="10220" end="10233" title="wave function" label="wave function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137810" start="10254" end="10270" title="Complex geometry" label="Complex geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5957897" start="10273" end="10294" title="Hypercomplex analysis" label="Hypercomplex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="10297" end="10312" title="Vector calculus" label="Vector calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822445" start="10315" end="10346" title="List of complex analysis topics" label="List of complex analysis topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455046" start="10349" end="10366" title="Monodromy theorem" label="Monodromy theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q854531" start="10369" end="10382" title="Real analysis" label="Real analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q379048" start="10385" end="10405" title="Riemann–Roch theorem" label="Riemann–Roch theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505529" start="10408" end="10428" title="Runge&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Runge&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900153" start="10463" end="10478" title="Mark J. Ablowitz" label="Ablowitz, M. J."/>
<link wikidata="Q754888" start="10485" end="10496" title="Athanassios S. Fokas" label="A. S. Fokas"/>
<link wikidata="Q211642" start="10580" end="10591" title="Lars Ahlfors" label="Ahlfors, L."/>
<link wikidata="Q164405" start="10645" end="10655" title="Henri Cartan" label="Cartan, H."/>
<link wikidata="Q65332" start="10913" end="10929" title="Constantin Carathéodory" label="Carathéodory, C."/>
<link wikidata="Q984527" start="11089" end="11103" title="George F. Carrier" label="Carrier, G. F."/>
<link wikidata="Q6794949" start="11105" end="11113" title="Max Krook" label="M. Krook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219901" start="11226" end="11239" title="John B. Conway" label="Conway, J. B."/>
<link wikidata="Q507040" start="11390" end="11401" title="Andrew Forsyth" label="Forsyth, A."/>
<link wikidata="Q1278986" start="11478" end="11489" title="Eberhard Freitag" label="Freitag, E."/>
<link wikidata="Q274322" start="11626" end="11637" title="Édouard Goursat" label="Goursat, E."/>
<link wikidata="Q122414" start="11853" end="11864" title="Peter Henrici (mathematician)" label="Henrici, P."/>
<link wikidata="Q373081" start="11967" end="11979" title="Erwin Kreyszig" label="Kreyszig, E."/>
<link wikidata="Q707137" start="12044" end="12058" title="Mikhail Lavrentyev" label="Lavrentyev, M."/>
<link wikidata="Q2623089" start="12230" end="12249" title="Aleksei Ivanovich Markushevich" label="Markushevich, A. I."/>
<link wikidata="Q574589" start="12348" end="12355" title="Jerrold E. Marsden" label="Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000497" start="12426" end="12437" title="Tristan Needham" label="Needham, T."/>
<link wikidata="Q73009" start="12520" end="12531" title="Reinhold Remmert" label="Remmert, R."/>
<link wikidata="Q470503" start="12594" end="12603" title="Walter Rudin" label="Rudin, W."/>
<link wikidata="Q1329182" start="12747" end="12756" title="Elias M. Stein" label="Stein, E."/>
<link wikidata="Q4410618" start="12828" end="12845" title="Aleksei Sveshnikov" label="Sveshnikov, A. G."/>
<link wikidata="Q372026" start="12852" end="12866" title="Andrey Nikolayevich Tikhonov" label="A. N. Tikhonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q526013" start="13028" end="13045" title="Edward Charles Titchmarsh" label="Titchmarsh, E. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q909884" start="13174" end="13190" title="Edmund T. Whittaker" label="Whittaker, E. T."/>
<link wikidata="Q924510" start="13197" end="13209" title="George N. Watson" label="G. N. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996825" start="13217" end="13244" title="A Course of Modern Analysis" label="A Course of Modern Analysis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5760" wikidata="Q82972" url="?curid=5760" title="History of China">
<text>The history of China spans several millennia across a wide geographical area. Each region now considered part of the Chinese world has experienced periods of unity, fracture, prosperity, and strife. Chinese civilization first emerged in the Yellow River valley, which along with the Yangtze basin constitutes the geographic core of the Chinese cultural sphere. China maintains a rich diversity of ethnic and linguistic people groups. The traditional lens for viewing Chinese history is the dynastic cycle: imperial dynasties rise and fall, and are ascribed certain achievements. Throughout pervades the narrative that Chinese civilization can be traced as an unbroken thread many thousands of years into the past, making it one of the cradles of civilization. At various times, states representative of a dominant Chinese culture have directly controlled areas stretching as far west as the Tian Shan, the Tarim Basin, and the Himalayas, as far north as the Sayan Mountains, and as far south as the delta of the Red River.

The Neolithic period saw increasingly complex polities begin to emerge along the Yellow and Yangtze rivers. The Erlitou culture in the central plains of China is sometimes identified with the Xia dynasty (3rd millennium BC) of traditional Chinese historiography. The earliest surviving written Chinese dates to roughly 1250 BC, consisting of divinations inscribed on oracle bones. Chinese bronze inscriptions, ritual texts dedicated to ancestors, form another large corpus of early Chinese writing. The earliest strata of received literature in Chinese include poetry, divination, and records of official speeches. China is believed to be one of a very few loci of independent invention of writing, and the earliest surviving records display an already-mature written language. The culture remembered by the earliest extant literature is that of the Zhou dynasty (256 BC), China&#x27;s Axial Age, during which the Mandate of Heaven was introduced, and foundations laid for philosophies such as Confucianism, Taoism, Legalism, and &quot;Wuxing&quot;.

China was first united under a single imperial state by Qin Shi Huang in 221 BC. Orthography, weights, measures, and law were all standardized. Shortly thereafter, China entered its classical era with the Han dynasty (202 BC220 AD), marking a critical period. A term for the Chinese language is still &quot;Han language&quot;, and the dominant Chinese ethnic group is known as Han Chinese. The Chinese empire reached some of its farthest geographical extents during this period. Confucianism was officially sanctioned and its core texts were edited into their received forms. Wealthy landholding families independent of the ancient aristocracy began to wield significant power. Han technology can be considered on par with that of the contemporaneous Roman Empire: mass production of paper aided the proliferation of written documents, and the written language of this period was employed for millennia afterwards. China became known internationally for its sericulture. When the Han imperial order finally collapsed after four centuries, China entered an equally lengthy period of disunity, during which Buddhism began to have a significant impact on Chinese culture, while Calligraphy, art, historiography, and storytelling flourished. Wealthy families in some cases became more powerful than the central government. The Yangtze River valley was incorporated into the dominant cultural sphere.

A period of unity began in 581 with the Sui dynasty, which soon gave way to the long-lived Tang dynasty (608–907), regarded as another Chinese golden age. The Tang dynasty saw flourishing developments in science, technology, poetry, economics, and geographical influence. China&#x27;s only officially recognized empress, Wu Zetian, reigned during the dynasty&#x27;s first century. Buddhism was adopted by Tang emperors. &quot;Tang people&quot; is the other common demonym for the Han ethnic group. After the Tang fractured, the Song dynasty (960–1279) saw the maximal extent of imperial Chinese cosmopolitan development. Mechanical printing was introduced, and many of the earliest surviving witnesses of certain texts are wood-block prints from this era. Song scientific advancement led the world, and the imperial examination system gave ideological structure to the political bureaucracy. Confucianism and Taoism were fully knit together in Neo-Confucianism.

Eventually, the Mongol Empire conquered all of China, establishing the Yuan dynasty in 1271. Contact with Europe began to increase during this time. Achievements under the subsequent Ming dynasty (1368–1644) include global exploration, fine porcelain, and many extant public works projects, such as those restoring the Grand Canal and Great Wall. Three of the four Classic Chinese Novels were written during the Ming. The Qing dynasty that succeeded the Ming was ruled by ethnic Manchu people. The Qianlong emperor ( 1735–1796) commissioned a complete encyclopaedia of imperial libraries, totaling nearly a billion words. Imperial China reached its greatest territorial extent of during the Qing, but China came into increasing conflict with European powers, culminating in the Opium Wars and subsequent unequal treaties.

The 1911 Xinhai Revolution, led by Sun Yat-sen and others, created the Republic of China. From 1927 to 1949, a costly civil war roiled between the Republican government under Chiang Kai-shek and the Communist-aligned Chinese Red Army, interrupted by the industrialized Empire of Japan invading the divided country until its defeat in the Second World War.

After the Communist victory, Mao Zedong proclaimed the establishment of the People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) in 1949, with the ROC retreating to Taiwan. Both governments still claim sole legitimacy of the entire mainland area. The PRC has slowly accumulated the majority of diplomatic recognition, and Taiwan&#x27;s status remains disputed to this day. From 1966 to 1976, the Cultural Revolution in mainland China helped consolidate Mao&#x27;s power towards the end of his life. After his death, the government began economic reforms under Deng Xiaoping, and became the world&#x27;s fastest-growing major economy. China had been the most populous nation in the world for decades since its unification, until it was surpassed by India in 2023.

==Prehistory==

===Paleolithic (1.7 Ma – 12 ka)===

The archaic human species of &quot;Homo erectus&quot; arrived in Eurasia sometime between 1.3 and 1.8 million years ago (Ma) and numerous remains of its subspecies have been found in what is now China. The oldest of these is the southwestern Yuanmou Man (; in Yunnan), dated to 1.7 Ma, which lived in a mixed bushland-forest environment alongside chalicotheres, deer, the elephant &quot;Stegodon&quot;, rhinos, cattle, pigs, and the giant short-faced hyena. The better-known Peking Man (; near Beijing) of 700,000–400,000 BP, was discovered in the Zhoukoudian cave alongside scrapers, choppers, and, dated slightly later, points, burins, and awls. Other &quot;Homo erectus&quot; fossils have been found widely throughout the region, including the northwestern Lantian Man in Shaanxi, as well minor specimens in northeastern Liaoning and southern Guangdong. The dates of most Paleolithic sites were long debated but have been more reliably established based on modern magnetostratigraphy: Majuangou at 1.66–1.55 Ma, Lanpo at 1.6 Ma, Xiaochangliang at 1.36 Ma, Xiantai at 1.36 Ma, Banshan at 1.32 Ma, Feiliang at 1.2 Ma and Donggutuo at 1.1 Ma. Evidence of fire use by &quot;Homo erectus&quot; occurred between 1–1.8 million years BP at the archaeological site of Xihoudu, Shanxi Province.

The circumstances surrounding the evolution of &quot;Homo erectus&quot; to contemporary &quot;H. sapiens&quot; is debated; the three main theories include the dominant &quot;Out of Africa&quot; theory (OOA), the regional continuity model and the admixture variant of the OOA hypothesis. Regardless, the earliest modern humans have been dated to China at 120,000–80,000 BP based on fossilized teeth discovered in Fuyan Cave of Dao County, Hunan. The larger animals which lived alongside these humans include the extinct &quot;Ailuropoda baconi&quot; panda, the &quot;Crocuta ultima&quot; hyena, the &quot;Stegodon&quot;, and the giant tapir. Evidence of Middle Palaeolithic Levallois technology has been found in the lithic assemblage of Guanyindong Cave site in southwest China, dated to approximately 170,000–80,000 years ago.

===Neolithic===


The Neolithic Age in China is considered to have begun about 10,000 years ago. Because the Neolithic is conventionally defined by the presence of agriculture, it follows that the Neolithic began at different times in the various regions of what is now China. Agriculture in China developed gradually, with initial domestication of a few grains and animals gradually expanding with the addition of many others over subsequent millennia. The earliest evidence of cultivated rice, found by the Yangtze River, was carbon-dated to 8,000 years ago. Early evidence for millet agriculture in the Yellow River valley was radiocarbon-dated to about 7000 BC. The Jiahu site is one of the best preserved early agricultural villages (7000 to 5800 BC). At Damaidi in Ningxia, 3,172 cliff carvings dating to 6000–5000 BC have been discovered, &quot;featuring 8,453 individual characters such as the sun, moon, stars, gods and scenes of hunting or grazing&quot;, according to researcher Li Xiangshi. Written symbols, sometimes called proto-writing, were found at the site of Jiahu, which is dated around 7000 BC, Damaidi around 6000 BC, Dadiwan from 5800 BC to 5400 BC, and Banpo dating from the 5th millennium BC. With agriculture came increased population, the ability to store and redistribute crops, and the potential to support specialist craftsmen and administrators, which may have existed at late Neolithic sites like Taosi and the Liangzhu culture in the Yangtze delta. The cultures of the middle and late Neolithic in the central Yellow River valley are known, respectively, as the Yangshao culture (5000 BC to 3000 BC) and the Longshan culture (3000 BC to 2000 BC). Pigs and dogs were the earliest-domesticated animals in the region, and after about 3000 BC domesticated cattle and sheep arrived from Western Asia. Wheat also arrived at this time but remained a minor crop. Fruit such as peaches, cherries and oranges, as well as chickens and various vegetables, were also domesticated in Neolithic China.

===Bronze Age===
Bronze artifacts have been found at the Majiayao culture site (between 3100 and 2700 BC). The Bronze Age is also represented at the Lower Xiajiadian culture (2200–1600 BC) site in northeast China. Sanxingdui located in what is now Sichuan is believed to be the site of a major ancient city, of a previously unknown Bronze Age culture (between 2000 and 1200 BC). The site was first discovered in 1929 and then re-discovered in 1986. Chinese archaeologists have identified the Sanxingdui culture to be part of the state of Shu, linking the artifacts found at the site to its early legendary kings.
Ferrous metallurgy begins to appear in the late 6th century in the Yangtze valley. A bronze hatchet with a blade of meteoric iron excavated near the city of Gaocheng in Shijiazhuang (now Hebei) has been dated to the 14th century BC. An Iron Age culture of the Tibetan Plateau has tentatively been associated with the Zhang Zhung culture described in early Tibetan writings.

==Ancient China==


Chinese historians in later periods were accustomed to the notion of one dynasty succeeding another, but the political situation in early China was much more complicated. Hence, as some scholars of China suggest, the Xia and the Shang can refer to political entities that existed concurrently, just as the early Zhou existed at the same time as the Shang. This bears similarities to how China, both contemporaneously and later, has been divided into states that were not one region, legally or culturally.

The earliest period once considered historical was the legendary era of the sage-emperors Yao, Shun, and Yu. Traditionally, the abdication system was prominent in this period, with Yao yielding his throne to Shun, who abdicated to Yu, who founded the Xia dynasty.

===Xia dynasty (c. 2070 – c. 1600 BC)===

The Xia dynasty () is the earliest of the three dynasties described in much later traditional historiography, which includes the &quot;Bamboo Annals&quot; and Sima Qian&#x27;s &quot;Shiji&quot; (). The Xia is generally considered mythical by Western scholars, but in China it is usually associated with the early Bronze Age site at Erlitou (1900–1500 BC) in Henan that was excavated in 1959. Since no writing was excavated at Erlitou or any other contemporaneous site, there is not enough evidence to prove whether the Xia dynasty ever existed. Some archaeologists claim that the Erlitou site was the capital of the Xia. In any case, the site of Erlitou had a level of political organization that would not be incompatible with the legends of Xia recorded in later texts. More importantly, the Erlitou site has the earliest evidence for an elite who conducted rituals using cast bronze vessels, which would later be adopted by the Shang and Zhou.

=== Shang dynasty (c. 1600 – c. 1046 BC)===


Both archaeological evidence like oracle bones and bronzes, as well as transmitted texts attest the historical existence of the Shang dynasty (). Findings from the earlier Shang period come from excavations at Erligang (modern Zhengzhou). Findings have been found at Yinxu (near modern Anyang, Henan), the site of the final Shang capital during the Late Shang period (). The findings at Anyang include the earliest written record of the Chinese so far discovered: inscriptions of divination records in ancient Chinese writing on the bones or shells of animals—the oracle bones, dating from .

A series of at least twenty-nine kings reigned over the Shang dynasty. Throughout their reigns, according to the &quot;Shiji&quot;, the capital city was moved six times. The final and most important move was to Yin during the reign of Wu Ding . The term Yin dynasty has been synonymous with the Shang dynasty in history, although it has lately been used to refer specifically to the latter half of the Shang dynasty.

Although written records found at Anyang confirm the existence of the Shang dynasty, Western scholars are often hesitant to associate settlements that are contemporaneous with the Anyang settlement with the Shang dynasty. For example, archaeological findings at Sanxingdui suggest a technologically advanced civilization culturally unlike Anyang. The evidence is inconclusive in proving how far the Shang realm extended from Anyang. The leading hypothesis is that Anyang, ruled by the same Shang in the official history, coexisted and traded with numerous other culturally diverse settlements in the area that is now referred to as China proper.

===Zhou dynasty (1046–256 BC)===
The Zhou dynasty (1046 BC to about 256 BC) is the longest-lasting dynasty in Chinese history, though its power declined steadily over the almost eight centuries of its existence. In the late 2nd millennium BC, the Zhou dynasty arose in the Wei River valley of modern western Shaanxi Province, where they were appointed Western Protectors by the Shang. A coalition led by the ruler of the Zhou, King Wu, defeated the Shang at the Battle of Muye. They took over most of the central and lower Yellow River valley and enfeoffed their relatives and allies in semi-independent states across the region. Several of these states eventually became more powerful than the Zhou kings.

The kings of Zhou invoked the concept of the Mandate of Heaven to legitimize their rule, a concept that was influential for almost every succeeding dynasty. Like Shangdi, Heaven (&quot;tian&quot;) ruled over all the other gods, and it decided who would rule China. It was believed that a ruler lost the Mandate of Heaven when natural disasters occurred in great number, and when, more realistically, the sovereign had apparently lost his concern for the people. In response, the royal house would be overthrown, and a new house would rule, having been granted the Mandate of Heaven.

The Zhou established two capitals Zongzhou (near modern Xi&#x27;an) and Chengzhou (Luoyang), with the king&#x27;s court moving between them regularly. The Zhou alliance gradually expanded eastward into Shandong, southeastward into the Huai River valley, and southward into the Yangtze River valley.

====Spring and Autumn period (722–476 BC)====

In 771 BC, King You and his forces were defeated in the Battle of Mount Li by rebel states and Quanrong barbarians. The rebel aristocrats established a new ruler, King Ping, in Luoyang, beginning the second major phase of the Zhou dynasty: the Eastern Zhou period, which is divided into the Spring and Autumn and Warring States periods. The former period is named after the famous &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals&quot;. The sharply reduced political authority of the royal house left a power vacuum at the center of the Zhou culture sphere. The Zhou kings had delegated local political authority to hundreds of settlement states, some of them only as large as a walled town and surrounding land. These states began to fight against one another and vie for hegemony. The more powerful states tended to conquer and incorporate the weaker ones, so the number of states declined over time. By the 6th century BC most small states had disappeared by being annexed and just a few large and powerful principalities remained. Some southern states, such as Chu and Wu, claimed independence from the Zhou, who undertook wars against some of them (Wu and Yue). Many new cities were established in this period and society gradually became more urbanized and commercialized. Many famous individuals such as Laozi, Confucius and Sun Tzu lived during this chaotic period.

Conflict in this period occurred both between and within states. Warfare between states forced the surviving states to develop better administrations to mobilize more soldiers and resources. Within states there was constant jockeying between elite families. For example, the three most powerful families in the Jin state—Zhao, Wei and Han—eventually overthrew the ruling family and partitioned the state between them.

The Hundred Schools of Thought of classical Chinese philosophy began blossoming during this period and the subsequent Warring States period. Such influential intellectual movements as Confucianism, Taoism, Legalism and Mohism were founded, partly in response to the changing political world. The first two philosophical thoughts would have an enormous influence on Chinese culture.

====Warring States period (476–221 BC)====

After further political consolidations, seven prominent states remained during the 5th centuryBC. The years in which these states battled each other is known as the Warring States period. Though the Zhou king nominally remained as such until 256BC, he was largely a figurehead that held little real power.

Numerous developments were made during this period in the areas of culture and mathematics—including the &quot;Zuo Zhuan&quot; within the &quot;Spring and Autumn Annals&quot; (a literary work summarizing the preceding Spring and Autumn period), and the bundle of 21 bamboo slips from the Tsinghua collection, dated to 305BC—being the world&#x27;s earliest known example of a two-digit, base-10 multiplication table. The Tsinghua collection indicates that sophisticated commercial arithmetic was already established during this period.

As neighboring territories of the seven states were annexed (including areas of modern Sichuan and Liaoning), they were now to be governed under an administrative system of commanderies and prefectures. This system had been in use elsewhere since the Spring and Autumn period, and its influence on administration would prove resilient—its terminology can still be seen in the contemporaneous &quot;sheng&quot; and &quot;xian&quot; (&quot;provinces&quot; and &quot;counties&quot;) of contemporary China.

The state of Qin became dominant in the waning decades of the Warring States period, conquering the Shu capital of Jinsha on the Chengdu Plain; and then eventually driving Chu from its place in the Han River valley. Qin imitated the administrative reforms of the other states, thereby becoming a powerhouse. Its final expansion began during the reign of Ying Zheng, ultimately unifying the other six regional powers, and enabling him to proclaim himself as China&#x27;s first emperor—known to history as Qin Shi Huang.

==Imperial era==

===Early imperial China===
====Qin dynasty (221–206 BC)====

Ying Zheng&#x27;s establishment of the Qin dynasty () in 221 BC effectively formalised the region as a true empire for the first time in Chinese history, rather than a state, and its pivotal status probably led to &quot;Qin&quot; () later evolving into the Western term &quot;&quot;. To emphasise his sole rule, Zheng proclaimed himself (; &quot;First Emperor&quot;); the title, derived from Chinese mythology, became the standard for subsequent rulers. Based in Xianyang, the empire was a centralized bureaucratic monarchy, a governing scheme which dominated the future of Imperial China. In an effort to improve the Zhou&#x27;s perceived failures, this system consisted of more than 36 commanderies (; ), made up of counties (; ) and progressively smaller divisions, each with a local leader.

Many aspects of society were informed by Legalism, a state ideology promoted by the emperor and his chancellor Li Si that was introduced at an earlier time by Shang Yang. In legal matters this philosophy emphasised mutual responsibility in disputes and severe punishments for crime, while economic practices included the general encouragement of agriculture and repression of trade. Reforms occurred in weights and measures, writing styles (seal script) and metal currency (Ban Liang), all of which were standardized. Traditionally, Qin Shi Huang is regarded as ordering a mass burning of books and the live burial of scholars under the guise of Legalism, though contemporary scholars express considerable doubt on the historicity of this event. Despite its importance, Legalism was probably supplemented in non-political matters by Confucianism for social and moral beliefs and the five-element Wuxing () theories for cosmological thought.

The Qin administration kept exhaustive records on their population, collecting information on their sex, age, social status and residence. Commoners, who made up over 90% of the population, &quot;suffered harsh treatment&quot; according to the historian Patricia Buckley Ebrey, as they were often conscripted into forced labor for the empire&#x27;s construction projects. This included a massive system of imperial highways in 220 BC, which ranged around altogether. Other major construction projects were assigned to the general Meng Tian, who concurrently led a successful campaign against the northern Xiongnu peoples (210s BC), reportedly with 300,000 troops. Under Qin Shi Huang&#x27;s orders, Meng supervised the combining of numerous ancient walls into what came to be known as the Great Wall of China and oversaw the building of a straight highway between northern and southern China. The emperor also oversaw the construction of his monumental mausoleum, which includes the well known Terracotta Army.

After Qin Shi Huang&#x27;s death the Qin government drastically deteriorated and eventually capitulated in 207 BC after the Qin capital was captured and sacked by rebels, which would ultimately lead to the establishment of the Han Empire.

====Han dynasty (206 BC – AD 220)====

=====Western Han=====
The Han dynasty was founded by Liu Bang, who emerged victorious in the Chu–Han Contention that followed the fall of the Qin dynasty. A golden age in Chinese history, the Han dynasty&#x27;s long period of stability and prosperity consolidated the foundation of China as a unified state under a central imperial bureaucracy, which was to last intermittently for most of the next two millennia. During the Han dynasty, territory of China was extended to most of the China proper and to areas far west. Confucianism was officially elevated to orthodox status and was to shape the subsequent Chinese civilization. Art, culture and science all advanced to unprecedented heights. With the profound and lasting impacts of this period of Chinese history, the dynasty name &quot;Han&quot; had been taken as the name of the Chinese people, now the dominant ethnic group in modern China, and had been commonly used to refer to Chinese language and written characters.

After the initial laissez-faire policies of Emperors Wen and Jing, the ambitious Emperor Wu brought the empire to its zenith. To consolidate his power, he disenfranchised the majority of imperial relatives, appointing military governors to control their former lands. As a further step, he extended patronage to Confucianism, which emphasizes stability and order in a well-structured society. Imperial Universities were established to support its study. At the urging of his Legalist advisors, however, he also strengthened the fiscal structure of the dynasty with government monopolies.
Major military campaigns were launched to weaken the nomadic Xiongnu Empire, limiting their influence north of the Great Wall. Along with the diplomatic efforts led by Zhang Qian, the sphere of influence of the Han Empire extended to the states in the Tarim Basin, opened up the Silk Road that connected China to the west, stimulating bilateral trade and cultural exchange. To the south, various small kingdoms far beyond the Yangtze River Valley were formally incorporated into the empire.

Emperor Wu also dispatched a series of military campaigns against the Baiyue tribes. The Han annexed Minyue in 135 BC and 111 BC, Nanyue in 111 BC, and Dian in 109 BC. Migration and military expeditions led to the cultural assimilation of the south. It also brought the Han into contact with kingdoms in Southeast Asia, introducing diplomacy and trade.

After Emperor Wu the empire slipped into gradual stagnation and decline. Economically, the state treasury was strained by excessive campaigns and projects, while land acquisitions by elite families gradually drained the tax base. Various consort clans exerted increasing control over strings of incompetent emperors and eventually the dynasty was briefly interrupted by the usurpation of Wang Mang.

=====Xin dynasty=====
In AD 9 the usurper Wang Mang claimed that the Mandate of Heaven called for the end of the Han dynasty and the rise of his own, and he founded the short-lived Xin dynasty. Wang Mang started an extensive program of land and other economic reforms, including the outlawing of slavery and land nationalization and redistribution. These programs, however, were never supported by the landholding families, because they favored the peasants. The instability of power brought about chaos, uprisings, and loss of territories. This was compounded by mass flooding of the Yellow River; silt buildup caused it to split into two channels and displaced large numbers of farmers. Wang Mang was eventually killed in Weiyang Palace by an enraged peasant mob in AD 23.

=====Eastern Han=====
Emperor Guangwu reinstated the Han dynasty with the support of landholding and merchant families at Luoyang, &quot;east&quot; of the former capital Xi&#x27;an. Thus, this new era is termed the Eastern Han dynasty. With the capable administrations of Emperors Ming and Zhang, former glories of the dynasty were reclaimed, with brilliant military and cultural achievements. The Xiongnu Empire was decisively defeated. The diplomat and general Ban Chao further expanded the conquests across the Pamirs to the shores of the Caspian Sea, thus reopening the Silk Road, and bringing trade, foreign cultures, along with the arrival of Buddhism. With extensive connections with the west, the first of several Roman embassies to China were recorded in Chinese sources, coming from the sea route in AD 166, and a second one in AD 284.

The Eastern Han dynasty was one of the most prolific eras of science and technology in ancient China, notably the historic invention of papermaking by Cai Lun, and the numerous scientific and mathematical contributions by the famous polymath Zhang Heng.

===Six Dynasties===

====Three Kingdoms (AD 220–280)====
By the 2nd century, the empire declined amidst land acquisitions, invasions, and feuding between consort clans and eunuchs. The Yellow Turban Rebellion broke out in AD 184, ushering in an era of warlords. In the ensuing turmoil, three states emerged, trying to gain predominance and reunify the land, giving this historical period its name. The classic historical novel &quot;Romance of the Three Kingdoms&quot; dramatizes events of this period.

The warlord Cao Cao reunified the north in 208, and in 220 his son accepted the abdication of Emperor Xian of Han, thus initiating the Wei dynasty. Soon, Wei&#x27;s rivals Shu and Wu proclaimed their independence. This period was characterized by a gradual decentralization of the state that had existed during the Qin and Han dynasties, and an increase in the power of great families.

In 266, the Jin dynasty overthrew the Wei and later unified the country in 280, but this union was short-lived.

====Jin dynasty (AD 266–420)====

The Jin dynasty reunited China proper for the first time since the end of the Han dynasty, ending the Three Kingdoms era. However, the Jin dynasty was severely weakened by the War of the Eight Princes and lost control of northern China after non-Han Chinese settlers rebelled and captured Luoyang and Chang&#x27;an. In 317, the Jin prince Sima Rui, based in modern-day Nanjing, became emperor and continued the dynasty, now known as the Eastern Jin, which held southern China for another century. Prior to this move, historians refer to the Jin dynasty as the Western Jin.

====Sixteen Kingdoms (AD 304–439)====

Northern China fragmented into a series of independent states known as the Sixteen Kingdoms, most of which were founded by Xiongnu, Xianbei, Jie, Di and Qiang rulers. These non-Han peoples were ancestors of the Turks, Mongols, and Tibetans. Many had, to some extent, been &quot;sinicized&quot; long before their ascent to power. In fact, some of them, notably the Qiang and the Xiongnu, had already been allowed to live in the frontier regions within the Great Wall since late Han times. During this period, warfare ravaged the north and prompted large-scale Han Chinese migration south to the Yangtze River Basin and Delta.

====Northern and Southern dynasties (AD 420–589)====

In the early 5th century China entered a period known as the Northern and Southern dynasties, in which parallel regimes ruled the northern and southern halves of the country. In the south, the Eastern Jin gave way to the Liu Song, Southern Qi, Liang and finally Chen. Each of these Southern dynasties were led by Han Chinese ruling families and used Jiankang (modern Nanjing) as the capital. They held off attacks from the north and preserved many aspects of Chinese civilization, while northern barbarian regimes began to sinify.

In the north the last of the Sixteen Kingdoms was extinguished in 439 by the Northern Wei, a kingdom founded by the Xianbei, a nomadic people who unified northern China. The Northern Wei eventually split into the Eastern and Western Wei, which then became the Northern Qi and Northern Zhou. These regimes were dominated by Xianbei or Han Chinese who had married into Xianbei families. During this period most Xianbei people adopted Han surnames, eventually leading to complete assimilation into the Han.

Despite the division of the country, Buddhism spread throughout the land. In southern China, fierce debates about whether Buddhism should be allowed were held frequently by the royal court and nobles. By the end of the era, Buddhists and Taoists had become much more tolerant of each other.

===Mid-imperial China===
====Sui dynasty (581–618)====


The short-lived Sui dynasty was a pivotal period in Chinese history. Founded by Emperor Wen in 581 in succession of the Northern Zhou, the Sui went on to conquer the Southern Chen in 589 to reunify China, ending three centuries of political division. The Sui pioneered many new institutions, including the government system of Three Departments and Six Ministries, imperial examinations for selecting officials from commoners, while improved on the systems of fubing system of the army conscription and the equal-field system of land distributions. These policies, which were adopted by later dynasties, brought enormous population growth, and amassed excessive wealth to the state. Standardized coinage was enforced throughout the unified empire. Buddhism took root as a prominent religion and was supported officially. Sui China was known for its numerous mega-construction projects. Intended for grains shipment and transporting troops, the Grand Canal was constructed, linking the capitals Daxing (Chang&#x27;an) and Luoyang to the wealthy southeast region, and in another route, to the northeast border. The Great Wall was also expanded, while series of military conquests and diplomatic maneuvers further pacified its borders. However, the massive invasions of the Korean Peninsula during the Goguryeo–Sui War failed disastrously, triggering widespread revolts that led to the fall of the dynasty.

====Tang dynasty (618–907)====

The Tang dynasty was a golden age of Chinese civilization, a prosperous, stable, and creative period with significant developments in culture, art, literature, particularly poetry, and technology. Buddhism became the predominant religion for the common people. Chang&#x27;an (modern Xi&#x27;an), the national capital, was the largest city in the world during its time.

The first emperor, Emperor Gaozu, came to the throne on 18 June 618, placed there by his son, Li Shimin, who became the second emperor, Taizong, one of the greatest emperors in Chinese history. Combined military conquests and diplomatic maneuvers reduced threats from Central Asian tribes, extended the border, and brought neighboring states into a tributary system. Military victories in the Tarim Basin kept the Silk Road open, connecting Chang&#x27;an to Central Asia and areas far to the west. In the south, lucrative maritime trade routes from port cities such as Guangzhou connected with distant countries, and foreign merchants settled in China, encouraging a cosmopolitan culture. The Tang culture and social systems were observed and adapted by neighboring countries, most notably Japan. Internally the Grand Canal linked the political heartland in Chang&#x27;an to the agricultural and economic centers in the eastern and southern parts of the empire. Xuanzang, a Chinese Buddhist monk, scholar, traveller, and translator travelled to India on his own and returned with &quot;over six hundred Mahayana and Hinayana texts, seven statues of the Buddha and more than a hundred sarira relics.&quot;

The prosperity of the early Tang dynasty was abetted by a centralized bureaucracy. The government was organized as &quot;Three Departments and Six Ministries&quot; to separately draft, review, and implement policies. These departments were run by royal family members and landed aristocrats, but as the dynasty wore on, were joined or replaced by scholar officials selected by imperial examinations, setting patterns for later dynasties.

Under the Tang &quot;equal-field system&quot; all land was owned by the Emperor and granted to each family according to household size. Men granted land were conscripted for military service for a fixed period each year, a military policy known as the &quot;fubing&quot; system. These policies stimulated a rapid growth in productivity and a significant army without much burden on the state treasury. By the dynasty&#x27;s midpoint, however, standing armies had replaced conscription, and land was continuously falling into the hands of private owners and religious institutions granted exemptions.

The dynasty continued to flourish under the rule of Empress Wu Zetian, the only official empress regnant in Chinese history, and reached its zenith during the long reign of Emperor Xuanzong, who oversaw an empire that stretched from the Pacific to the Aral Sea with at least people. There were vibrant artistic and cultural creations, including works of the greatest Chinese poets, Li Bai and Du Fu.

At the zenith of prosperity of the empire, the An Lushan Rebellion from 755 to 763 was a watershed event. War, disease, and economic disruption devastated the population and drastically weakened the central imperial government. Upon suppression of the rebellion, regional military governors, known as &quot;jiedushi&quot;, gained increasingly autonomous status as the central government lost its ability to control them. With loss of revenue from land tax, the central imperial government came to rely heavily on its salt monopoly. Externally, former submissive states raided the empire and the vast border territories were lost for centuries. Nevertheless, civil society recovered and thrived amidst the weakened imperial bureaucracy.

In late Tang period the empire was worn out by recurring revolts of the regional military governors, while scholar-officials engaged in fierce factional strife and corrupted eunuchs amassed immense power. Catastrophically, the Huang Chao Rebellion, from 874 to 884, devastated the entire empire for a decade. The sack of the southern port Guangzhou in 879 was followed by the massacre of most of its inhabitants, especially the large foreign merchant enclaves. By 881, both capitals, Luoyang and Chang&#x27;an, fell successively. The reliance on ethnic Han and Turkic warlords in suppressing the rebellion increased their power and influence. Consequently, the fall of the dynasty following Zhu Wen&#x27;s usurpation led to an era of division.

In 808, 30,000 Shatuo under Zhuye Jinzhong defected from the Tibetans to Tang China and the Tibetans punished them by killing Zhuye Jinzhong as they were chasing them. The Uyghurs also fought against an alliance of Shatuo and Tibetans at Beshbalik. The Shatuo Turks under Zhuye Chixin (Li Guochang) served the Tang dynasty in fighting against their fellow Turkic people in the Uyghur Khaganate. In 839, when the Uyghur khaganate (Huigu) general Jueluowu (掘羅勿) rose against the rule of then-reigning Zhangxin Khan, he elicited the help from Zhuye Chixin by giving Zhuye 300 horses, and together, they defeated Zhangxin Khan, who then committed suicide, precipitating the subsequent collapse of the Uyghur Khaganate. In the next few years, when Uyghur Khaganate remnants tried to raid Tang borders, the Shatuo participated extensively in counterattacking the Uyghur Khaganate with other tribes loyal to Tang. In 843, Zhuye Chixin, under the command of the Han Chinese officer Shi Xiong with Tuyuhun, Tangut and Han Chinese troops, participated in a raid against the Uyghur khaganate that led to the slaughter of Uyghur forces at Shahu mountain.

====Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms (907–960)====

The period of political disunity between the Tang and the Song, known as the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period, lasted from 907 to 960. During this half-century, China was in all respects a multi-state system. Five regimes, namely, (Later) Liang, Tang, Jin, Han and Zhou, rapidly succeeded one another in control of the traditional Imperial heartland in northern China. Among the regimes, rulers of (Later) Tang, Jin and Han were sinicized Shatuo Turks, which ruled over an ethnic majority of Han Chinese in the north. More stable and smaller regimes of mostly ethnic Han rulers coexisted in south and western China over the period, cumulatively constituted the &quot;Ten Kingdoms&quot;.

Amidst political chaos in the north, the strategic Sixteen Prefectures (region along today&#x27;s Great Wall) were ceded to the emerging Khitan Liao dynasty, which drastically weakened the defense of China proper against northern nomadic empires. To the south, Vietnam gained lasting independence after being a Chinese prefecture for many centuries. With wars dominating in Northern China, there were mass southward migrations of population, which further enhanced the southward shift of cultural and economic centers in China. The era ended with the coup of Later Zhou general Zhao Kuangyin, and the establishment of the Song dynasty in 960, which eventually annihilated the remains of the &quot;Ten Kingdoms&quot; and reunified China.
===Late imperial China===
====Song, Liao, Jin, and Western Xia dynasties (960–1279)====


In 960, the Song dynasty was founded by Emperor Taizu, with its capital established in Kaifeng (then known as Bianjing). In 979, the Song dynasty reunified most of China proper, while large swaths of the outer territories were occupied by sinicized nomadic empires. The Khitan Liao dynasty, which lasted from 907 to 1125, ruled over Manchuria, Mongolia, and parts of Northern China. Meanwhile, in what are now the north-western Chinese provinces of Gansu, Shaanxi, and Ningxia, the Tangut tribes founded the Western Xia dynasty from 1032 to 1227.

Aiming to recover the strategic sixteen prefectures lost in the previous dynasty, campaigns were launched against the Liao dynasty in the early Song period, which all ended in failure. Then in 1004, the Liao cavalry swept over the exposed North China Plain and reached the outskirts of Kaifeng, forcing the Song&#x27;s submission and then agreement to the Chanyuan Treaty, which imposed heavy annual tributes from the Song treasury. The treaty was a significant reversal of Chinese dominance of the traditional tributary system. Yet the annual outflow of Song&#x27;s silver to the Liao was paid back through the purchase of Chinese goods and products, which expanded the Song economy, and replenished its treasury. This dampened the incentive for the Song to further campaign against the Liao. Meanwhile, this cross-border trade and contact induced further sinicization within the Liao Empire, at the expense of its military might which was derived from its nomadic lifestyle. Similar treaties and social-economical consequences occurred in Song&#x27;s relations with the Jin dynasty.

Within the Liao Empire the Jurchen tribes revolted against their overlords to establish the Jin dynasty in 1115. In 1125, the devastating Jin cataphract annihilated the Liao dynasty, while remnants of Liao court members fled to Central Asia to found the Qara Khitai Empire (Western Liao dynasty). Jin&#x27;s invasion of the Song dynasty followed swiftly. In 1127, Kaifeng was sacked, a massive catastrophe known as the Jingkang Incident, ending the Northern Song dynasty. Later the entire north of China was conquered. The survived members of Song court regrouped in the new capital city of Hangzhou, and initiated the Southern Song dynasty, which ruled territories south of the Huai River. In the ensuing years, the territory and population of China were divided between the Song dynasty, the Jin dynasty and the Western Xia dynasty. The era ended with the Mongol conquest, as Western Xia fell in 1227, the Jin dynasty in 1234, and finally the Southern Song dynasty in 1279.

Despite its military weakness, the Song dynasty is widely considered to be the high point of classical Chinese civilization. The Song economy, facilitated by technological advancement, had reached a level of sophistication probably unseen in world history before its time. The population soared to over and the living standards of common people improved tremendously due to improvements in rice cultivation and the wide availability of coal for production. The capital cities of Kaifeng and subsequently Hangzhou were both the most populous cities in the world for their time, and encouraged vibrant civil societies unmatched by previous Chinese dynasties. Although land trading routes to the far west were blocked by nomadic empires, there was extensive maritime trade with neighbouring states, such as in South-east Asia, which facilitated the use of Song coinage as the de facto currency of exchange. Giant wooden vessels equipped with compasses traveled throughout the China Seas and northern Indian Ocean. The concept of insurance was practised by merchants to hedge the risks of such long-haul maritime shipments. With prosperous economic activities, the historically first use of paper currency emerged in the western city of Chengdu, as a cheaper supplement to the existing copper coins.

The Song dynasty was considered to be the golden age of great advancements in science and technology of China, thanks to innovative scholar-officials such as Su Song (1020–1101) and Shen Kuo (1031–1095). Inventions such as the hydro-mechanical astronomical clock, the first continuous and endless power-transmitting chain, woodblock printing and paper money were all invented during the Song dynasty, further cementing its status.

There was court intrigue between the political reformers and conservatives, led by the chancellors Wang Anshi and Sima Guang, respectively. By the mid-to-late 13th century, the Chinese had adopted the dogma of Neo-Confucian philosophy formulated by Zhu Xi. Enormous literary works were compiled during the Song dynasty, such as the innovative historical narrative &quot;Zizhi Tongjian&quot; (&quot;Comprehensive Mirror to Aid in Government&quot;). The invention of movable-type printing further facilitated the spread of knowledge. Culture and the arts flourished, with grandiose artworks such as &quot;Along the River During the Qingming Festival&quot; and &quot;Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute&quot;, along with great Buddhist painters such as the prolific Lin Tinggui.

The Song dynasty was also a period of major innovation in the history of warfare. Gunpowder, while invented in the Tang dynasty, was first put into practical use on the battlefield by the Song army, inspiring a succession of new firearms and siege engines designs. During the Southern Song dynasty, as its survival hinged decisively on guarding the Yangtze and Huai River against the cavalry forces from the north, the first standing navy in China was assembled in 1132, with its admiral&#x27;s headquarters established at Dinghai. Paddle-wheel warships equipped with trebuchets could launch incendiary bombs made of gunpowder and lime to effect, as recorded in Song&#x27;s victory over the invading Jin forces at the Battle of Tangdao in the East China Sea, and the Battle of Caishi on the Yangtze River in 1161.

The advances in civilisation during the Song dynasty came to an abrupt end following the devastating Mongol conquest of the North and subsequently other areas of the empire, during which the population sharply dwindled, with a marked contraction in economy. Despite viciously halting Mongol advances for more than three decades, the Southern Song capital Hangzhou fell in 1276, followed by the final annihilation of the Song standing navy at the Battle of Yamen in 1279.

====Yuan dynasty (1271–1368)====


The Yuan dynasty was formally proclaimed in 1271, when the Great Khan of Mongol, Kublai Khan, one of the grandsons of Genghis Khan, assumed the additional title of Emperor of China, and considered his inherited part of the Mongol Empire as a Chinese dynasty. In the preceding decades, the Mongols had conquered the Jin dynasty in Northern China, and the Southern Song dynasty fell in 1279 after a protracted and bloody war. The Mongol Yuan dynasty became the first conquest dynasty in Chinese history to rule the entirety of China proper and its population as an ethnic minority. The dynasty also directly controlled the Mongol heartland and other regions, inheriting the largest share of territory of the eastern Mongol empire, which roughly coincided with the modern area of China and nearby regions in East Asia. Further expansion of the empire was halted after defeats in the invasions of Japan and Vietnam. Following the previous Jin dynasty, the capital of Yuan dynasty was established at Khanbaliq (also known as Dadu, modern-day Beijing). The Grand Canal was reconstructed to connect the remote capital city to lively economic hubs in southern part of China, setting the precedence and foundation for Beijing to largely remain as the capital of the successive regimes of the unified Chinese mainland.

A series of Mongol civil wars in the late 13th century led to the division of the Mongol Empire. In 1304 the emperors of the Yuan dynasty were upheld as the nominal Khagan over western khanates (the Chagatai Khanate, the Golden Horde and the Ilkhanate), which nonetheless remained &quot;de facto&quot; autonomous. The era was known as &quot;Pax Mongolica&quot;, when much of the Asian continent was ruled by the Mongols. For the first and only time in history, the Silk Road was controlled entirely by a single state, facilitating the flow of people, trade, and cultural exchange. A network of roads and a postal system were established to connect the vast empire. Lucrative maritime trade, developed from the previous Song dynasty, continued to flourish, with Quanzhou and Hangzhou emerging as the largest ports in the world. Adventurous travelers from the far west, most notably the Venetian, Marco Polo, would settle in China for decades. Upon his return, his detail travel record inspired generations of medieval Europeans with the splendors of the far East. The Yuan dynasty was the first ancient economy, where paper currency, known at the time as &quot;Jiaochao&quot;, was used as the predominant medium of exchange. Its unrestricted issuance in the late Yuan dynasty inflicted hyperinflation, which eventually brought the downfall of the dynasty.

While the Mongol rulers of the Yuan dynasty adopted substantially to Chinese culture, their sinicization was of lesser extent compared to earlier conquest dynasties in Chinese history. For preserving racial superiority as the conqueror and ruling class, traditional nomadic customs and heritage from the Mongolian Steppe were held in high regard. On the other hand, the Mongol rulers also adopted flexibly to a variety of cultures from many advanced civilizations within the vast empire. Traditional social structure and culture in China underwent immense transform during the Mongol dominance. Large groups of foreign migrants settled in China, who enjoyed elevated social status over the majority Han Chinese, while enriching Chinese culture with foreign elements. The class of scholar officials and intellectuals, traditional bearers of elite Chinese culture, lost substantial social status. This stimulated the development of culture of the common folks. There were prolific works in &quot;zaju&quot; variety shows and literary songs (&quot;sanqu&quot;), which were written in a distinctive poetry style known as &quot;qu&quot;. Novels of vernacular style gained unprecedented status and popularity.

Before the Mongol invasion, Chinese dynasties reported approximately inhabitants; after the conquest had been completed in 1279, the 1300 census reported roughly people. This major decline is not necessarily due only to Mongol killings. Scholars such as Frederick W. Mote argue that the wide drop in numbers reflects an administrative failure to record rather than an actual decrease; others such as Timothy Brook argue that the Mongols created a system of enserfment among a huge portion of the Chinese populace, causing many to disappear from the census altogether; other historians including William McNeill and David Morgan consider that plague was the main factor behind the demographic decline during this period. In the 14th century China suffered additional depredations from epidemics of plague, estimated to have killed around a quarter of the population of China.

Throughout the Yuan dynasty, there was some general sentiment among the populace against the Mongol dominance. Yet rather than the nationalist cause, it was mainly strings of natural disasters and incompetent, corrupt governance that triggered widespread peasant uprisings since the 1340s. After the massive naval engagement at Lake Poyang, Zhu Yuanzhang prevailed over other rebel forces in the south. He proclaimed himself emperor and founded the Ming dynasty in 1368. The same year his northern expedition army captured the capital Khanbaliq. The Yuan remnants fled back to Mongolia and sustained the regime, but the period of Yuan dominance was effectively over for good. Other Mongol Khanates in Central Asia continued to exist after the fall of Yuan dynasty in China.

====Ming dynasty (1368–1644)====


The Ming dynasty was founded by Zhu Yuanzhang in 1368, who proclaimed himself as the Hongwu Emperor. The capital was initially set at Nanjing, and was later moved to Beijing from Yongle Emperor&#x27;s reign onward.

Urbanization increased as the population grew and as the division of labor grew more complex. Large urban centers, such as Nanjing and Beijing, also contributed to the growth of private industry. In particular, small-scale industries grew up, often specializing in paper, silk, cotton, and porcelain goods. For the most part, however, relatively small urban centers with markets proliferated around the country. Town markets mainly traded food, with some necessary manufactures such as pins or oil.

Despite the xenophobia and intellectual introspection characteristic of the increasingly popular new school of neo-Confucianism, China under the early Ming dynasty was not isolated. Foreign trade and other contacts with the outside world, particularly Japan, increased considerably. Chinese merchants explored all of the Indian Ocean, reaching East Africa with the voyages of Zheng He.

The Hongwu Emperor, being the only founder of a Chinese dynasty who was also of peasant origin, had laid the foundation of a state that relied fundamentally in agriculture. Commerce and trade, which flourished in the previous Song and Yuan dynasties, were less emphasized. Neo-feudal landholdings of the Song and Mongol periods were expropriated by the Ming rulers. Land estates were confiscated by the government, fragmented, and rented out. Private slavery was forbidden. Consequently, after the death of the Yongle Emperor, independent peasant landholders predominated in Chinese agriculture. These laws might have paved the way to removing the worst of the poverty during the previous regimes. Towards later era of the Ming dynasty, with declining government control, commerce, trade and private industries revived.

The dynasty had a strong and complex central government that unified and controlled the empire. The emperor&#x27;s role became more autocratic, although Hongwu Emperor necessarily continued to use what he called the &quot;Grand Secretariat&quot; to assist with the immense paperwork of the bureaucracy, including memorials (petitions and recommendations to the throne), imperial edicts in reply, reports of various kinds, and tax records. It was this same bureaucracy that later prevented the Ming government from being able to adapt to changes in society, and eventually led to its decline.

The Yongle Emperor strenuously tried to extend China&#x27;s influence beyond its borders by demanding other rulers send ambassadors to China to present tribute. A large navy was built, including four-masted ships displacing 1,500 tons. A standing army of 1 million troops was created. The Chinese armies conquered and occupied Vietnam for around 20 years, while the Chinese fleet sailed the China seas and the Indian Ocean, cruising as far as the east coast of Africa. The Chinese gained influence in eastern Moghulistan. Several maritime Asian nations sent envoys with tribute for the Chinese emperor. Domestically, the Grand Canal was expanded and became a stimulus to domestic trade. Over 100,000 tons of iron per year were produced. Many books were printed using movable type. The imperial palace in Beijing&#x27;s Forbidden City reached its current splendor. It was also during these centuries that the potential of south China came to be fully exploited. New crops were widely cultivated and industries such as those producing porcelain and textiles flourished.

In 1449 Esen Tayisi led an Oirat Mongol invasion of northern China which culminated in the capture of the Zhengtong Emperor at Tumu. Since then, the Ming became on the defensive on the northern frontier, which led to the Ming Great Wall being built. Most of what remains of the Great Wall of China today was either built or repaired by the Ming. The brick and granite work was enlarged, the watchtowers were redesigned, and cannons were placed along its length.

At sea the Ming became increasingly isolationist after the death of the Yongle Emperor. The treasure voyages which sailed the Indian Ocean were discontinued, and the maritime prohibition laws were set in place banning the Chinese from sailing abroad. European traders who reached China in the midst of the Age of Discovery were repeatedly rebuked in their requests for trade, with the Portuguese being repulsed by the Ming navy at Tuen Mun in 1521 and again in 1522. Domestic and foreign demands for overseas trade, deemed illegal by the state, led to widespread &quot;wokou&quot; piracy attacking the southeastern coastline during the rule of the Jiajing Emperor (1507–1567), which only subsided after the opening of ports in Guangdong and Fujian and much military suppression. In addition to raids from Japan by the &quot;wokou&quot;, raids from Taiwan and the Philippines by the Pisheye also ravaged the southern coasts. The Portuguese were allowed to settle in Macau in 1557 for trade, which remained in Portuguese hands until 1999. After the Spanish invasion of the Philippines, trade with the Spanish at Manila imported large quantities of Mexican and Peruvian silver from the Spanish Americas to China. The Dutch entry into the Chinese seas was also met with fierce resistance, with the Dutch being chased off the Penghu islands in the Sino-Dutch conflicts of 1622–1624 and were forced to settle in Taiwan instead. The Dutch in Taiwan fought with the Ming in the Battle of Liaoluo Bay in 1633 and lost, and eventually surrendered to the Ming loyalist Koxinga in 1662, after the fall of the Ming dynasty.

In 1556, during the rule of the Jiajing Emperor, the Shaanxi earthquake killed about 830,000 people, the deadliest earthquake of all time.

The Ming dynasty intervened deeply in the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598), which ended with the withdrawal of all invading Japanese forces in Korea, and the restoration of the Joseon dynasty, its traditional ally and tributary state. The regional hegemony of the Ming dynasty was preserved at a toll on its resources. Coincidentally, with Ming&#x27;s control in Manchuria in decline, the Manchu (Jurchen) tribes, under their chieftain Nurhaci, broke away from Ming&#x27;s rule, and emerged as a powerful, unified state, which was later proclaimed as the Qing dynasty. It went on to subdue the much weakened Korea as its tributary, conquered Mongolia, and expanded its territory to the outskirt of the Great Wall. The most elite army of the Ming dynasty was to station at the Shanhai Pass to guard the last stronghold against the Manchus, which weakened its suppression of internal peasants uprisings.

====Qing dynasty (1644–1912)====


The Qing dynasty (1644–1912) was the last imperial dynasty in China. Founded by the Manchus, it was the second conquest dynasty to rule the entirety of China proper, and roughly doubled the territory controlled by the Ming. The Manchus were formerly known as Jurchens, residing in the northeastern part of the Ming territory outside the Great Wall. They emerged as the major threat to the late Ming dynasty after Nurhaci united all Jurchen tribes and his son, Hong Taiji, declared the founding of the Qing dynasty in 1636. The Qing dynasty set up the Eight Banners system that provided the basic framework for the Qing military conquest. Li Zicheng&#x27;s peasant rebellion captured Beijing in 1644 and the Chongzhen Emperor, the last Ming emperor, committed suicide. The Manchus allied with the Ming general Wu Sangui to seize Beijing, which was made the capital of the Qing dynasty, and then proceeded to subdue the Ming remnants in the south. During the Ming-Qing transition, when the Ming dynasty and later the Southern Ming, the emerging Qing dynasty, and several other factions like the Shun dynasty and Xi dynasty founded by peasant revolt leaders fought against each another, which, along with innumerable natural disasters at that time such as those caused by the Little Ice Age and epidemics like the Great Plague during the last decade of the Ming dynasty, caused enormous loss of lives and significant harm to the economy. In total, these decades saw the loss of as many as lives, but the Qing appeared to have restored China&#x27;s imperial power and inaugurate another flowering of the arts. The early Manchu emperors combined traditions of Inner Asian rule with Confucian norms of traditional Chinese government and were considered a Chinese dynasty.

The Manchus enforced a &#x27;queue order&#x27;, forcing Han Chinese men to adopt the Manchu queue hairstyle. Officials were required to wear Manchu-style clothing &quot;Changshan&quot; (bannermen dress and &quot;Tangzhuang&quot;), but ordinary Han civilians were allowed to wear traditional Han clothing. Bannermen could not undertake trade or manual labor; they had to petition to be removed from banner status. They were considered aristocracy and were given annual pensions, land, and allotments of cloth. The Kangxi Emperor ordered the creation of the &quot;Kangxi Dictionary&quot;, the most complete dictionary of Chinese characters that had been compiled.

Over the next half-century, all areas previously under the Ming dynasty were consolidated under the Qing. Conquests in Central Asia in the eighteenth century extended territorial control. Between 1673 and 1681, the Kangxi Emperor suppressed the Revolt of the Three Feudatories, an uprising of three generals in Southern China who had been denied hereditary rule of large fiefdoms granted by the previous emperor. In 1683, the Qing staged an amphibious assault on southern Taiwan, bringing down the rebel Kingdom of Tungning, which was founded by the Ming loyalist Koxinga (Zheng Chenggong) in 1662 after the fall of the Southern Ming, and had served as a base for continued Ming resistance in Southern China. The Qing defeated the Russians at Albazin, resulting in the Treaty of Nerchinsk.

By the end of Qianlong Emperor&#x27;s long reign in 1796, the Qing Empire was at its zenith. The Qing ruled more than one-third of the world&#x27;s population, and had the largest economy in the world. By area it was one of the largest empires ever.
In the 19th century the empire was internally restive and externally threatened by western powers. The defeat by the British Empire in the First Opium War (1840) led to the Treaty of Nanking (1842), under which Hong Kong was ceded to Britain and importation of opium (produced by British Empire territories) was allowed. Opium usage continued to grow in China, adversely affecting societal stability. Subsequent military defeats and unequal treaties with other western powers continued even after the fall of the Qing dynasty.

Internally the Taiping Rebellion (1851–1864), a Christian religious movement led by the &quot;Heavenly King&quot; Hong Xiuquan swept from the south to establish the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom and controlled roughly a third of China proper for over a decade. The court in desperation empowered Han Chinese officials such as Zeng Guofan to raise local armies. After initial defeats, Zeng crushed the rebels in the Third Battle of Nanking in 1864. This was one of the largest wars in the 19th century in troop involvement; there was massive loss of life, with a death toll of about 20 million. A string of civil disturbances followed, including the Punti–Hakka Clan Wars, Nian Rebellion, Dungan Revolt, and Panthay Rebellion. All rebellions were ultimately put down, but at enormous cost and with millions dead, seriously weakening the central imperial authority. China never rebuilt a strong central army, and many local officials used their military power to effectively rule independently in their provinces.

Yet the dynasty appeared to recover in the Tongzhi Restoration (1860–1872), led by Manchu royal family reformers and Han Chinese officials such as Zeng Guofan and his proteges Li Hongzhang and Zuo Zongtang. Their Self-Strengthening Movement made effective institutional reforms, imported Western factories and communications technology, with prime emphasis on strengthening the military. However, the reform was undermined by official rivalries, cynicism, and quarrels within the imperial family. The defeat of Yuan Shikai&#x27;s modernized &quot;Beiyang Fleet&quot; in the First Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895) led to the formation of the New Army. The Guangxu Emperor, advised by Kang Youwei, then launched a comprehensive reform effort, the Hundred Days&#x27; Reform (1898). Empress Dowager Cixi, however, feared that precipitous change would lead to bureaucratic opposition and foreign intervention and quickly suppressed it.

In the summer of 1900, the Boxer Uprising opposed foreign influence and murdered Chinese Christians and foreign missionaries. When Boxers entered Beijing, the Qing government ordered all foreigners to leave, but they and many Chinese Christians were besieged in the foreign legations quarter. An Eight-Nation Alliance sent the Seymour Expedition of Japanese, Russian, British, Italian, German, French, American, and Austrian troops to relieve the siege, but they were routed and forced to retreat by Boxer and Qing troops at the Battle of Langfang. After the Alliance&#x27;s attack on the Dagu Forts, the court declared war on the Alliance and authorised the Boxers to join with imperial armies. After fierce fighting at Tianjin, the Alliance formed the second, much larger Gaselee Expedition and finally reached Beijing; the Empress Dowager evacuated to Xi&#x27;an. The Boxer Protocol ended the war, exacting a tremendous indemnity.

The Qing court then instituted administrative and legal reforms known as the late Qing reforms, including abolition of the examination system. But young officials, military officers, and students debated reform, perhaps a constitutional monarchy, or the overthrow of the dynasty and the creation of a republic. They were inspired by an emerging public opinion formed by intellectuals such as Liang Qichao and the revolutionary ideas of Sun Yat-sen. A localised military uprising, the Wuchang uprising, began on 10 October 1911, in Wuchang (today part of Wuhan), and soon spread. The Republic of China was proclaimed on 1 January 1912, ending 2,000 years of dynastic rule.

==Modern China==

===Republic of China (since 1912)===

The provisional government of the Republic of China was formed in Nanjing on 12 March 1912. Sun Yat-sen became President of the Republic of China, but he turned power over to Yuan Shikai, who commanded the New Army. Over the next few years, Yuan proceeded to abolish the national and provincial assemblies, and declared himself as the emperor of Empire of China in late 1915, in the style of an absolute monarchy. Yuan&#x27;s imperial ambitions were fiercely opposed by his subordinates; faced with the rapidly growing prospect of violent rebellion, he abdicated in March 1916 and died of natural causes in June.

Yuan&#x27;s death in 1916 left a power vacuum; the republican government (that had been nearly brought to its knees by his policies) was all but shattered. This opened the way for the Warlord Era, during which much of China was ruled by shifting coalitions of competing provincial military leaders and the Beiyang government, ushering in a short-lived period of uncertainty. Intellectuals, disappointed in the failure of the Republic, launched the New Culture Movement.

In 1919, the May Fourth Movement began as a response to the pro-Japanese terms imposed on China by the Treaty of Versailles following World War I. It quickly became a nationwide protest movement. The protests were a moral success as the cabinet fell and China refused to sign the Treaty of Versailles, which had awarded German holdings of Shandong to Japan. Memory of the mistreatment at Versailles fuels resentment into the 21st century.

Political and intellectual ferment waxed strong throughout the 1920s and 1930s. According to Patricia Ebrey:
:&quot;Nationalism, patriotism, progress, science, democracy, and freedom were the goals; imperialism, feudalism, warlordism, autocracy, patriarchy, and blind adherence to tradition were the enemies. Intellectuals struggled with how to be strong and modern and yet Chinese, how to preserve China as a political entity in the world of competing nations.&quot;


In the 1920s Sun Yat-sen established a revolutionary base in Guangzhou and set out to unite the fragmented nation. He welcomed assistance from the Soviet Union (itself fresh from Lenin&#x27;s Communist takeover) and he entered into an alliance with the fledgling Chinese Communist Party (CCP). After Sun&#x27;s death from cancer in 1925, one of his protégés, Chiang Kai-shek, seized control of the Nationalist Party (KMT) and succeeded in bringing most of south and central China under its rule in the Northern Expedition (1926–1927). Having defeated the warlords in the south and central China by military force, Chiang was able to secure the nominal allegiance of the warlords in the North and establish the Nationalist government in Nanjing. In 1927, Chiang turned on the CCP and relentlessly purged the Communists elements in his NRA. In 1934, driven from their mountain bases such as the Chinese Soviet Republic, the CCP forces embarked on the Long March across China&#x27;s most desolate terrain to the northwest, a feat transformed into legend, where they established a guerrilla base at Yan&#x27;an in Shaanxi. During the Long March, the communists reorganised under a new leader, Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung).
The bitter Chinese Civil War between the Nationalists and the Communists continued, openly or clandestinely, through the 14-year-long Japanese occupation of various parts of the country (1931–1945). The two Chinese parties nominally formed a United Front to oppose the Japanese in 1937, during the Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945), which became a part of World War II, although this alliance was tenuous at best and disagreements, sometimes violent, between the forces were still common. Japanese forces committed numerous war atrocities against the civilian population, including biological warfare (see Unit 731) and the Three Alls Policy (&quot;Sankō Sakusen&quot;), namely being: &quot;Kill All, Burn All and Loot All&quot;. During the war, China was recognized as one of the Allied &quot;Big Four&quot; in the Declaration by United Nations, as a tribute to its enduring struggle against the invading Japanese. China was one of the four major Allies of World War II, and was later considered one of the primary victors in the war.

Following the defeat of Japan in 1945, the war between the Nationalist government forces and the CCP resumed, after failed attempts at reconciliation and a negotiated settlement. By 1949, the CCP had established control over most of the country. Odd Arne Westad says the Communists won the Civil War because they made fewer military mistakes than Chiang, and because in his search for a powerful centralized government, Chiang antagonised too many interest groups in China. Furthermore, his party was weakened in the war against the Japanese. Meanwhile, the Communists told different groups, such as peasants, exactly what they wanted to hear, and cloaked themselves in the cover of Chinese Nationalism. During the civil war both the Nationalists and Communists carried out mass atrocities, with millions of non-combatants killed by both sides. These included deaths from forced conscription and massacres.

The Nationalists were slowly routed towards the South. When the Nationalist government forces were defeated by CCP forces in mainland China in 1949, the Nationalist government fled to Taiwan with its forces, along with Chiang and a large number of their supporters; the Nationalist government had taken effective control of Taiwan at the end of WWII as part of the overall Japanese surrender, when Japanese troops in Taiwan surrendered to the Republic of China troops there.

Until the early 1970s the ROC was recognised as the sole legitimate government of China by the United Nations, the United States and most Western nations, refusing to recognise the PRC on account of its status as a communist nation during the Cold War. This changed in 1971 when the PRC was seated in the United Nations, replacing the ROC. The KMT ruled Taiwan under martial law until 1987, with the stated goal of being vigilant against Communist infiltration and preparing to retake mainland China. Therefore, political dissent was not tolerated during that period, and crackdowns against dissidents were common.

In the 1990s the ROC underwent a major democratic reform, beginning with the 1991 resignation of the members of the Legislative Yuan and National Assembly elected in 1947. These groups were originally created to represent mainland China constituencies. Also lifted were the restrictions on the use of Taiwanese languages in the broadcast media and in schools. In 1996, the ROC held its first direct presidential election, and the incumbent president, KMT candidate Lee Teng-hui, was elected. In 2000, the KMT status as the ruling party ended when the DPP took power, only to regain its status in the 2008 election by Ma Ying-jeou.

Due to the controversial nature of Taiwan&#x27;s political status, the ROC is currently recognised by merely 12 UN member states and the Holy See as the legitimate government of &quot;China&quot;.

===People&#x27;s Republic of China (since 1949)===

Major combat in the Chinese Civil War ended in 1949 with the KMT pulling out of the mainland, with the government relocating to Taipei and maintaining control only over a few islands. The CCP was left in control of mainland China. On 1 October 1949, Mao Zedong proclaimed the People&#x27;s Republic of China. &quot;Communist China&quot; and &quot;Red China&quot; were two common names for the PRC.

The PRC was shaped by a series of campaigns and five-year plans. The Great Leap Forward, a radical campaign that encompassed numerous attempted economic and social reforms, resulted in tens of millions of deaths. Mao&#x27;s government carried out mass executions of landowners, instituted collectivisation and implemented the Laogai camp system. Execution, deaths from forced labor and other atrocities resulted in millions of deaths under Mao. In 1966 Mao and his allies launched the Cultural Revolution, which continued until Mao&#x27;s death a decade later. The Cultural Revolution, motivated by power struggles within the Party and a fear of the Soviet Union, led to a major upheaval in Chinese society.

Following the Sino-Soviet split and motivated by concerns of invasion by either the Soviet Union or the United States, China initiated the Third Front campaign to develop national defense and industrial infrastructure in its rugged interior. Through its distribution of infrastructure, industry, and human capital around the country, the Third Front created favorable conditions for subsequent market development and private enterprise.

In 1972, at the peak of the Sino-Soviet split, Mao and Zhou Enlai met U.S. president Richard Nixon in Beijing to establish relations with the US. In the same year, the PRC was admitted to the United Nations in place of the Republic of China, with permanent membership of the Security Council.

A power struggle followed Mao&#x27;s death in 1976. The Gang of Four were arrested and blamed for the excesses of the Cultural Revolution, marking the end of a turbulent political era in China. Deng Xiaoping outmaneuvered Mao&#x27;s anointed successor chairman Hua Guofeng, and gradually emerged as the &quot;de facto&quot; leader over the next few years.

Deng Xiaoping was the Paramount Leader of China from 1978 to 1992, although he never became the head of the party or state, and his influence within the Party led the country to significant economic reforms. The CCP subsequently loosened governmental control over citizens&#x27; personal lives and the communes were disbanded with many peasants receiving multiple land leases, which greatly increased incentives and agricultural production. In addition, there were many free market areas opened. The most successful free market area was Shenzhen. It is located in Guangdong and the property tax free area still exists today. This turn of events marked China&#x27;s transition from a planned economy to a mixed economy with an increasingly open market environment, a system termed by some as market socialism, and officially by the CCP as Socialism with Chinese characteristics. The PRC adopted its current constitution on 4 December 1982.

In 1989 the death of former general secretary Hu Yaobang helped to spark the Tiananmen Square protests of that year, during which students and others campaigned for several months, speaking out against corruption and in favour of greater political reform, including democratic rights and freedom of speech. However, they were eventually put down on 4 June when Army troops and vehicles entered and forcibly cleared the square, resulting in considerable numbers of fatalities. This event was widely reported, and brought worldwide condemnation and sanctions against the communist government.

CCP general secretary and PRC president Jiang Zemin and PRC premier Zhu Rongji, both former mayors of Shanghai, led post-Tiananmen PRC in the 1990s. Under Jiang and Zhu&#x27;s ten years of administration, the PRC&#x27;s economic performance pulled an estimated 150 million peasants out of poverty and sustained an average annual gross domestic product growth rate of 11.2%. The country formally joined the World Trade Organization in 2001. By 1997 and 1999, former European colonies of British Hong Kong and Portuguese Macau became the Hong Kong and Macau special administrative regions of the People&#x27;s Republic of China, respectively.

Although the PRC needed economic growth to spur its development, the government began to worry that rapid economic growth was degrading the country&#x27;s natural resources and environment. Another concern was that certain sectors of society were not sufficiently benefiting from the PRC&#x27;s economic development; one example of this was the wide gap between urban and rural areas in terms of development and prevalence of updated infrastructure. As a result, under former CCP general secretary and President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao, the PRC initiated policies to address issues of equitable distribution of resources, but the outcome was not known . More than 40 million farmers were displaced from their land, usually for economic development, contributing to 87,000 demonstrations and riots across China in 2005. For much of the PRC&#x27;s population, living standards improved very substantially and freedom increased, but political controls remained tight and rural areas poor.

According to the U.S. Department of Defense, as many as 3 million Uyghurs and members of other Muslim minority groups are being held in China&#x27;s internment camps which are located in the Xinjiang region and which Western news reports often label as &quot;concentration camps&quot;. The camps were established in late 2010s under Xi Jinping&#x27;s administration. Human Rights Watch says that they have been used to indoctrinate Uyghurs and other Muslims since 2017 as part of a people&#x27;s war on terror, a policy announced in 2014. The use of these centers appears to have ended in 2019 following international pressure. Academic Kerry Brown attributes their closures beginning in late 2019 to the expense required to operate them. China has repeatedly denied this, asserting that the West has never been able to produce reliably-sourced satellite footage of any such detainment or resulting detention of minority groups. Although no comprehensive independent surveys of such centres have been performed as of June 2024, spot checks by journalists have found such sites converted or abandoned. In 2022, a Washington Post reporter checked a dozen sites previously identified as reeducation centres and found &quot;[m]ost of them appeared to be empty or converted, with several sites labeled as coronavirus quarantine facilities, teachers&#x27; schools and vocational schools.&quot; In 2023, Amnesty International said that they were &quot;witnessing more and more arbitrary detention&quot;, but that detained individuals were being moved from the camps into the formal prison system.

The novel coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, which causes the disease COVID-19, was first detected in Wuhan, Hubei in 2019 and led to a global pandemic, causing the majority of the world to enter a period of lockdown for at least a year following.

== See also ==

* Chinese emperors family tree
** Ancient – Early – Middle – Late
* Chinese exploration
* Chinese historiography
* Christianity in China
* Economic history of China
* Ethnic groups in Chinese history
* Foreign relations of imperial China
* Golden ages of China
* History of canals in China
* History of Islam in China
* History of science and technology in China
* History of Taiwan
* History of the Great Wall of China
* List of Chinese monarchs
* List of rebellions in China
* List of recipients of tribute from China
* List of tributary states of China
* Military history of China before 1912
* Naval history of China
* Population history of China
* Timeline of Chinese history
* Women in ancient and imperial China

== References ==
===Notes===
=== Citations ===
===Sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
** 
** 
== Further reading ==
* 
* Fairbank, John King and Goldman, Merle. &quot;China: A New History.&quot; 2nd ed. (Harvard UP, 2006). 640 pp.
* Gernet, Jacques. &quot;A History of Chinese Civilization&quot; (1996). One-volume survey.
* Li, Xiaobing, ed. &quot;China at War: An Encyclopedia&quot;. (ABC-CLIO, 2012).
* Mote, Frederick W. &quot;Imperial China, 900–1800&quot; (Harvard UP, 1999), 1,136 pp. Authoritative treatment of the Song, Yuan, Ming, and early Qing dynasties.
* Perkins, Dorothy. &quot;Encyclopedia of China: The Essential Reference to China, Its History and Culture&quot; (Facts on File, 1999). 662 pp.
* Roberts, J. A. G. &quot;A Concise History of China&quot; (Harvard U. Press, 1999). 341 pp.
* Stanford, Edward. &quot;Atlas of the Chinese Empire, containing separate maps of the eighteen provinces of China&quot; (2nd ed., 1917). Legible color maps.
* Wright, David Curtis. &quot;History of China&quot; (2001) 257 pp.
== External links ==
* &quot;China Knowledge&quot;, a comprehensive online encyclopedia of China from Ulrich Theobald
* The &quot;Berkshire Encyclopedia of China&quot; on Oxford Reference 
* China Rediscovers its Own History, a lengthy lecture on Chinese history given by Yu Ying-shih</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="4" end="20" title="History of China" label="history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="241" end="253" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="283" end="290" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="336" end="359" title="Sinosphere" label="Chinese cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="438" end="454" title="Chinese historiography" label="traditional lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857432" start="490" end="504" title="Dynasties of China" label="dynastic cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q126736785" start="675" end="712" title="Five thousand years of Chinese civilization" label="many thousands of years into the past"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207629" start="735" end="758" title="Cradle of civilization" label="cradles of civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474" start="891" end="900" title="Tian Shan" label="Tian Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216622" start="906" end="917" title="Tarim Basin" label="Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="927" end="936" title="Himalayas" label="Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q203239" start="958" end="973" title="Sayan Mountains" label="Sayan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q342451" start="999" end="1021" title="Red River Delta" label="delta of the Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284498" start="1028" end="1037" title="Neolithic China" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28584" start="1105" end="1111" title="Yellow river civilization" label="Yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q856310" start="1116" end="1123" title="Yangtze civilization" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051663" start="1136" end="1151" title="Erlitou culture" label="Erlitou culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q190277" start="1159" end="1182" title="Zhongyuan" label="central plains of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="1216" end="1227" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="1263" end="1285" title="Chinese historiography" label="Chinese historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="1310" end="1325" title="written Chinese" label="written Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q283127" start="1391" end="1402" title="oracle bone" label="oracle bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q917520" start="1405" end="1432" title="Chinese bronze inscriptions" label="Chinese bronze inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q465108" start="1585" end="1591" title="Classic of Poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q181937" start="1593" end="1603" title="Yi Jing" label="divination"/>
<link wikidata="Q875313" start="1609" end="1637" title="Shang Shu" label="records of official speeches"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="1806" end="1813" title="culture of China" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q456012" start="1841" end="1858" title="Chinese literature" label="extant literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="1874" end="1886" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q340742" start="1910" end="1919" title="Axial Age" label="Axial Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="1938" end="1955" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="2018" end="2030" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="2032" end="2038" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="2040" end="2048" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="2060" end="2066" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="Wuxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986801" start="2085" end="2097" title="Qin&amp;#x27;s wars of unification" label="first united"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="2131" end="2144" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43091" start="2156" end="2167" title="Orthography" label="Orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="2280" end="2291" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="2452" end="2463" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377760" start="2601" end="2611" title="Four Books and Five Classics" label="core texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="2826" end="2838" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q864650" start="3033" end="3044" title="sericulture" label="sericulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="3180" end="3188" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498317" start="3250" end="3261" title="Chinese calligraphy" label="Calligraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="3512" end="3523" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="3563" end="3575" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="3793" end="3802" title="Wu Zetian" label="Wu Zetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="4000" end="4012" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255779" start="4093" end="4112" title="History of printing in East Asia" label="Mechanical printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="4195" end="4212" title="woodblock printing" label="wood-block prints"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="4279" end="4306" title="imperial examination system" label="imperial examination system"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="4416" end="4432" title="Neo-Confucianism" label="Neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12557" start="4451" end="4464" title="Mongol Empire" label="Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="4506" end="4518" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="4618" end="4630" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="4651" end="4669" title="Ming treasure voyages" label="global exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074328" start="4676" end="4685" title="Chinese ceramics" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="4754" end="4765" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="4770" end="4780" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q753883" start="4800" end="4822" title="Classic Chinese Novels" label="Classic Chinese Novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="4857" end="4869" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="4914" end="4920" title="Manchu" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="4933" end="4941" title="Qianlong" label="Qianlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q699477" start="4976" end="5000" title="Siku Quanshu" label="a complete encyclopaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q220984" start="5213" end="5223" title="Opium Wars" label="Opium Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="5239" end="5255" title="unequal treaties" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="5267" end="5284" title="Xinhai Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="5293" end="5304" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="5329" end="5346" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="5369" end="5385" title="Chinese Civil War" label="costly civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="5433" end="5448" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036830" start="5475" end="5491" title="Chinese Red Army" label="Chinese Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="5527" end="5542" title="Empire of Japan" label="Empire of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="5625" end="5634" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="5644" end="5654" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5691" end="5722" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="5996" end="6015" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="6137" end="6153" title="Chinese economic reform" label="economic reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="6160" end="6173" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3764970" start="6203" end="6232" title="List of countries by real GDP growth rate" label="fastest-growing major economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6348" end="6353" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="6420" end="6433" title="archaic human" label="archaic human"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="6451" end="6463" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="6481" end="6488" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="6518" end="6535" title="million years ago" label="million years ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195256" start="6658" end="6669" title="Yuanmou Man" label="Yuanmou Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="6676" end="6682" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001522" start="6725" end="6733" title="bushland" label="bushland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081383" start="6763" end="6775" title="chalicothere" label="chalicothere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="6778" end="6782" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q772364" start="6803" end="6811" title="Stegodon" label="Stegodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34718" start="6819" end="6824" title="rhino" label="rhino"/>
<link wikidata="Q135094" start="6849" end="6872" title="giant short-faced hyena" label="giant short-faced hyena"/>
<link wikidata="Q45931" start="6891" end="6901" title="Peking Man" label="Peking Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q503142" start="6938" end="6940" title="Before Present" label="BP"/>
<link wikidata="Q13659137" start="6964" end="6975" title="Zhoukoudian" label="Zhoukoudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605626" start="6991" end="6999" title="scraper (archaeology)" label="scrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728731" start="7001" end="7009" title="chopper (archaeology)" label="choppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859027" start="7046" end="7052" title="burin (lithic flake)" label="burins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067903" start="7176" end="7187" title="Lantian Man" label="Lantian Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="7191" end="7198" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="7240" end="7248" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="7262" end="7271" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q504325" start="7291" end="7308" title="List of Paleolithic sites in China" label="Paleolithic sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884430" start="7383" end="7402" title="magnetostratigraphy" label="magnetostratigraphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125132" start="7448" end="7462" title="Xiaochangliang" label="Xiaochangliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q806953" start="7495" end="7502" title="Banshan" label="Banshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q268327" start="7678" end="7685" title="Xihoudu" label="Xihoudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q83944" start="7739" end="7748" title="Human evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="7799" end="7809" title="H. sapiens" label="H. sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478419" start="7873" end="7905" title="Recent African origin of modern humans" label="&amp;quot;Out of Africa&amp;quot; theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509795" start="7917" end="7942" title="regional continuity model" label="regional continuity model"/>
<link wikidata="Q24083360" start="8117" end="8127" title="Fuyan Cave" label="Fuyan Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165386" start="8131" end="8141" title="Dao County" label="Dao County"/>
<link wikidata="Q16350420" start="8230" end="8247" title="Ailuropoda baconi" label="Ailuropoda baconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q10750855" start="8271" end="8285" title="Crocuta" label="Crocuta ultima"/>
<link wikidata="Q309562" start="8333" end="8344" title="giant tapir" label="giant tapir"/>
<link wikidata="Q626270" start="8358" end="8377" title="Middle Palaeolithic" label="Middle Palaeolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q841321" start="8378" end="8387" title="Levallois technique" label="Levallois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342644" start="8442" end="8453" title="Guanyindong" label="Guanyindong"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="8556" end="8569" title="Neolithic Age" label="Neolithic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q259438" start="9114" end="9120" title="millet" label="millet"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="9164" end="9181" title="Radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon-dated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688860" start="9204" end="9209" title="Jiahu" label="Jiahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012594" start="9294" end="9301" title="Damaidi" label="Damaidi"/>
<link wikidata="Q18669097" start="9320" end="9334" title="Neolithic signs in China" label="cliff carvings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18175774" start="9570" end="9583" title="proto-writing" label="proto-writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344314" start="9673" end="9680" title="Dadiwan culture" label="Dadiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q806929" start="9710" end="9715" title="Banpo" label="Banpo"/>
<link wikidata="Q217859" start="9962" end="9967" title="Taosi" label="Taosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204909" start="9976" end="9992" title="Liangzhu culture" label="Liangzhu culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q854631" start="10128" end="10144" title="Yangshao culture" label="Yangshao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057935" start="10174" end="10190" title="Longshan culture" label="Longshan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189" start="10435" end="10442" title="peaches" label="peaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="10444" end="10452" title="cherries" label="cherries"/>
<link wikidata="Q13191" start="10457" end="10464" title="Orange (fruit)" label="oranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310602" start="10611" end="10627" title="Majiayao culture" label="Majiayao culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041674" start="10703" end="10727" title="Lower Xiajiadian culture" label="Lower Xiajiadian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q929072" start="10768" end="10778" title="Sanxingdui" label="Sanxingdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="10802" end="10809" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193806" start="11083" end="11095" title="state of Shu" label="state of Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285982" start="11167" end="11185" title="Ferrous metallurgy" label="Ferrous metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="11234" end="11241" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q6823449" start="11283" end="11296" title="meteoric iron" label="meteoric iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000135" start="11324" end="11332" title="Gaocheng District" label="Gaocheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q58401" start="11336" end="11348" title="Shijiazhuang" label="Shijiazhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q21208" start="11354" end="11359" title="Hebei" label="Hebei"/>
<link wikidata="Q179842" start="11427" end="11442" title="Tibetan Plateau" label="Tibetan Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358851" start="11484" end="11503" title="Zhang Zhung culture" label="Zhang Zhung culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q819556" start="12159" end="12162" title="Emperor Yao" label="Yao"/>
<link wikidata="Q313342" start="12164" end="12168" title="Emperor Shun" label="Shun"/>
<link wikidata="Q627784" start="12174" end="12176" title="Yu the Great" label="Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040489" start="12197" end="12214" title="abdication system" label="abdication system"/>
<link wikidata="Q169705" start="12380" end="12391" title="Xia dynasty" label="Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q805994" start="12511" end="12524" title="Bamboo Annals" label="Bamboo Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9372" start="12535" end="12544" title="Sima Qian" label="Sima Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q272530" start="12558" end="12563" title="Shiji" label="Shiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q2692927" start="12708" end="12715" title="Erlitou" label="Erlitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151593" start="13580" end="13588" title="Erligang" label="Erligang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30340" start="13597" end="13606" title="Zhengzhou" label="Zhengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q464904" start="13637" end="13642" title="Yinxu" label="Yinxu"/>
<link wikidata="Q324293" start="13656" end="13662" title="Anyang" label="Anyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325593" start="13719" end="13729" title="Late Shang" label="Late Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q283127" start="13934" end="13945" title="oracle bone" label="oracle bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q464904" start="14174" end="14177" title="Yinxu" label="Yin"/>
<link wikidata="Q369159" start="14198" end="14205" title="Wu Ding" label="Wu Ding"/>
<link wikidata="Q929072" start="14643" end="14653" title="Sanxingdui" label="Sanxingdui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="15013" end="15025" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="15406" end="15411" title="Shang" label="Shang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061289" start="15455" end="15462" title="King Wu of Zhou" label="King Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273506" start="15490" end="15504" title="Battle of Muye" label="Battle of Muye"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="15781" end="15798" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818368" start="16354" end="16362" title="Zongzhou" label="Zongzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="16376" end="16386" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="16392" end="16401" title="Chengzhou" label="Chengzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="16403" end="16410" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="16597" end="16610" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193397" start="16678" end="16686" title="King You of Zhou" label="King You"/>
<link wikidata="Q15913098" start="16723" end="16741" title="Battle of Mount Li" label="Battle of Mount Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018710" start="16762" end="16770" title="Quanrong" label="Quanrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193546" start="16830" end="16839" title="King Ping of Zhou" label="King Ping"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="16844" end="16851" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q747720" start="17054" end="17078" title="Spring and Autumn Annals" label="Spring and Autumn Annals"/>
<link wikidata="Q836688" start="17277" end="17294" title="Ancient Chinese states" label="settlement states"/>
<link wikidata="Q182034" start="17422" end="17430" title="hegemony" label="hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9333" start="17960" end="17965" title="Laozi" label="Laozi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604" start="17967" end="17976" title="Confucius" label="Confucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q37151" start="17981" end="17988" title="Sun Tzu" label="Sun Tzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267934" start="18406" end="18440" title="Partition of Jin" label="partitioned the state between them"/>
<link wikidata="Q864947" start="18447" end="18473" title="Hundred Schools of Thought" label="Hundred Schools of Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q184663" start="18477" end="18505" title="Chinese philosophy" label="classical Chinese philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="18627" end="18639" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="18641" end="18647" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="18649" end="18657" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q720866" start="18662" end="18668" title="Mohism" label="Mohism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185063" start="19035" end="19049" title="Warring States" label="Warring States"/>
<link wikidata="Q35216" start="19069" end="19073" title="Zhou dynasty" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q230230" start="19288" end="19297" title="Zuo Zhuan" label="Zuo Zhuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849730" start="19465" end="19473" title="Tsinghua Bamboo Slips" label="Tsinghua"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19563" end="19592" title="Tsinghua Bamboo Slips#Decimal multiplication table" label="base-10 multiplication table."/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="19800" end="19807" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="19812" end="19820" title="Liaoning" label="Liaoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q517267" start="19886" end="19898" title="Commandery (China)" label="commanderies"/>
<link wikidata="Q515716" start="19903" end="19914" title="prefectures" label="prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q50231" start="20105" end="20143" title="Administrative divisions of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="&amp;quot;sheng&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;xian&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34756" start="20230" end="20233" title="Qin (state)" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193806" start="20317" end="20320" title="Shu (state)" label="Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q217618" start="20332" end="20338" title="Jinsha site" label="Jinsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q504759" start="20389" end="20392" title="Chu (state)" label="Chu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="20571" end="20581" title="Ying Zheng" label="Ying Zheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="20693" end="20700" title="Emperor of China" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="20721" end="20734" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q210677" start="21208" end="21225" title="Chinese mythology" label="Chinese mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q497341" start="21279" end="21287" title="Xianyang" label="Xianyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="21318" end="21330" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517267" start="21504" end="21516" title="Commandery (China)" label="commanderies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289426" start="21534" end="21542" title="Counties of China" label="counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q238344" start="21653" end="21661" title="Legalism (Chinese philosophy)" label="Legalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275294" start="21712" end="21722" title="Grand chancellor (China)" label="chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152919" start="21723" end="21728" title="Li Si" label="Li Si"/>
<link wikidata="Q351345" start="21771" end="21781" title="Shang Yang" label="Shang Yang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208842" start="22053" end="22064" title="seal script" label="seal script"/>
<link wikidata="Q845689" start="22086" end="22095" title="Ban Liang" label="Ban Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147887" start="22185" end="22238" title="Burning of books and burying of scholars" label="mass burning of books and the live burial of scholars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22331" end="22356" title="Burning of books and burying of scholars#Skepticism" label="historicity of this event"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="22445" end="22457" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q218652" start="22508" end="22514" title="Wuxing (Chinese philosophy)" label="Wuxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q338" start="22531" end="22543" title="cosmology" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945630" start="22808" end="22830" title="Patricia Buckley Ebrey" label="Patricia Buckley Ebrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151702" start="23084" end="23093" title="Meng Tian" label="Meng Tian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267754" start="23112" end="23137" title="Qin&amp;#x27;s campaign against the Xiongnu" label="led a successful campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="23159" end="23166" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="23343" end="23362" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q910180" start="23496" end="23516" title="Mausoleum of the First Qin Emperor" label="monumental mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47672" start="23548" end="23563" title="Terracotta Army" label="Terracotta Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210" start="23898" end="23906" title="Emperor Gaozu of Han" label="Liu Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151705" start="23938" end="23956" title="Chu–Han Contention" label="Chu–Han Contention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315969" start="24002" end="24012" title="Pax Sinica" label="golden age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="24330" end="24342" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="24366" end="24378" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="24704" end="24725" title="Han Chinese" label="dominant ethnic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="24803" end="24821" title="Chinese characters" label="written characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282973" start="24834" end="24864" title="Huang-Lao" label="initial laissez-faire policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7221" start="24877" end="24880" title="Emperor Wen of Han" label="Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224" start="24885" end="24889" title="Emperor Jing of Han" label="Jing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225" start="24905" end="24915" title="Emperor Wu of Han" label="Emperor Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q835560" start="25217" end="25238" title="Taixue" label="Imperial Universities"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25384" end="25410" title="Economy of the Han Dynasty#Private manufacture and government monopolies" label="with government monopolies"/>
<link wikidata="Q744969" start="25412" end="25436" title="Han–Xiongnu War" label="Major military campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="25473" end="25487" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q197276" start="25580" end="25590" title="Zhang Qian" label="Zhang Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190423" start="25650" end="25675" title="Western Regions" label="states in the Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="25691" end="25700" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932349" start="25933" end="25961" title="southward expansion of the Han dynasty" label="series of military campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q774615" start="25974" end="25980" title="Baiyue" label="Baiyue"/>
<link wikidata="Q15798413" start="26005" end="26021" title="Han campaigns against Minyue" label="Minyue in 135 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711032" start="26034" end="26050" title="Han–Nanyue War" label="Nanyue in 111 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q16840963" start="26056" end="26070" title="Han campaign against Dian" label="Dian in 109 BC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050320" start="26496" end="26508" title="consort clan" label="consort clan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250" start="26646" end="26655" title="Wang Mang" label="Wang Mang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250" start="26700" end="26709" title="Wang Mang" label="Wang Mang"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="26727" end="26744" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355" start="27243" end="27255" title="Yellow River" label="Yellow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051521" start="27382" end="27396" title="Weiyang Palace" label="Weiyang Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268" start="27456" end="27471" title="Emperor Guangwu of Han" label="Emperor Guangwu"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="27556" end="27563" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="27649" end="27668" title="Eastern Han dynasty" label="Eastern Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271" start="27715" end="27719" title="Emperor Ming of Han" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277" start="27724" end="27729" title="Emperor Zhang of Han" label="Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="27832" end="27846" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27851" end="27870" title="Han–Xiongnu War#Final stages" label="decisively defeated"/>
<link wikidata="Q366132" start="27897" end="27905" title="Ban Chao" label="Ban Chao"/>
<link wikidata="Q161750" start="27948" end="27954" title="Pamirs" label="Pamirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="27976" end="27987" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="28008" end="28017" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28072" end="28091" title="Chinese Buddhism#Traditional accounts" label="arrival of Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q182246" start="28156" end="28180" title="Romano-Chinese relations" label="Roman embassies to China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433671" start="28320" end="28364" title="Science and technology of the Han dynasty" label="most prolific eras of science and technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q335415" start="28417" end="28428" title="papermaking" label="papermaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q229235" start="28432" end="28439" title="Cai Lun" label="Cai Lun"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="28514" end="28522" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q197206" start="28523" end="28533" title="Zhang Heng" label="Zhang Heng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050320" start="28690" end="28702" title="consort clan" label="consort clan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28708" end="28715" title="Eunuch#China" label="eunuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q751743" start="28721" end="28744" title="Yellow Turban Rebellion" label="Yellow Turban Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q220098" start="28788" end="28795" title="warlord" label="warlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q70806" start="28969" end="28998" title="Romance of the Three Kingdoms" label="Romance of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q204077" start="29052" end="29059" title="Cao Cao" label="Cao Cao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316" start="29134" end="29153" title="Emperor Xian of Han" label="Emperor Xian of Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q320930" start="29175" end="29178" title="Cao Wei" label="Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q320925" start="29212" end="29215" title="Shu Han" label="Shu"/>
<link wikidata="Q274488" start="29220" end="29222" title="Eastern Wu" label="Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="29439" end="29450" title="Jin dynasty (265–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352" start="29578" end="29589" title="Jin dynasty (266–420)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="29652" end="29663" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185043" start="29676" end="29690" title="Three Kingdoms" label="Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q770951" start="29750" end="29774" title="War of the Eight Princes" label="War of the Eight Princes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817040" start="29816" end="29849" title="Uprising of the Five Barbarians" label="non-Han Chinese settlers rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="29863" end="29870" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="29875" end="29888" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q7392" start="29913" end="29921" title="Emperor Yuan of Jin" label="Sima Rui"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="29943" end="29950" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q683551" start="30262" end="30278" title="Sixteen Kingdoms" label="Sixteen Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q188836" start="30310" end="30317" title="Xiongnu" label="Xiongnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="30319" end="30326" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149106" start="30328" end="30331" title="Jie people" label="Jie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194940" start="30333" end="30335" title="Di (Five Barbarians)" label="Di"/>
<link wikidata="Q7267629" start="30340" end="30345" title="Qiang (historical people)" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q83328" start="30398" end="30403" title="Turkic people" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="30405" end="30412" title="Mongols" label="Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q187985" start="30418" end="30426" title="Tibetans" label="Tibetans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258641" start="30465" end="30474" title="Sinicization" label="sinicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q841325" start="30551" end="30556" title="Qiang people" label="Qiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="30642" end="30652" title="Great Wall" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q49697" start="31088" end="31096" title="Liu Song dynasty" label="Liu Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q62456" start="31098" end="31109" title="Southern Qi" label="Southern Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069868" start="31111" end="31116" title="Liang dynasty" label="Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q62454" start="31129" end="31133" title="Chen dynasty" label="Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330294" start="31217" end="31225" title="Jiankang" label="Jiankang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258641" start="31390" end="31396" title="sinify" label="sinify"/>
<link wikidata="Q875305" start="31476" end="31488" title="Northern Wei" label="Northern Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q861054" start="31515" end="31522" title="Xianbei" label="Xianbei"/>
<link wikidata="Q307069" start="31612" end="31619" title="Eastern Wei" label="Eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143164" start="31624" end="31635" title="Western Wei" label="Western Wei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143524" start="31659" end="31670" title="Northern Qi" label="Northern Qi"/>
<link wikidata="Q551067" start="31675" end="31688" title="Northern Zhou" label="Northern Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="32026" end="32034" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="32142" end="32148" title="Taoist" label="Taoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418" start="32333" end="32344" title="Emperor Wen of Sui" label="Emperor Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q551067" start="32373" end="32386" title="Northern Zhou" label="Northern Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q62454" start="32419" end="32432" title="Chen dynasty" label="Southern Chen"/>
<link wikidata="Q706894" start="32580" end="32616" title="Three Departments and Six Ministries" label="Three Departments and Six Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="32618" end="32638" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501249" start="32713" end="32726" title="fubing system" label="fubing system"/>
<link wikidata="Q710066" start="32760" end="32778" title="equal-field system" label="equal-field system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752816" start="32936" end="32956" title="Ancient Chinese coinage" label="Standardized coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="33197" end="33208" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="33247" end="33269" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Daxing (Chang&amp;#x27;an)"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="33274" end="33281" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q197877" start="33297" end="33313" title="Southeastern China" label="southeast region"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="33366" end="33376" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="33524" end="33540" title="Korean Peninsula" label="Korean Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q48883" start="33552" end="33568" title="Goguryeo–Sui War" label="Goguryeo–Sui War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272591" start="33632" end="33655" title="transition from Sui to Tang" label="the fall of the dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315969" start="33713" end="33747" title="Pax Sinica" label="golden age of Chinese civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236984" start="33863" end="33869" title="Tang poetry" label="poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q847618" start="33887" end="33895" title="Chinese Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="33951" end="33964" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="33973" end="33983" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625002" start="34016" end="34057" title="List of largest cities throughout history" label="largest city in the world during its time"/>
<link wikidata="Q9700" start="34079" end="34092" title="Emperor Gaozu of Tang" label="Emperor Gaozu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9701" start="34196" end="34203" title="Emperor Taizong of Tang" label="Taizong"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="34225" end="34252" title="Emperor of China" label="emperors in Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006438" start="34407" end="34425" title="Imperial Chinese tributary system" label="a tributary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7682683" start="34453" end="34464" title="Tang dynasty in Inner Asia" label="Tarim Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="34629" end="34638" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q188843" start="34727" end="34739" title="Cosmopolitanism" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189178" start="34850" end="34855" title="Nara period" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="34872" end="34883" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42063" start="35022" end="35030" title="Xuanzang" label="Xuanzang"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="35042" end="35055" title="Bhikkhu" label="Buddhist monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156436" start="35244" end="35250" title="sarira" label="sarira"/>
<link wikidata="Q706894" start="35387" end="35423" title="Three Departments and Six Ministries" label="Three Departments and Six Ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="35613" end="35630" title="Scholar-bureaucrats" label="scholar officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="35643" end="35663" title="imperial examination" label="imperial examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q710066" start="35726" end="35744" title="equal-field system" label="equal-field system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2501249" start="35963" end="35969" title="Fubing system" label="fubing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="36148" end="36163" title="Standing army" label="standing armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="36366" end="36375" title="Wu Zetian" label="Wu Zetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q19643" start="36395" end="36410" title="empress regnant" label="empress regnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9746" start="36479" end="36495" title="Emperor Xuanzong of Tang" label="Emperor Xuanzong"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="36543" end="36550" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="36558" end="36566" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236984" start="36681" end="36686" title="Tang poetry" label="poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071" start="36688" end="36694" title="Li Bai" label="Li Bai"/>
<link wikidata="Q33772" start="36699" end="36704" title="Du Fu" label="Du Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q253774" start="36754" end="36773" title="An Lushan Rebellion" label="An Lushan Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36851" end="36876" title="An Lushan Rebellion#Death toll" label="devastated the population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688932" start="37014" end="37022" title="jiedushi" label="jiedushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9384423" start="37224" end="37237" title="Salt in Chinese history" label="salt monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11570150" start="37587" end="37603" title="Niu–Li factional strife" label="factional strife"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="37618" end="37625" title="eunuchs" label="eunuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042914" start="37626" end="37647" title="Sweet Dew incident" label="amassed immense power"/>
<link wikidata="Q620621" start="37671" end="37691" title="Huang Chao Rebellion" label="Huang Chao Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="37783" end="37792" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5613750" start="37820" end="37828" title="Guangzhou massacre" label="massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q187136" start="37928" end="37935" title="Luoyang" label="Luoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501000" start="37940" end="37953" title="Chang&amp;#x27;an" label="Chang&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="37997" end="38000" title="Han Chinese" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367368" start="38005" end="38011" title="Shatuo" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1688932" start="38012" end="38020" title="Jiedushi" label="warlords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275305" start="38135" end="38142" title="Zhu Wen" label="Zhu Wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q242115" start="38171" end="38186" title="Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period" label="era of division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001693" start="38475" end="38486" title="Li Guochang" label="Li Guochang"/>
<link wikidata="Q831218" start="38566" end="38582" title="Uyghur Khaganate" label="Uyghur Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q137018" start="38688" end="38701" title="Zhangxin Khan" label="Zhangxin Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495935" start="39163" end="39172" title="Shi Xiong" label="Shi Xiong"/>
<link wikidata="Q783489" start="39629" end="39634" title="Later Liang (Five Dynasties)" label="Liang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143126" start="39636" end="39640" title="Later Tang" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154540" start="39642" end="39645" title="Later Jin (Five Dynasties)" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069829" start="39647" end="39650" title="Later Han (Five Dynasties)" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154556" start="39655" end="39659" title="Later Zhou" label="Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143126" start="39796" end="39800" title="Later Tang" label="Tang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154540" start="39802" end="39805" title="Later Jin (Five Dynasties)" label="Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069829" start="39810" end="39813" title="Later Han (Five Dynasties)" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258641" start="39819" end="39828" title="Sinicization" label="sinicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367368" start="39829" end="39841" title="Shatuo" label="Shatuo Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q42740" start="39882" end="39893" title="Han Chinese" label="Han Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151682" start="40129" end="40148" title="Sixteen Prefectures" label="Sixteen Prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="40176" end="40186" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="40215" end="40234" title="Liao dynasty" label="Khitan Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="40278" end="40290" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890760" start="40347" end="40374" title="Battle of Bạch Đằng (938)" label="gained lasting independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q403273" start="40381" end="40407" title="Third Chinese domination of Vietnam" label="being a Chinese prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q403827" start="40412" end="40426" title="Chinese domination of Vietnam" label="many centuries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154556" start="40637" end="40647" title="Later Zhou" label="Later Zhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7471" start="40656" end="40669" title="Emperor Taizu of Song" label="Zhao Kuangyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="40700" end="40712" title="Song dynasty" label="Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7471" start="40945" end="40958" title="Emperor Taizu of Song" label="Emperor Taizu"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="40992" end="40999" title="Kaifeng" label="Kaifeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q208471" start="41015" end="41023" title="Bianjing" label="Bianjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="41069" end="41081" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258641" start="41144" end="41153" title="Sinicization" label="sinicized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495771" start="41154" end="41168" title="nomadic empire" label="nomadic empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q218332" start="41175" end="41181" title="Khitan people" label="Khitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="41238" end="41247" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="41249" end="41257" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046848" start="41272" end="41286" title="North China" label="Northern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="41354" end="41359" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="41361" end="41368" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57448" start="41374" end="41381" title="Ningxia" label="Ningxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q756608" start="41387" end="41393" title="Tangut people" label="Tangut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427" start="41413" end="41432" title="Western Xia" label="Western Xia dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151682" start="41485" end="41504" title="sixteen prefectures" label="sixteen prefectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154540" start="41517" end="41533" title="Later Jin (Five Dynasties)" label="previous dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871081" start="41535" end="41544" title="Battle of Gaoliang River" label="campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="41571" end="41583" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7473" start="41591" end="41608" title="Emperor Taizong of Song" label="early Song period"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="41661" end="41668" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q147304" start="41692" end="41709" title="North China Plain" label="North China Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151686" start="41809" end="41824" title="Chanyuan Treaty" label="Chanyuan Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006438" start="41964" end="41980" title="imperial Chinese tributary system" label="tributary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="42334" end="42345" title="Liao dynasty" label="Liao Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="42525" end="42536" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="42566" end="42573" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204766" start="42681" end="42691" title="cataphract" label="cataphract"/>
<link wikidata="Q862304" start="42793" end="42804" title="Qara Khitai" label="Qara Khitai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446152" start="42836" end="42875" title="Jin–Song Wars" label="Jin&amp;#x27;s invasion of the Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326831" start="42958" end="42975" title="Jingkang Incident" label="Jingkang Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="42988" end="43009" title="Northern Song dynasty" label="Northern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446152" start="43021" end="43056" title="Jurchen campaigns against the Song dynasty" label="entire north of China was conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="43130" end="43138" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="43158" end="43179" title="Southern Song dynasty" label="Southern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q213576" start="43218" end="43228" title="Huai River" label="Huai River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092093" start="43397" end="43412" title="Mongol conquest" label="Mongol conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014253" start="43447" end="43466" title="Mongol conquest of the Jin dynasty" label="Jin dynasty in 1234"/>
<link wikidata="Q400061" start="43484" end="43513" title="Mongol conquest of the Song dynasty" label="Southern Song dynasty in 1279"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615610" start="43645" end="43657" title="Economy of the Song dynasty" label="Song economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625002" start="44043" end="44063" title="List of largest cities throughout history" label="most populous cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149509" start="44271" end="44285" title="Maritime Silk Route" label="maritime trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="44323" end="44338" title="South-east Asia" label="South-east Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34735" start="44455" end="44462" title="compass" label="compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q398805" start="44489" end="44499" title="China Seas" label="China Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q651658" start="44625" end="44633" title="shipment" label="shipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q953729" start="44703" end="44717" title="Jiaozi (currency)" label="paper currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="44749" end="44756" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="44805" end="44809" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265657" start="44971" end="44978" title="Su Song" label="Su Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q270085" start="44995" end="45003" title="Shen Kuo" label="Shen Kuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="45136" end="45154" title="woodblock printing" label="woodblock printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131938946" start="45159" end="45170" title="paper money" label="paper money"/>
<link wikidata="Q319618" start="45344" end="45354" title="Wang Anshi" label="Wang Anshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33566" start="45359" end="45369" title="Sima Guang" label="Sima Guang"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="45455" end="45468" title="Neo-Confucian" label="Neo-Confucian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9397" start="45494" end="45500" title="Zhu Xi" label="Zhu Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q207062" start="45615" end="45629" title="Zizhi Tongjian" label="Zizhi Tongjian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261053" start="45710" end="45731" title="Woodblock print" label="movable-type printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q714802" start="45848" end="45892" title="Along the River During the Qingming Festival" label="Along the River During the Qingming Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032518" start="45909" end="45940" title="Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute" label="Eighteen Songs of a Nomad Flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241242" start="46004" end="46015" title="Lin Tinggui" label="Lin Tinggui"/>
<link wikidata="Q192781" start="46080" end="46098" title="Military history" label="history of warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q12861" start="46100" end="46109" title="Gunpowder" label="Gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="46133" end="46145" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12796" start="46247" end="46254" title="firearm" label="firearm"/>
<link wikidata="Q655697" start="46260" end="46272" title="siege engine" label="siege engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="46367" end="46374" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q213576" start="46379" end="46389" title="Huai River" label="Huai River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226419" start="46541" end="46548" title="Dinghai" label="Dinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874394" start="46550" end="46562" title="Paddle wheel" label="Paddle-wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19776" start="46586" end="46595" title="trebuchet" label="trebuchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q897842" start="46610" end="46626" title="Incendiary device" label="incendiary bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q985668" start="46736" end="46753" title="Battle of Tangdao" label="Battle of Tangdao"/>
<link wikidata="Q45341" start="46761" end="46775" title="East China Sea" label="East China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397117" start="46785" end="46801" title="Battle of Caishi" label="Battle of Caishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q400061" start="47109" end="47132" title="Mongol conquest of the Song dynasty" label="halting Mongol advances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078359" start="47279" end="47294" title="Battle of Yamen" label="Battle of Yamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="47344" end="47356" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q932129" start="47399" end="47419" title="List of Mongol rulers" label="Great Khan of Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="47421" end="47432" title="Kublai Khan" label="Kublai Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="47458" end="47470" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="47504" end="47520" title="Emperor of China" label="Emperor of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987562" start="47537" end="47555" title="Division of the Mongol Empire" label="his inherited part"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857432" start="47582" end="47597" title="Chinese dynasty" label="Chinese dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="47768" end="47774" title="Mongols" label="Mongol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089515" start="47805" end="47821" title="conquest dynasty" label="conquest dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="47865" end="47877" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q476256" start="47882" end="47896" title="List of ethnic groups in China" label="its population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187403" start="47903" end="47918" title="Mongols in China" label="ethnic minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875368" start="47961" end="47977" title="Mongol heartland" label="Mongol heartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987562" start="48046" end="48067" title="Division of the Mongol Empire" label="eastern Mongol empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q208156" start="48220" end="48238" title="Mongol invasions of Japan" label="invasions of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448644" start="48243" end="48250" title="Mongol invasions of Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q101186473" start="48335" end="48344" title="Khanbaliq" label="Khanbaliq"/>
<link wikidata="Q31347" start="48391" end="48402" title="Grand Canal (China)" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022911" start="48582" end="48589" title="Historical capitals of China" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48662" end="48679" title="Division of the Mongol Empire#Civil war" label="Mongol civil wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q20987562" start="48716" end="48745" title="division of the Mongol Empire" label="division of the Mongol Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q187878" start="48815" end="48821" title="Khagan" label="Khagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q487829" start="48849" end="48865" title="Chagatai Khanate" label="Chagatai Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="48871" end="48883" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q178084" start="48892" end="48901" title="Ilkhanate" label="Ilkhanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473258" start="48991" end="49004" title="Pax Mongolica" label="Pax Mongolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q36288" start="49115" end="49124" title="Silk Road" label="Silk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2369507" start="49256" end="49269" title="Yam (route)" label="postal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q68695" start="49411" end="49419" title="Quanzhou" label="Quanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970" start="49424" end="49432" title="Hangzhou" label="Hangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="49535" end="49543" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6101" start="49545" end="49555" title="Marco Polo" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q654562" start="49620" end="49633" title="The Travels of Marco Polo" label="travel record"/>
<link wikidata="Q212685" start="49658" end="49676" title="High Middle Ages" label="medieval Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131938946" start="49767" end="49781" title="paper currency" label="paper currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665794" start="49810" end="49818" title="Jiaochao" label="Jiaochao"/>
<link wikidata="Q185565" start="49935" end="49949" title="hyperinflation" label="hyperinflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258641" start="50098" end="50110" title="sinicization" label="sinicization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089515" start="50152" end="50170" title="Conquest dynasty" label="conquest dynasties"/>
<link wikidata="Q172497" start="50310" end="50326" title="Mongolian Steppe" label="Mongolian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073164" start="50617" end="50633" title="Semu" label="foreign migrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q708299" start="50786" end="50803" title="Scholar-official" label="scholar officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q930910" start="51000" end="51004" title="zaju" label="zaju"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763598" start="51029" end="51043" title="Sanqu" label="literary songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763598" start="51051" end="51056" title="sanqu" label="sanqu"/>
<link wikidata="Q8060058" start="51101" end="51113" title="Yuan poetry" label="poetry style"/>
<link wikidata="Q834808" start="51129" end="51131" title="Qu (poetry)" label="qu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130197" start="51611" end="51624" title="Timothy Brook" label="Timothy Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q103350" start="51668" end="51678" title="serfdom" label="enserfment"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="51853" end="51859" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q6489247" start="52387" end="52411" title="Largest naval battle in history" label="massive naval engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291963" start="52412" end="52426" title="Battle of Lake Poyang" label="at Lake Poyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="52428" end="52441" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Zhu Yuanzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q268218" start="52512" end="52519" title="Emperor of China" label="emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="52536" end="52548" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8959" start="52677" end="52697" title="Northern Yuan dynasty" label="sustained the regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="52901" end="52913" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="52982" end="52996" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="53031" end="53038" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="53063" end="53070" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9965" start="53076" end="53090" title="Yongle Emperor" label="Yongle Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="53625" end="53635" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q825754" start="53724" end="53740" title="neo-Confucianism" label="neo-Confucianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="53978" end="53997" title="Treasure voyages" label="voyages of Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857432" start="54048" end="54063" title="Dynasties of China" label="Chinese dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="54226" end="54230" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="54235" end="54239" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208709" start="55043" end="55060" title="Grand Secretariat" label="Grand Secretariat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10942384" start="55134" end="55143" title="memorial to the throne" label="memorials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112854" start="55718" end="55727" title="Ming–Hồ War" label="conquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338187" start="55732" end="55748" title="Fourth Chinese domination of Vietnam" label="occupied Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q699127" start="55780" end="55800" title="Treasure voyages" label="Chinese fleet sailed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191125" start="55923" end="55934" title="Moghulistan" label="Moghulistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80290" start="56233" end="56247" title="Forbidden City" label="Forbidden City"/>
<link wikidata="Q9263" start="56491" end="56502" title="Esen Tayisi" label="Esen Tayisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q689831" start="56510" end="56515" title="Oirats" label="Oirat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9983" start="56589" end="56606" title="Emperor Yingzong of Ming" label="Zhengtong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196236" start="56610" end="56614" title="Tumu Crisis" label="Tumu"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088230" start="56704" end="56719" title="Ming Great Wall" label="Ming Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569008" start="57112" end="57132" title="Haijin" label="maritime prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="57252" end="57268" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452540" start="57348" end="57373" title="Battle of Tunmen" label="repulsed by the Ming navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758751" start="57377" end="57385" title="Tuen Mun" label="Tuen Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443119" start="57404" end="57411" title="Second Battle of Tamao" label="in 1522"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="57515" end="57520" title="wokou" label="wokou"/>
<link wikidata="Q10011" start="57594" end="57609" title="Jiajing Emperor" label="Jiajing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="57673" end="57682" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="57687" end="57693" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23419106" start="57698" end="57723" title="Jiajing wokou raids" label="much military suppression"/>
<link wikidata="Q697605" start="57770" end="57775" title="wokou" label="wokou"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57809" end="57835" title="Military history of the Philippines#Pre-colonial period (900 AD to 1565)" label="Philippines by the Pisheye"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="57911" end="57916" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="58045" end="58062" title="Manila Galleon" label="Spanish at Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808040" start="58092" end="58119" title="Global silver trade from the 16th to 19th centuries" label="Mexican and Peruvian silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q653884" start="58129" end="58145" title="Spanish Americas" label="Spanish Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q918799" start="58267" end="58281" title="Penghu" label="Penghu islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053924" start="58289" end="58309" title="Sino-Dutch conflicts" label="Sino-Dutch conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q699446" start="58368" end="58387" title="Dutch Formosa" label="The Dutch in Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025874" start="58416" end="58437" title="Battle of Liaoluo Bay" label="Battle of Liaoluo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="58504" end="58511" title="Koxinga" label="Koxinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10011" start="58590" end="58605" title="Jiajing Emperor" label="Jiajing Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191293" start="58611" end="58629" title="1556 Shaanxi earthquake" label="Shaanxi earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="58740" end="58779" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)" label="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–1598)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="58882" end="58896" title="Joseon" label="Joseon dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799000" start="58923" end="58938" title="List of tributaries of Imperial China" label="tributary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006438" start="58944" end="58961" title="Imperial Chinese tributary system" label="regional hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="59068" end="59077" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="59094" end="59100" title="Manchu people" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="59102" end="59109" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q311189" start="59141" end="59148" title="Nurhaci" label="Nurhaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="59236" end="59252" title="Hong Taiji" label="later proclaimed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="59260" end="59272" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="59313" end="59318" title="Joseon dynasty" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799000" start="59326" end="59335" title="List of tributaries of Imperial China" label="tributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8959" start="59347" end="59355" title="Northern Yuan dynasty" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048381" start="59481" end="59493" title="Shanhai Pass" label="Shanhai Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q333567" start="59587" end="59605" title="Li Zicheng" label="peasants uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q145665" start="59727" end="59734" title="Manchu people" label="Manchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089515" start="59754" end="59770" title="conquest dynasty" label="conquest dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="59795" end="59807" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="59902" end="59910" title="Jurchen people" label="Jurchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q311189" start="60056" end="60063" title="Nurhaci" label="Nurhaci"/>
<link wikidata="Q296367" start="60103" end="60113" title="Hong Taiji" label="Hong Taiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="60194" end="60207" title="Eight Banners" label="Eight Banners"/>
<link wikidata="Q333567" start="60281" end="60291" title="Li Zicheng" label="Li Zicheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q10069" start="60350" end="60367" title="Chongzhen Emperor" label="Chongzhen Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q468701" start="60452" end="60461" title="Wu Sangui" label="Wu Sangui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198163" start="60561" end="60587" title="Southern Ming dynasty" label="Ming remnants in the south"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427966" start="60600" end="60620" title="Transition from Ming to Qing" label="Ming-Qing transition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370784" start="60736" end="60748" title="Shun dynasty" label="Shun dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178974" start="60753" end="60763" title="Xi dynasty" label="Xi dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065" start="60857" end="60873" title="natural disaster" label="natural disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q190530" start="60916" end="60930" title="Little Ice Age" label="Little Ice Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q44512" start="60935" end="60943" title="epidemic" label="epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q104892373" start="60954" end="61009" title="Great Plague in the late Ming dynasty" label="Great Plague during the last decade of the Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61045" end="61076" title="Economic history of China before 1912#Qing dynasty (1644–1912)" label="significant harm to the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11212956" start="61298" end="61308" title="Inner Asia" label="Inner Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978480" start="61502" end="61517" title="Queue (hairstyle)" label="queue hairstyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622777" start="61579" end="61588" title="Changshan" label="Changshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q340803" start="61596" end="61605" title="Eight Banners" label="bannermen"/>
<link wikidata="Q840356" start="61622" end="61632" title="Tangzhuang" label="Tangzhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327357" start="61689" end="61713" title="Ancient Chinese clothing" label="traditional Han clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17790" start="61923" end="61937" title="Kangxi Emperor" label="Kangxi Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q850590" start="61972" end="61989" title="Kangxi Dictionary" label="Kangxi Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044456" start="62179" end="62204" title="Ten Great Campaigns" label="Conquests in Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q112501" start="62318" end="62349" title="Revolt of the Three Feudatories" label="Revolt of the Three Feudatories"/>
<link wikidata="Q310453" start="62468" end="62484" title="Shunzhi Emperor" label="previous emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152855" start="62577" end="62596" title="Kingdom of Tungning" label="Kingdom of Tungning"/>
<link wikidata="Q197615" start="62637" end="62644" title="Koxinga" label="Koxinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065867" start="62791" end="62823" title="Sino-Russian border conflicts" label="defeated the Russians at Albazin"/>
<link wikidata="Q696094" start="62842" end="62861" title="Treaty of Nerchinsk" label="Treaty of Nerchinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="62878" end="62894" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Qianlong Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367193" start="62945" end="62955" title="High Qing era" label="its zenith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62982" end="63022" title="List of largest empires#Empires at their greatest extent" label="one-third of the world&amp;#x27;s population"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63081" end="63112" title="List of largest empires#Empires at their greatest extent" label="one of the largest empires ever"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="63231" end="63245" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="63253" end="63268" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q238262" start="63287" end="63304" title="Treaty of Nanking" label="Treaty of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864872" start="63325" end="63334" title="History of Hong Kong (1800s–1930s)" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q46452" start="63375" end="63380" title="opium" label="opium"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="63547" end="63563" title="unequal treaties" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="63657" end="63674" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q334732" start="63756" end="63768" title="Hong Xiuquan" label="Hong Xiuquan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3486676" start="63807" end="63831" title="Taiping Heavenly Kingdom" label="Taiping Heavenly Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q189512" start="63963" end="63974" title="Zeng Guofan" label="Zeng Guofan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784779" start="64052" end="64075" title="Third Battle of Nanking" label="Third Battle of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q838771" start="64286" end="64307" title="Punti–Hakka Clan Wars" label="Punti–Hakka Clan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q965649" start="64309" end="64323" title="Nian Rebellion" label="Nian Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q889879" start="64325" end="64338" title="Dungan revolt (1862–1877)" label="Dungan Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230569" start="64344" end="64361" title="Panthay Rebellion" label="Panthay Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q475513" start="64693" end="64712" title="Tongzhi Restoration" label="Tongzhi Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q378517" start="64826" end="64838" title="Li Hongzhang" label="Li Hongzhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q230200" start="64843" end="64855" title="Zuo Zongtang" label="Zuo Zongtang"/>
<link wikidata="Q498117" start="64863" end="64890" title="Self-Strengthening Movement" label="Self-Strengthening Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="65161" end="65172" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q702430" start="65197" end="65210" title="Beiyang Fleet" label="Beiyang Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178687" start="65224" end="65247" title="First Sino-Japanese War" label="First Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186887" start="65288" end="65296" title="New Army" label="New Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q299710" start="65302" end="65317" title="Guangxu Emperor" label="Guangxu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q360135" start="65330" end="65341" title="Kang Youwei" label="Kang Youwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q917709" start="65392" end="65417" title="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; Reform" label="Hundred Days&amp;#x27; Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q47842" start="65426" end="65446" title="Empress Dowager Cixi" label="Empress Dowager Cixi"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="65606" end="65620" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337436" start="65829" end="65870" title="Siege of the International Legations" label="besieged in the foreign legations quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q320404" start="65875" end="65896" title="Eight-Nation Alliance" label="Eight-Nation Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459167" start="65906" end="65924" title="Seymour Expedition" label="Seymour Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356964" start="66108" end="66126" title="Battle of Langfang" label="Battle of Langfang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890708" start="66134" end="66178" title="Battle of Dagu Forts (1900)" label="the Alliance&amp;#x27;s attack on the Dagu Forts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087324" start="66281" end="66307" title="Battle of Tientsin" label="fierce fighting at Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526415" start="66353" end="66371" title="Gaselee Expedition" label="Gaselee Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087313" start="66376" end="66399" title="Battle of Peking (1900)" label="finally reached Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="66434" end="66444" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q672556" start="66450" end="66464" title="Boxer Protocol" label="Boxer Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q672556" start="66502" end="66511" title="Boxer Indemnity" label="indemnity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497146" start="66591" end="66608" title="late Qing reforms" label="late Qing reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408" start="66637" end="66655" title="imperial examinations" label="examination system"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="66736" end="66759" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q379836" start="66906" end="66918" title="Liang Qichao" label="Liang Qichao"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="66950" end="66961" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q339291" start="66998" end="67014" title="Wuchang uprising" label="Wuchang uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014420" start="67045" end="67052" title="Wuchang" label="Wuchang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="67068" end="67073" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252740" start="67247" end="67294" title="Provisional Government of the Republic of China (1912)" label="provisional government of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16666" start="67309" end="67316" title="Nanjing" label="Nanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="67354" end="67388" title="President of the Republic of China" label="President of the Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q210329" start="67418" end="67429" title="Yuan Shikai" label="Yuan Shikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186887" start="67449" end="67457" title="New Army" label="New Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q175379" start="67589" end="67604" title="Empire of China (1915–1916)" label="Empire of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="67638" end="67655" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201263" start="68041" end="68052" title="Warlord Era" label="Warlord Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q814959" start="68163" end="68181" title="Beiyang government" label="Beiyang government"/>
<link wikidata="Q852377" start="68305" end="68325" title="New Culture Movement" label="New Culture Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q279790" start="68341" end="68360" title="May Fourth Movement" label="May Fourth Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="68431" end="68451" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43407" start="68667" end="68675" title="Shandong" label="Shandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="69385" end="69397" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="69501" end="69524" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="69597" end="69612" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="69636" end="69653" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073476" start="69740" end="69759" title="Northern Expedition" label="Northern Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="69836" end="69850" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="military force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308761" start="69948" end="69970" title="Nationalist government" label="Nationalist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q714843" start="70072" end="70075" title="National Revolutionary Army" label="NRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135255" start="70131" end="70154" title="Chinese Soviet Republic" label="Chinese Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="70187" end="70197" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q515388" start="70333" end="70344" title="Yan&amp;#x27;an" label="Yan&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="70427" end="70437" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="70465" end="70482" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="70752" end="70776" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="70813" end="70825" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q701321" start="70981" end="70995" title="Japanese war crimes" label="war atrocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q378835" start="71063" end="71071" title="Unit 731" label="Unit 731"/>
<link wikidata="Q648346" start="71081" end="71098" title="Three Alls Policy" label="Three Alls Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945433" start="71251" end="71259" title="Four Policemen" label="Big Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q176930" start="71273" end="71302" title="Declaration by United Nations" label="Declaration by United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="71405" end="71427" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077309" start="71740" end="71755" title="Odd Arne Westad" label="Odd Arne Westad"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="72586" end="72592" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917181" start="72930" end="72965" title="China and the United Nations" label="sole legitimate government of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334327" start="73161" end="73197" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758" label="PRC was seated in the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q715869" start="73610" end="73626" title="Legislative Yuan" label="Legislative Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969555" start="73631" end="73648" title="National Assembly" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q431657" start="73876" end="73914" title="1996 Taiwanese presidential election" label="its first direct presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q315528" start="73959" end="73971" title="Lee Teng-hui" label="Lee Teng-hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q700833" start="74094" end="74107" title="2008 Taiwan presidential election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q19216" start="74111" end="74123" title="Ma Ying-jeou" label="Ma Ying-jeou"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="74161" end="74191" title="Political status of Taiwan" label="Taiwan&amp;#x27;s political status"/>
<link wikidata="Q197428" start="74228" end="74271" title="Foreign relations of Taiwan" label="merely 12 UN member states and the Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="74504" end="74510" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="74591" end="74605" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608729" start="74799" end="74818" title="List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party" label="series of campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q855055" start="74823" end="74838" title="Five-year plans of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="five-year plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q58715" start="74844" end="74862" title="Great Leap Forward" label="Great Leap Forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4314084" start="75064" end="75080" title="collectivisation" label="collectivisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280973" start="75101" end="75107" title="Laogai" label="Laogai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="75260" end="75279" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="75425" end="75437" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="75498" end="75515" title="Sino-Soviet split" label="Sino-Soviet split"/>
<link wikidata="Q10866590" start="75623" end="75643" title="Third Front (China)" label="Third Front campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="75977" end="75987" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="76007" end="76020" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334327" start="76090" end="76128" title="United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758" label="PRC was admitted to the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="76272" end="76284" title="Gang of Four" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="76410" end="76423" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="76477" end="76488" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="76595" end="76611" title="Paramount Leader" label="Paramount Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="76751" end="76779" title="Chinese economic reform" label="significant economic reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153975" start="76875" end="76883" title="People&amp;#x27;s commune" label="communes"/>
<link wikidata="Q268919" start="77364" end="77380" title="market socialism" label="market socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="77411" end="77449" title="Socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="Socialism with Chinese characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="77479" end="77491" title="constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q99850" start="77559" end="77569" title="Hu Yaobang" label="Hu Yaobang"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="77590" end="77615" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="Tiananmen Square protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="77874" end="77878" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77953" end="77987" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests#Death toll" label="considerable numbers of fatalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="78145" end="78156" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18285" start="78173" end="78183" title="Zhu Rongji" label="Zhu Rongji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="78511" end="78535" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q15251" start="78548" end="78552" title="Handover of Hong Kong" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q847839" start="78557" end="78561" title="Transfer of sovereignty over Macau" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="78591" end="78608" title="British Hong Kong" label="British Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916279" start="78613" end="78629" title="Portuguese Macau" label="Portuguese Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q779415" start="78661" end="78730" title="special administrative regions of China" label="special administrative regions of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="79259" end="79268" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="79281" end="79291" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="79760" end="79786" title="U.S. Department of Defense" label="U.S. Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="79809" end="79816" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="79838" end="79844" title="Islam in China" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506436" start="79892" end="79908" title="Xinjiang internment camps" label="internment camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="79934" end="79942" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="80076" end="80086" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161605" start="80094" end="80108" title="Xi Jinping Administration" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="80110" end="80128" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750181" start="80225" end="80252" title="people&amp;#x27;s war on terror" label="people&amp;#x27;s war on terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q55615855" start="80380" end="80391" title="Kerry Brown (historian)" label="Kerry Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q42970" start="81140" end="81161" title="Amnesty International" label="Amnesty International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498185" start="81311" end="81331" title="Penal system in China" label="formal prison system"/>
<link wikidata="Q82069695" start="81356" end="81366" title="SARS-CoV-2" label="SARS-CoV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="81393" end="81401" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="81425" end="81430" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="81459" end="81474" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="global pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433408" start="81590" end="81618" title="Family tree of Chinese monarchs (ancient)" label="Chinese emperors family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5433408" start="81622" end="81629" title="Family tree of Chinese monarchs (ancient)" label="Ancient"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100761" start="81632" end="81637" title="Family tree of Chinese monarchs (early)" label="Early"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100765" start="81640" end="81646" title="Family tree of Chinese monarchs (middle)" label="Middle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100764" start="81649" end="81653" title="Family tree of Chinese monarchs (late)" label="Late"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100775" start="81656" end="81675" title="Chinese exploration" label="Chinese exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q133908" start="81678" end="81700" title="Chinese historiography" label="Chinese historiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q908467" start="81703" end="81724" title="Christianity in China" label="Christianity in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333474" start="81727" end="81752" title="Economic history of China" label="Economic history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141544" start="81755" end="81787" title="Ethnic groups in Chinese history" label="Ethnic groups in Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468569" start="81790" end="81825" title="Foreign relations of imperial China" label="Foreign relations of imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16077776" start="81828" end="81848" title="Golden ages of China" label="Golden ages of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q842111" start="81851" end="81877" title="History of canals in China" label="History of canals in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864978" start="81880" end="81905" title="History of Islam in China" label="History of Islam in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q747986" start="81908" end="81950" title="History of science and technology in China" label="History of science and technology in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q378008" start="81953" end="81970" title="History of Taiwan" label="History of Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15984181" start="81973" end="82007" title="History of the Great Wall of China" label="History of the Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q185373" start="82010" end="82034" title="List of Chinese monarchs" label="List of Chinese monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636134" start="82037" end="82064" title="List of rebellions in China" label="List of rebellions in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636157" start="82067" end="82107" title="List of recipients of tribute from China" label="List of recipients of tribute from China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799000" start="82110" end="82143" title="List of tributary states of China" label="List of tributary states of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q834441" start="82146" end="82183" title="Military history of China before 1912" label="Military history of China before 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647151" start="82186" end="82208" title="Naval history of China" label="Naval history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872845" start="82211" end="82238" title="Population history of China" label="Population history of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521584" start="82241" end="82268" title="Timeline of Chinese history" label="Timeline of Chinese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031511" start="82271" end="82306" title="Women in ancient and imperial China" label="Women in ancient and imperial China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394780" start="82426" end="82445" title="John K. Fairbank" label="Fairbank, John King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100088" start="83389" end="83422" title="Chinaknowledge" label="comprehensive online encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q99563800" start="83506" end="83522" title="Oxford Reference" label="Oxford Reference"/>
<link wikidata="Q9079071" start="83607" end="83619" title="Yu Ying-shih" label="Yu Ying-shih"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5762" wikidata="Q77590" url="?curid=5762" title="Civil engineering">
<text>Civil engineering is a professional engineering discipline that deals with the design, construction, and maintenance of the physical and naturally built environment, including public works such as roads, bridges, canals, dams, airports, sewage systems, pipelines, structural components of buildings, and railways.

Civil engineering is traditionally broken into a number of sub-disciplines. It is considered the second-oldest engineering discipline after military engineering, and it is defined to distinguish non-military engineering from military engineering. Civil engineering can take place in the public sector from municipal public works departments through to federal government agencies, and in the private sector from locally based firms to &quot;Fortune&quot; Global 500 companies.

==History==
=== Civil engineering as a discipline ===
Civil engineering is the application of physical and scientific principles for solving the problems of society, and its history is intricately linked to advances in the understanding of physics and mathematics throughout history. Because civil engineering is a broad profession, including several specialized sub-disciplines, its history is linked to knowledge of structures, materials science, geography, geology, soils, hydrology, environmental science, mechanics, project management, and other fields.

Throughout ancient and medieval history most architectural design and construction was carried out by artisans, such as stonemasons and carpenters, rising to the role of master builder. Knowledge was retained in guilds and seldom supplanted by advances. Structures, roads, and infrastructure that existed were repetitive, and increases in scale were incremental.

One of the earliest examples of a scientific approach to physical and mathematical problems applicable to civil engineering is the work of Archimedes in the 3rd century BC, including Archimedes&#x27; principle, which underpins our understanding of buoyancy, and practical solutions such as Archimedes&#x27; screw. Brahmagupta, an Indian mathematician, used arithmetic in the 7th century AD, based on Hindu-Arabic numerals, for excavation (volume) computations.

=== Civil engineering profession ===

Engineering has been an aspect of life since the beginnings of human existence. The earliest practice of civil engineering may have commenced between 4000 and 2000 BC in ancient Egypt, the Indus Valley civilization, and Mesopotamia (ancient Iraq) when humans started to abandon a nomadic existence, creating a need for the construction of shelter. During this time, transportation became increasingly important leading to the development of the wheel and sailing.

Until modern times there was no clear distinction between civil engineering and architecture, and the term engineer and architect were mainly geographical variations referring to the same occupation, and often used interchangeably. The constructions of pyramids in Egypt (–2500 BC) constitute some of the first instances of large structure constructions in history. Other ancient historic civil engineering constructions include the Qanat water management system in modern-day Iran (the oldest is older than 3000 years and longer than ), the Parthenon by Iktinos in Ancient Greece (447–438 BC), the Appian Way by Roman engineers (), the Great Wall of China by General Meng T&#x27;ien under orders from Ch&#x27;in Emperor Shih Huang Ti () and the stupas constructed in ancient Sri Lanka like the Jetavanaramaya and the extensive irrigation works in Anuradhapura. The Romans developed civil structures throughout their empire, including especially aqueducts, insulae, harbors, bridges, dams and roads.


In the 18th century, the term civil engineering was coined to incorporate all things civilian as opposed to military engineering. In 1747, the first institution for the teaching of civil engineering, the École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées, was established in France; and more examples followed in other European countries, like Spain. The first self-proclaimed civil engineer was John Smeaton, who constructed the Eddystone Lighthouse. In 1771 Smeaton and some of his colleagues formed the Smeatonian Society of Civil Engineers, a group of leaders of the profession who met informally over dinner. Though there was evidence of some technical meetings, it was little more than a social society.
In 1818 the Institution of Civil Engineers was founded in London, and in 1820 the eminent engineer Thomas Telford became its first president. The institution received a Royal charter in 1828, formally recognising civil engineering as a profession. Its charter defined civil engineering as:

===Civil engineering education===
The first private college to teach civil engineering in the United States was Norwich University, founded in 1819 by Captain Alden Partridge. The first degree in civil engineering in the United States was awarded by Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in 1835. The first such degree to be awarded to a woman was granted by Cornell University to Nora Stanton Blatch in 1905.

In the UK during the early 19th century, the division between civil engineering and military engineering (served by the Royal Military Academy, Woolwich), coupled with the demands of the Industrial Revolution, spawned new engineering education initiatives: the Class of Civil Engineering and Mining was founded at King&#x27;s College London in 1838, mainly as a response to the growth of the railway system and the need for more qualified engineers, the private College for Civil Engineers in Putney was established in 1839, and the UK&#x27;s first Chair of Engineering was established at the University of Glasgow in 1840.

==Education==
&quot;Civil engineers&quot; typically possess an academic degree in civil engineering. The length of study is three to five years, and the completed degree is designated as a bachelor of technology, or a bachelor of engineering. The curriculum generally includes classes in physics, mathematics, project management, design and specific topics in civil engineering. After taking basic courses in most sub-disciplines of civil engineering, they move on to specialize in one or more sub-disciplines at advanced levels. While an undergraduate degree (BEng/BSc) normally provides successful students with industry-accredited qualifications, some academic institutions offer post-graduate degrees (MEng/MSc), which allow students to further specialize in their particular area of interest.

== Practicing engineers ==
In most countries, a bachelor&#x27;s degree in engineering represents the first step towards professional certification, and a professional body certifies the degree program. After completing a certified degree program, the engineer must satisfy a range of requirements including work experience and exam requirements before being certified. Once certified, the engineer is designated as a professional engineer (in the United States, Canada and South Africa), a chartered engineer (in most Commonwealth countries), a chartered professional engineer (in Australia and New Zealand), or a European engineer (in most countries of the European Union). There are international agreements between relevant professional bodies to allow engineers to practice across national borders.

The benefits of certification vary depending upon location. For example, in the United States and Canada, &quot;only a licensed professional engineer may prepare, sign and seal, and submit engineering plans and drawings to a public authority for approval, or seal engineering work for public and private clients.&quot; This requirement is enforced under provincial law such as the Engineers Act in Quebec. No such legislation has been enacted in other countries including the United Kingdom. In Australia, state licensing of engineers is limited to the state of Queensland. Almost all certifying bodies maintain a code of ethics which all members must abide by.

Engineers must obey contract law in their contractual relationships with other parties. In cases where an engineer&#x27;s work fails, they may be subject to the law of tort of negligence, and in extreme cases, criminal charges. An engineer&#x27;s work must also comply with numerous other rules and regulations such as building codes and environmental law.

==Sub-disciplines==

There are a number of sub-disciplines within the broad field of civil engineering. General civil engineers work closely with surveyors and specialized civil engineers to design grading, drainage, pavement, water supply, sewer service, dams, electric and communications supply. General civil engineering is also referred to as site engineering, a branch of civil engineering that primarily focuses on converting a tract of land from one usage to another. Site engineers spend time visiting project sites, meeting with stakeholders, and preparing construction plans. Civil engineers apply the principles of geotechnical engineering, structural engineering, environmental engineering, transportation engineering and construction engineering to residential, commercial, industrial and public works projects of all sizes and levels of construction.

===Coastal engineering===
&quot;Coastal engineering&quot; is concerned with managing coastal areas. In some jurisdictions, the terms sea defense and coastal protection mean defense against flooding and erosion, respectively. Coastal defense is the more traditional term, but coastal management has become popular as well.

===Construction engineering===

&quot;Construction engineering&quot; involves planning and execution, transportation of materials, and site development based on hydraulic, environmental, structural, and geotechnical engineering. As construction firms tend to have higher business risk than other types of civil engineering firms, construction engineers often engage in more business-like transactions, such as drafting and reviewing contracts, evaluating logistical operations, and monitoring supply prices.

===Earthquake engineering===
&quot;Earthquake engineering&quot; involves designing structures to withstand hazardous earthquake exposures. Earthquake engineering is a sub-discipline of structural engineering. The main objectives of earthquake engineering are to understand interaction of structures on the shaky ground; foresee the consequences of possible earthquakes; and design, construct and maintain structures to perform at earthquake in compliance with building codes.

===Environmental engineering===
&quot;Environmental engineering&quot; is the contemporary term for sanitary engineering, though sanitary engineering traditionally had not included much of the hazardous waste management and environmental remediation work covered by environmental engineering. Public health engineering and environmental health engineering are other terms being used.

Environmental engineering deals with treatment of chemical, biological, or thermal wastes, purification of water and air, and remediation of contaminated sites after waste disposal or accidental contamination. Among the topics covered by environmental engineering are pollutant transport, water purification, waste water treatment, air pollution, solid waste treatment, recycling, and hazardous waste management. Environmental engineers administer pollution reduction, green engineering, and industrial ecology. Environmental engineers also compile information on environmental consequences of proposed actions.

===Forensic engineering===

&quot;Forensic engineering&quot; is the investigation of materials, products, structures or components that fail or do not operate or function as intended, causing personal injury or damage to property. The consequences of failure are dealt with by the law of product liability. The field also deals with retracing processes and procedures leading to accidents in operation of vehicles or machinery. The subject is applied most commonly in civil law cases, although it may be of use in criminal law cases. Generally the purpose of a Forensic engineering investigation is to locate cause or causes of failure with a view to improve performance or life of a component, or to assist a court in determining the facts of an accident. It can also involve investigation of intellectual property claims, especially patents.

===Geotechnical engineering===
&quot;Geotechnical engineering&quot; studies rock and soil supporting civil engineering systems. Knowledge from the field of soil science, materials science, mechanics, and hydraulics is applied to safely and economically design foundations, retaining walls, and other structures. Environmental efforts to protect groundwater and safely maintain landfills have spawned a new area of research called geo-environmental engineering.

Identification of soil properties presents challenges to geotechnical engineers. Boundary conditions are often well defined in other branches of civil engineering, but unlike steel or concrete, the material properties and behavior of soil are difficult to predict due to its variability and limitation on investigation. Furthermore, soil exhibits nonlinear (stress-dependent) strength, stiffness, and dilatancy (volume change associated with application of shear stress), making studying soil mechanics all the more difficult. Geotechnical engineers frequently work with professional geologists, Geological Engineering professionals and soil scientists.

===Materials science and engineering===

&quot;Materials science&quot; is closely related to civil engineering. It studies fundamental characteristics of materials, and deals with ceramics such as concrete and mix asphalt concrete, strong metals such as aluminum and steel, and thermosetting polymers including polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and carbon fibers.

&quot;Materials engineering&quot; involves protection and prevention (paints and finishes). Alloying combines two types of metals to produce another metal with desired properties. It incorporates elements of applied physics and chemistry. With recent media attention on nanoscience and nanotechnology, materials engineering has been at the forefront of academic research. It is also an important part of forensic engineering and failure analysis.

===Site development and planning===
&quot;Site development&quot;, also known as &quot;site planning&quot;, is focused on the planning and development potential of a site as well as addressing possible impacts from permitting issues and environmental challenges.

===Structural engineering===

&quot;Structural engineering&quot; is concerned with the structural design and structural analysis of buildings, bridges, towers, flyovers (overpasses), tunnels, off shore structures like oil and gas fields in the sea, aerostructure and other structures. This involves identifying the loads which act upon a structure and the forces and stresses which arise within that structure due to those loads, and then designing the structure to successfully support and resist those loads. The loads can be self weight of the structures, other dead load, live loads, moving (wheel) load, wind load, earthquake load, load from temperature change etc. The structural engineer must design structures to be safe for their users and to successfully fulfill the function they are designed for (to be &quot;serviceable&quot;). Due to the nature of some loading conditions, sub-disciplines within structural engineering have emerged, including wind engineering and earthquake engineering.

Design considerations will include strength, stiffness, and stability of the structure when subjected to loads which may be static, such as furniture or self-weight, or dynamic, such as wind, seismic, crowd or vehicle loads, or transitory, such as temporary construction loads or impact. Other considerations include cost, constructibility, safety, aesthetics and sustainability.

===Surveying===
&quot;Surveying&quot; is the process by which a surveyor measures certain dimensions that occur on or near the surface of the Earth. Surveying equipment such as levels and theodolites are used for accurate measurement of angular deviation, horizontal, vertical and slope distances. With computerization, electronic distance measurement (EDM), total stations, GPS surveying and laser scanning have to a large extent supplanted traditional instruments. Data collected by survey measurement is converted into a graphical representation of the Earth&#x27;s surface in the form of a map. This information is then used by civil engineers, contractors and realtors to design from, build on, and trade, respectively. Elements of a structure must be sized and positioned in relation to each other and to site boundaries and adjacent structures.

Although surveying is a distinct profession with separate qualifications and licensing arrangements, civil engineers are trained in the basics of surveying and mapping, as well as geographic information systems. Surveyors also lay out the routes of railways, tramway tracks, highways, roads, pipelines and streets as well as position other infrastructure, such as harbors, before construction.

;Land surveying
In the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom and most Commonwealth countries land surveying is considered to be a separate and distinct profession. Land surveyors are not considered to be engineers, and have their own professional associations and licensing requirements. The services of a licensed land surveyor are generally required for boundary surveys (to establish the boundaries of a parcel using its legal description) and subdivision plans (a plot or map based on a survey of a parcel of land, with boundary lines drawn inside the larger parcel to indicate the creation of new boundary lines and roads), both of which are generally referred to as Cadastral surveying. They collect data on important geological features below and on the land.

;Construction surveying
Construction surveying is generally performed by specialized technicians. Unlike land surveyors, the resulting plan does not have legal status. Construction surveyors perform the following tasks:
* Surveying existing conditions of the future work site, including topography, existing buildings and infrastructure, and underground infrastructure when possible;
* &quot;lay-out&quot; or &quot;setting-out&quot;: placing reference points and markers that will guide the construction of new structures such as roads or buildings;
* Verifying the location of structures during construction;
* As-Built surveying: a survey conducted at the end of the construction project to verify that the work authorized was completed to the specifications set on plans.

===Transportation engineering===
&quot;Transportation engineering&quot; is concerned with moving people and goods efficiently, safely, and in a manner conducive to a vibrant community. This involves specifying, designing, constructing, and maintaining transportation infrastructure which includes streets, canals, highways, rail systems, airports, ports, and mass transit. It includes areas such as transportation design, transportation planning, traffic engineering, some aspects of urban engineering, queueing theory, pavement engineering, Intelligent Transportation System (ITS), and infrastructure management.

===Municipal or urban engineering===

&quot;Municipal engineering&quot; is concerned with municipal infrastructure. This involves specifying, designing, constructing, and maintaining streets, sidewalks, water supply networks, sewers, street lighting, municipal solid waste management and disposal, storage depots for various bulk materials used for maintenance and public works (salt, sand, etc.), public parks and cycling infrastructure. In the case of underground utility networks, it may also include the civil portion (conduits and access chambers) of the local distribution networks of electrical and telecommunications services. It can also include the optimization of waste collection and bus service networks. Some of these disciplines overlap with other civil engineering specialties, however municipal engineering focuses on the coordination of these infrastructure networks and services, as they are often built simultaneously, and managed by the same municipal authority. Municipal engineers may also design the site civil works for large buildings, industrial plants or campuses (i.e. access roads, parking lots, potable water supply, treatment or pretreatment of waste water, site drainage, etc.)

===Water resources engineering===
&quot;Water resources engineering&quot; is concerned with the collection and management of water (as a natural resource). As a discipline, it therefore combines elements of hydrology, environmental science, meteorology, conservation, and resource management. This area of civil engineering relates to the prediction and management of both the quality and the quantity of water in both underground (aquifers) and above ground (lakes, rivers, and streams) resources. Water resource engineers analyze and model very small to very large areas of the earth to predict the amount and content of water as it flows into, through, or out of a facility. However, the actual design of the facility may be left to other engineers.

&quot;Hydraulic engineering&quot; concerns the flow and conveyance of fluids, principally water. This area of civil engineering is intimately related to the design of pipelines, water supply network, drainage facilities (including bridges, dams, channels, culverts, levees, storm sewers), and canals. Hydraulic engineers design these facilities using the concepts of fluid pressure, fluid statics, fluid dynamics, and hydraulics, among others.

===Civil engineering systems===
Civil engineering systems is a discipline that promotes using systems thinking to manage complexity and change in civil engineering within its broader public context. It posits that the proper development of civil engineering infrastructure requires a holistic, coherent understanding of the relationships between all of the crucial factors that contribute to successful projects while at the same time emphasizing the importance of attention to technical detail. Its purpose is to help integrate the entire civil engineering project life cycle from conception, through planning, designing, making, operating to decommissioning.

==See also==
* Architectural engineering
* Engineering drawing
* Geological Engineering
* Geomatics engineering
* Glossary of civil engineering
* Index of civil engineering articles
* List of civil engineers
* List of engineering branches
* List of Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks
* Macro-engineering
* Railway engineering
* Site survey
=== Associations ===
* American Society of Civil Engineers
* Canadian Society for Civil Engineering
* Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors
* Council for the Regulation of Engineering in Nigeria
* Earthquake Engineering Research Institute
* Engineers Australia
* European Federation of National Engineering Associations
* International Federation of Consulting Engineers
* Indian Geotechnical Society
* Institution of Civil Engineers
* Institution of Structural Engineers
* Institute of Engineering (Nepal)
* International Society of Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering
* Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh
* Institution of Engineers (India)
* Institution of Engineers of Ireland
* Institute of Transportation Engineers
* Japan Society of Civil Engineers
* Pakistan Engineering Council
* Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers
* Transportation Research Board
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* The Institution of Civil Engineers
* Civil Engineering Software Database
* The Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors
* Civil engineering classes, from MIT OpenCourseWare</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77590" start="0" end="17" title="Civil engineering" label="Civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185073" start="23" end="47" title="regulation and licensure in engineering" label="professional engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q82604" start="79" end="85" title="design" label="design"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="87" end="99" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043452" start="105" end="116" title="maintenance" label="maintenance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986688" start="147" end="164" title="built environment" label="built environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="176" end="188" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q156849" start="237" end="250" title="sewage system" label="sewage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q811679" start="264" end="285" title="structural element" label="structural components"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="455" end="475" title="military engineering" label="military engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q627364" start="631" end="643" title="public works" label="public works"/>
<link wikidata="Q621102" start="750" end="780" title="Fortune Global 500" label="&amp;quot;Fortune&amp;quot; Global 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="1033" end="1040" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1045" end="1056" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1253" end="1260" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1262" end="1266" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q42250" start="1269" end="1278" title="hydrology" label="hydrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q188847" start="1280" end="1301" title="environmental science" label="environmental science"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="1303" end="1312" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="1314" end="1332" title="project management" label="project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q323611" start="1398" end="1418" title="architectural design" label="architectural design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294787" start="1455" end="1462" title="artisan" label="artisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q272999" start="1473" end="1484" title="masonry" label="stonemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="1489" end="1498" title="carpenter" label="carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="1523" end="1537" title="Architect" label="master builder"/>
<link wikidata="Q939871" start="1565" end="1570" title="guild" label="guild"/>
<link wikidata="Q8739" start="1856" end="1866" title="Archimedes" label="Archimedes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181404" start="1900" end="1926" title="Archimedes&amp;#x27; principle" label="Archimedes&amp;#x27; principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497624" start="1965" end="1973" title="buoyancy" label="buoyancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q189155" start="2007" end="2029" title="Archimedes&amp;#x27; screw" label="Archimedes&amp;#x27; screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q202943" start="2031" end="2042" title="Brahmagupta" label="Brahmagupta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11768" start="2387" end="2400" title="ancient Egypt" label="ancient Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q42534" start="2406" end="2431" title="Indus Valley civilization" label="Indus Valley civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q11767" start="2437" end="2448" title="Mesopotamia" label="Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="2497" end="2502" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516975" start="2672" end="2679" title="Maritime history" label="sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q175582" start="2935" end="2943" title="Egyptian pyramids" label="pyramids"/>
<link wikidata="Q459297" start="3115" end="3120" title="Qanat" label="Qanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q10288" start="3224" end="3233" title="Parthenon" label="Parthenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q311502" start="3237" end="3244" title="Iktinos" label="Iktinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3248" end="3262" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q189417" start="3281" end="3291" title="Appian Way" label="Appian Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413460" start="3295" end="3310" title="Roman engineering" label="Roman engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12501" start="3319" end="3338" title="Great Wall of China" label="Great Wall of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151702" start="3350" end="3365" title="Meng Tian" label="Meng T&amp;#x27;ien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="3403" end="3416" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Shih Huang Ti"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="3458" end="3467" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961579" start="3477" end="3491" title="Jetavanaramaya" label="Jetavanaramaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724" start="3530" end="3542" title="Anuradhapura" label="Anuradhapura"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="3628" end="3637" title="Roman aqueduct" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228887" start="3639" end="3646" title="insulae" label="insulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q273523" start="3888" end="3926" title="École nationale des ponts et chaussées" label="École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4016" end="4021" title="Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros de Caminos, Canales y Puertos" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="4068" end="4080" title="John Smeaton" label="John Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q546122" start="4102" end="4122" title="Eddystone Lighthouse" label="Eddystone Lighthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q380875" start="4481" end="4495" title="Thomas Telford" label="Thomas Telford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422253" start="4551" end="4564" title="Royal charter" label="Royal charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681928" start="4785" end="4803" title="Norwich University" label="Norwich University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49211" start="4923" end="4955" title="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute" label="Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="5027" end="5045" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17676" start="5049" end="5068" title="Nora Stanton Blatch" label="Nora Stanton Blatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573631" start="5199" end="5231" title="Royal Military Academy, Woolwich" label="Royal Military Academy, Woolwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="5393" end="5419" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q21592344" start="5541" end="5568" title="College for Civil Engineers" label="College for Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465220" start="5572" end="5578" title="Putney" label="Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="5672" end="5693" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="5767" end="5782" title="academic degree" label="academic degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838838" start="5893" end="5915" title="bachelor of technology" label="bachelor of technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q798132" start="5922" end="5945" title="bachelor of engineering" label="bachelor of engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="6014" end="6032" title="project management" label="project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q16023913" start="6623" end="6649" title="professional certification" label="professional certification"/>
<link wikidata="Q829080" start="6657" end="6674" title="professional body" label="professional body"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185073" start="6920" end="6941" title="professional engineer" label="professional engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185073" start="6993" end="7011" title="chartered engineer" label="chartered engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="7021" end="7033" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="7098" end="7109" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="7161" end="7175" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185073" start="7435" end="7456" title="professional engineer" label="professional engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="7705" end="7711" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="7869" end="7879" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264133" start="7921" end="7935" title="code of ethics" label="code of ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="7990" end="8002" title="contract law" label="contract law"/>
<link wikidata="Q160070" start="8138" end="8156" title="negligence" label="tort of negligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="8289" end="8303" title="building codes" label="building codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q328798" start="8308" end="8325" title="environmental law" label="environmental law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049667" start="8545" end="8553" title="Pavement (material)" label="pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q177777" start="9972" end="9993" title="Logistics" label="logistical operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2656128" start="10445" end="10452" title="seismic performance" label="perform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333573" start="10486" end="10499" title="building code" label="building code"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306798" start="10602" end="10622" title="sanitary engineering" label="sanitary engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019586" start="11013" end="11024" title="Environmental remediation" label="remediation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463025" start="11176" end="11194" title="water purification" label="water purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127660" start="11196" end="11217" title="waste water treatment" label="waste water treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q180388" start="11234" end="11255" title="Waste management" label="solid waste treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="11257" end="11266" title="recycling" label="recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069369" start="11272" end="11298" title="hazardous waste" label="hazardous waste management"/>
<link wikidata="Q20278131" start="11356" end="11373" title="green engineering" label="green engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2323664" start="11379" end="11397" title="industrial ecology" label="industrial ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424752" start="11596" end="11604" title="Product (business)" label="products"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="12335" end="12341" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161265" start="12501" end="12513" title="soil science" label="soil science"/>
<link wikidata="Q41217" start="12534" end="12543" title="mechanics" label="mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q177784" start="12549" end="12559" title="hydraulics" label="hydraulics"/>
<link wikidata="Q191360" start="12605" end="12616" title="foundation (engineering)" label="foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076291" start="12618" end="12632" title="retaining wall" label="retaining wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="12690" end="12701" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="12888" end="12906" title="Boundary condition" label="Boundary condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066351" start="13112" end="13125" title="geotechnical investigation" label="investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206175" start="13165" end="13171" title="stress (physics)" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492185" start="13183" end="13191" title="shear strength (soil)" label="strength"/>
<link wikidata="Q657936" start="13264" end="13276" title="shear stress" label="shear stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q471872" start="13295" end="13309" title="soil mechanics" label="soil mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="13391" end="13401" title="geologists" label="geologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q9707696" start="13403" end="13425" title="Geological Engineering" label="Geological Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q868477" start="13740" end="13761" title="thermosetting polymer" label="thermosetting polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q146123" start="13773" end="13795" title="polymethylmethacrylate" label="polymethylmethacrylate"/>
<link wikidata="Q373065" start="14031" end="14046" title="applied physics" label="applied physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="14051" end="14060" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="14093" end="14104" title="nanoscience" label="nanoscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="14109" end="14123" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022240" start="14252" end="14268" title="failure analysis" label="failure analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571373" start="14485" end="14495" title="Building permit" label="permitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q320389" start="14507" end="14531" title="Environmental impact assessment" label="environmental challenges"/>
<link wikidata="Q633538" start="14621" end="14638" title="structural design" label="structural design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762403" start="14643" end="14662" title="structural analysis" label="structural analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12518" start="14686" end="14691" title="tower" label="tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="14694" end="14702" title="overpass" label="flyovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019713" start="14783" end="14796" title="aerostructure" label="aerostructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441902" start="15491" end="15507" title="wind engineering" label="wind engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="15901" end="15915" title="sustainability" label="sustainability"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="16951" end="16980" title="geographic information system" label="geographic information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q728943" start="17030" end="17043" title="tramway track" label="tramway track"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="17135" end="17141" title="harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17334" end="17348" title="Surveying#Cadastral surveying" label="Land surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735630" start="17842" end="17861" title="Cadastral surveying" label="Cadastral surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="19038" end="19050" title="rail transport" label="rail systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="19073" end="19085" title="mass transit" label="mass transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034047" start="19136" end="19159" title="transportation planning" label="transportation planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640676" start="19161" end="19180" title="traffic engineering (transportation)" label="traffic engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380395" start="19198" end="19215" title="municipal or urban engineering" label="urban engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q847526" start="19217" end="19232" title="queueing theory" label="queueing theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155835" start="19234" end="19254" title="pavement engineering" label="pavement engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q508378" start="19256" end="19289" title="Intelligent Transportation System" label="Intelligent Transportation System"/>
<link wikidata="Q177749" start="19521" end="19529" title="sidewalk" label="sidewalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q625083" start="19532" end="19553" title="municipal water supply" label="water supply networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q503958" start="19563" end="19575" title="street light" label="street light"/>
<link wikidata="Q18538" start="19580" end="19601" title="municipal solid waste" label="municipal solid waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q22746" start="19727" end="19739" title="urban park" label="public parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5198662" start="19744" end="19766" title="cycling infrastructure" label="cycling infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951366" start="19795" end="19802" title="public utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740966" start="20025" end="20036" title="public transport bus service" label="bus service"/>
<link wikidata="Q188460" start="20678" end="20694" title="natural resource" label="natural resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="20782" end="20793" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462136" start="20795" end="20807" title="water conservation" label="conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14431238" start="20813" end="20832" title="resource management" label="resource management"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="20973" end="20980" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841394" start="21462" end="21471" title="Pipeline transport" label="pipelines"/>
<link wikidata="Q625083" start="21473" end="21493" title="water supply network" label="water supply network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210950" start="21541" end="21549" title="Channel (geography)" label="channels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168092" start="21551" end="21558" title="culvert" label="culvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q105190" start="21561" end="21566" title="levee" label="levee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139766" start="21569" end="21580" title="storm sewer" label="storm sewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39552" start="21662" end="21676" title="fluid pressure" label="fluid pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="21678" end="21691" title="fluid statics" label="fluid statics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216320" start="21693" end="21707" title="fluid dynamics" label="fluid dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340474" start="21834" end="21850" title="systems thinking" label="systems thinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="21998" end="22012" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q192891" start="22024" end="22032" title="Holism" label="holistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="22298" end="22316" title="Project management" label="project life cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q150737" start="22417" end="22442" title="Architectural engineering" label="Architectural engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788588" start="22445" end="22464" title="Engineering drawing" label="Engineering drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9707696" start="22467" end="22489" title="Geological Engineering" label="Geological Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q619798" start="22492" end="22513" title="Geomatics engineering" label="Geomatics engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324792" start="22516" end="22545" title="Glossary of civil engineering" label="Glossary of civil engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6018841" start="22548" end="22583" title="Index of civil engineering articles" label="Index of civil engineering articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610050" start="22586" end="22609" title="List of civil engineers" label="List of civil engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028479" start="22612" end="22640" title="List of engineering branches" label="List of engineering branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573251" start="22643" end="22687" title="List of Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks" label="List of Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629994" start="22690" end="22707" title="Macro-engineering" label="Macro-engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260703" start="22710" end="22729" title="Railway engineering" label="Railway engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531793" start="22732" end="22743" title="Site survey" label="Site survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q466880" start="22767" end="22802" title="American Society of Civil Engineers" label="American Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030571" start="22805" end="22843" title="Canadian Society for Civil Engineering" label="Canadian Society for Civil Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086836" start="22846" end="22898" title="Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors" label="Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688023" start="22901" end="22953" title="Council for the Regulation of Engineering in Nigeria" label="Council for the Regulation of Engineering in Nigeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327257" start="22956" end="22997" title="Earthquake Engineering Research Institute" label="Earthquake Engineering Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377913" start="23000" end="23019" title="Engineers Australia" label="Engineers Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479706" start="23022" end="23078" title="European Federation of National Engineering Associations" label="European Federation of National Engineering Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388484" start="23081" end="23129" title="FIDIC" label="International Federation of Consulting Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020342" start="23132" end="23159" title="Indian Geotechnical Society" label="Indian Geotechnical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="23162" end="23192" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113225" start="23195" end="23230" title="Institution of Structural Engineers" label="Institution of Structural Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986440" start="23233" end="23257" title="Institute of Engineering" label="Institute of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588809" start="23268" end="23336" title="International Society of Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering" label="International Society of Soil Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041083" start="23339" end="23375" title="Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh" label="Institution of Engineers, Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041101" start="23378" end="23410" title="Institution of Engineers (India)" label="Institution of Engineers (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041095" start="23413" end="23448" title="Institution of Engineers of Ireland" label="Institution of Engineers of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040957" start="23451" end="23488" title="Institute of Transportation Engineers" label="Institute of Transportation Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11423671" start="23491" end="23523" title="Japan Society of Civil Engineers" label="Japan Society of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125569" start="23526" end="23554" title="Pakistan Engineering Council" label="Pakistan Engineering Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185134" start="23557" end="23596" title="Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers" label="Philippine Institute of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835180" start="23599" end="23628" title="Transportation Research Board" label="Transportation Research Board"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5763" wikidata="Q5033988" url="?curid=5763" title="Cantonese (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Cantonese]] is a language originating in Canton, Guangdong.

Cantonese may also refer to:
* Yue Chinese, Chinese languages that include Cantonese
* Cantonese cuisine, the cuisine of Guangdong Province
* Cantonese people, the native people of Guangdong and Guangxi
* Lingnan culture, the regional culture often referred to as Cantonese culture

==See also==
* Cantonese Braille, a Cantonese-language version of Braille in Hong Kong
* Cantopop, Cantonese pop music</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5033988" start="0" end="13" title="Cantonese (disambiguation)" label="[[Cantonese]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q5033988" start="63" end="72" title="Cantonese (disambiguation)" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="94" end="105" title="Yue Chinese" label="Yue Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="150" end="167" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423803" start="205" end="221" title="Cantonese people" label="Cantonese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038134" start="268" end="283" title="Lingnan culture" label="Lingnan culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13586477" start="361" end="378" title="Cantonese Braille" label="Cantonese Braille"/>
<link wikidata="Q853873" start="435" end="443" title="Cantopop" label="Cantopop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5765" wikidata="Q192522" url="?curid=5765" title="Çatalhöyük">
<text>Çatalhöyük (English: Chatalhoyuk ; ; also &quot;Çatal Höyük&quot; and &quot;Çatal Hüyük&quot;; from Turkish &quot;çatal&quot; &quot;fork&quot; + &quot;höyük&quot; &quot;tumulus&quot;) is a tell (a mounded accretion due to long-term human settlement) of a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic proto-city settlement in southern Anatolia, which existed from approximately 7500 BC to 5600 BC and flourished around 7000 BC. In July 2012, it was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Çatalhöyük overlooks the Konya Plain, southeast of the present-day city of Konya (ancient Iconium) in Turkey, approximately from the twin-coned volcano of Mount Hasan. The eastern settlement forms a mound that would have risen about above the plain at the time of the latest Neolithic occupation. There is also a smaller settlement mound to the west and a Byzantine settlement a few hundred meters to the east. The prehistoric mound settlements were abandoned before the Bronze Age. A channel of the Çarşamba River once flowed between the two mounds, and the settlement was built on alluvial clay which may have been favorable for early agriculture. Currently, the closest river is the Euphrates.

==Archaeology==
The site was first excavated by James Mellaart in 1958. He later led a team which further excavated there for four seasons between 1961 and 1965. These excavations revealed this section of Anatolia as a centre of advanced culture in the Neolithic period. Excavation revealed 18 successive layers of buildings signifying various stages of the settlement and eras of history. The bottom layer of buildings can be dated as early as 7100 BC while the top layer of the later West Mound is from 5600 BC.

Mellaart was banned from Turkey for his involvement in the Dorak affair, in which he published drawings of supposedly important Bronze Age artifacts that later went missing. After this scandal, the site lay idle until 1993, when excavations began under the leadership of Ian Hodder, then at the University of Cambridge. The Hodder-led excavations ended in 2018. Hodder, a former student of Mellaart, chose the site as the first &quot;real world&quot; test of his the controversial theory of post-processual archaeology. The site has always had a strong research emphasis upon engagement with digital methodologies, driven by the project&#x27;s experimental and reflexive methodological framework. According to Mickel, Hodder&#x27;s Çatalhöyük Research Project (ÇRP) established itself as a site for progressive methodologiesin terms of adaptable and democratized recording, integration of computerized technologies, sampling strategies, and community involvement.&quot;

New excavations are being directed by Ali Umut Türkcan from Anadolu University.

==Culture==
 
Çatalhöyük was composed entirely of domestic buildings with no obvious public buildings. While some of the larger rooms have rather ornate murals, the purpose of others remains unclear.

Initial estimates suggested an average population of between 5,000 and 7,000. However, more recent work using revised ideas of the distribution of residential buildings, and employing archaeological and ethnographic data exploring building use, suggests that between 600 and 800 people would have lived at Çatalhöyük East during an average year during the Middle phase (6700–6500 BC).

The sites were set up as large numbers of buildings clustered together. Households looked to their neighbors for help, trade, and possible marriage for their children. The inhabitants lived in mudbrick houses that were crammed together in an aggregate structure. No footpaths or streets were used between the dwellings, which were clustered in a honeycomb-like maze. Most were accessed by holes in the ceiling and doors on the side of the houses, with doors reached by ladders and stairs. The rooftops were effectively streets. The ceiling openings also served as the only source of ventilation, allowing smoke from the houses&#x27; open hearths and ovens to escape. 

Houses had plaster interiors accessed by squared-off timber ladders or steep stairs. These were usually on the south wall of the room, as were cooking hearths and ovens. The main rooms contained raised platforms that may have been used for a range of domestic activities. Typical houses contained two rooms for everyday activity, such as cooking and crafting. All interior walls and platforms were plastered to a smooth finish. Ancillary rooms were used as storage, and were accessed through low openings from main rooms.

All rooms were kept scrupulously clean. Archaeologists identified very little rubbish in the buildings, finding middens outside the ruins, with sewage and food waste, as well as significant amounts of ash from burning wood, reeds, and animal dung. In good weather, many daily activities may also have taken place on the rooftops, which may have formed a plaza. In later periods, large communal ovens appear to have been built on these rooftops. Over time, houses were renewed by partial demolition and rebuilding on a foundation of rubble, which was how the mound was gradually built up. As many as eighteen levels of settlement have been uncovered.

As a part of ritual life, the people of Çatalhöyük buried their dead within the village. Human remains have been found in pits beneath the floors and especially beneath hearths, the platforms within the main rooms, and beds. Bodies were tightly flexed before burial and were often placed in baskets or wound and wrapped in reed mats. Disarticulated bones in some graves suggest that bodies may have been exposed in the open air for a time before the bones were gathered and buried. In some cases, graves were disturbed, and the individual&#x27;s head removed from the skeleton. These heads may have been used in rituals, as some were found in other areas of the community. In a woman&#x27;s grave, spinning whorls were recovered and in a man&#x27;s grave, stone axes. Some skulls were plastered and painted with ochre to recreate faces, a custom more characteristic of Neolithic sites in Syria and Neolithic Jericho than at sites closer by.

Vivid murals and figurines are found throughout the settlement on interior and exterior walls. Distinctive clay figurines of women, notably the Seated Woman of Çatalhöyük, have been found in the upper levels of the site. Although no identifiable temples have been found, the graves, murals, and figurines suggest that the people of Çatalhöyük had a religion rich in symbols. Rooms with concentrations of these items may have been shrines or public meeting areas. Predominant images include men with erect phalluses, hunting scenes, red images of the now extinct aurochs (wild cattle) and stags, and vultures swooping down on headless figures. Relief figures are carved on walls, such as of lionesses facing one another.

Heads of animals, especially of cattle, were mounted on walls. A painting of the village, with the twin mountain peaks of Hasan Dağ in the background, is frequently cited as the world&#x27;s oldest map, and the first landscape painting. However, some archaeologists question this interpretation. Stephanie Meece, for example, argues that it is more likely a painting of a leopard skin instead of a volcano, and a decorative geometric design instead of a map.

==Religion==

A feature of Çatalhöyük are its female figurines. Mellaart, the original excavator, argued that these carefully made figurines, carved and molded from marble, blue and brown limestone, schist, calcite, basalt, alabaster, and clay, represented a female deity. Although a male deity existed as well, &quot;statues of a female deity far outnumber those of the male deity, who moreover, does not appear to be represented at all after Level VI&quot;. To date, eighteen levels have been identified. These figurines were found primarily in areas Mellaart believed to be shrines. The stately goddess seated on a throne flanked by two lionesses was found in a grain bin, which Mellaart suggests might have been a means of ensuring the harvest or protecting the food supply.

Whereas Mellaart excavated nearly two hundred buildings in four seasons, the current excavator, Ian Hodder, spent an entire season excavating one building alone. Hodder and his team, in 2004 and 2005, began to believe that the patterns suggested by Mellaart were false. They found one similar figurine, but the vast majority did not imitate the Mother Goddess style that Mellaart suggested. Instead of a Mother Goddess culture, Hodder points out that the site gives little indication of a matriarchy or patriarchy.

In an article in the &quot;Turkish Daily News&quot;, Hodder is reported as denying that Çatalhöyük was a matriarchal society and quoted as saying &quot;When we look at what they eat and drink and at their social statues, we see that men and women had the same social status. There was a balance of power. Another example is the skulls found. If one&#x27;s social status was of high importance in Çatalhöyük, the body and head were separated after death. The number of female and male skulls found during the excavations is almost equal.&quot; In another article in the &quot;Hurriyet Daily News&quot; Hodder is reported to say &quot;We have learned that men and women were equally approached&quot;.

In a report in September 2009 on the discovery of around 2000 figurines Hodder is quoted as saying:

Professor Lynn Meskell explained that while the original excavations had found only 200 figures, the new excavations had uncovered 2,000 figures, most of which depicted animals, and fewer than 5% of the figurines depicted women.

Estonian folklorist Uku Masing has suggested as early as in 1976, that Çatalhöyük was probably a hunting and gathering religion and the Mother Goddess figurine did not represent a female deity. He implied that perhaps a longer period of time was needed to develop symbols for agricultural rites. His theory was developed in the paper &quot;Some remarks on the mythology of the people of Catal Hüyük&quot;.

== Economy ==
Çatalhöyük has strong evidence of an egalitarian society, as no houses with distinctive features (belonging to royalty or religious hierarchy for example) have been found so far. The most recent investigations also reveal little social distinction based on gender, with men and women receiving equivalent nutrition and seeming to have equal social status, as typically found in Paleolithic cultures. Children observed domestic areas. They learned how to perform rituals and how to build or repair houses by watching the adults make statues, beads, and other objects.
Çatalhöyük&#x27;s spatial layout may be due to the close kin relations exhibited amongst the people. It can be seen, in the layout, that the people were &quot;divided into two groups who lived on opposite sides of the town, separated by a gully.&quot; Furthermore, because no nearby towns were found from which marriage partners could be drawn, &quot;this spatial separation must have marked two intermarrying kinship groups.&quot; This would help explain how a settlement so early on would become so large.

In the upper levels of the site, it becomes apparent that the people of Çatalhöyük were honing skills in agriculture and the domestication of animals. Female figurines have been found within bins used for storage of cereals, such as wheat and barley, and the figurines are presumed to be of a deity protecting the grain. Peas were also grown, and almonds, pistachios, and fruit were harvested from trees in the surrounding hills. Sheep were domesticated and evidence suggests the beginning of cattle domestication as well. However, hunting continued to be a major source of food for the community. Pottery and obsidian tools appear to have been major industries; obsidian tools were probably both used and also traded for items such as Mediterranean sea shells and flint from Syria. Noting the lack of hierarchy and economic inequality, historian and anti-capitalist author Murray Bookchin has argued that Çatalhöyük was an early example of anarcho-communism.

Conversely, a 2014 paper argues that the picture of Çatalhöyük is more complex and that while there seemed to have been an egalitarian distribution of cooking tools and some stone tools, unbroken quern-stones and storage units were more unevenly distributed. Private property existed but shared tools also existed. It was also suggested that Çatalhöyük was becoming less egalitarian, with greater inter-generational wealth transmission.

==Museum==
In 2023 a new state-of-the-art museum has opened on the site, constructed by the Konya municipality. In October 2024 a bookshop and cafe was added to the site. Non-Turkish visitors are charged five euros per person for entry. There are numerous visitor-activated information kiosks, some of which provide information in English as well as Turkish. Full information on all aspects of the various discoveries is available in eight rooms, including an underground reconstruction of a typical dwelling used by people of 90 centuries ago.

==See also==
*Körtiktepe
*Göbekli Tepe
*Boncuklu Höyük
*Cities of the ancient Near East
*Cucuteni–Trypillian culture
*Kamyana Mohyla
*List of largest cities throughout history
*List of Stone Age art
*Matriarchy
*Neolithic Revolution
*Old Europe (archaeology)
*Sacred bull
*Venus figurines

==References==
==Further reading==
* Bailey, Douglass. &quot;Prehistoric Figurines: Representation and Corporeality in the Neolithic.&quot; New York: Routledge, 2005 (hardcover, ; paperback, ).
* Balter, Michael. &quot;The Goddess and the Bull: Çatalhöyük: An Archaeological Journey to the Dawn of Civilization.&quot; New York: Free Press, 2004 (hardcover, ); Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2006 (paperback, ). A highly condensed version was published in &quot;The Smithsonian Magazine&quot;, May 2005.
* Dural, Sadrettin. &quot;Protecting Catalhoyuk: Memoir of an Archaeological Site Guard.&quot; Contributions by Ian Hodder. Translated by Duygu Camurcuoglu Cleere. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2007. .
* Hodder, Ian. &quot;Women and Men at Çatalhöyük,&quot; &quot;Scientific American Magazine&quot;, January 2004 (update V15:1, 2005).
* Hodder, I. (2014). &quot;Çatalhöyük excavations: the 2000-2008 seasons.&quot;, British Institute at Ankara, Monumenta Archaeologica 29, 
* Hodder, Ian. &quot;Twenty-Five Years of Research at Çatalhöyük&quot;, Near Eastern Archaeology; Chicago, vol. 83, iss. 2, pp. 72–29, June 2020
* Hodder, Ian. &quot;The Leopard&#x27;s Tale: Revealing the Mysteries of Çatalhöyük&quot;. London; New York: Thames &amp; Hudson, 2006 (hardcover, ). (The UK title of this work is &quot;Çatalhöyük: The Leopard&#x27;s Tale&quot;.)
*Hodder, Ian; Bogaard, Amy; Engel, Claudia; Pearson, Jessica; Wolfhagen, Jesse., &quot;Spatial autocorrelation analysis and the social organisation of crop and herd management at Çatalhöyük&quot;, Anatolian Studies, London, vol. 72, pp. 1–15, 2022
*Mallett, Marla, &quot;The Goddess from Anatolia: An Updated View of the Catak Huyuk Controversy ,&quot; in Oriental Rug Review, Vol. XIII, No. 2 (December 1992/January 1993).
* Mellaart, James. &quot;Çatal Hüyük: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia.&quot; London: Thames &amp; Hudson, 1967; New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1967. Online at archive.org
* &quot;On the Surface: Çatalhöyük 1993–95&quot;, edited by Ian Hodder. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research and British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara, 1996 ().
*Rast-Eicher, Antoinette, Sabine Karg, and Lise Bender Jørgensen, &quot;The use of local fibres for textiles at Neolithic Çatalhöyük&quot;, Antiquity 95.383, pp. 1129-1144, 2021
* Todd, Ian A. &quot;Çatal Hüyük in Perspective&quot;. Menlo Park, CA: Cummings Pub. Co., 1976 (; )
*Twiss, Katheryn C., et al., &quot;“But some were more equal than others:” Exploring inequality at Neolithic Çatalhöyük&quot;, Plos one 19.9, e0307067, 2024

==External links==
*What we learned from 25 Years of Research at Catalhoyuk - Ian Hodder - Oriental Institute lecture Dec 4, 2019
* Çatalhöyük — Excavations of a Neolithic Anatolian Höyük, Çatalhöyük excavation official website
* Çatalhöyük photos
* The First Cities: Why Settle Down? The Mystery of Communities, by Michael Balter, Çatalhöyük excavation official biographer
* Interview with Ian Hodder March 201 &quot;Ian Hodder: Çatalhöyük, Religion &amp; Templeton&#x27;s 25%&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192522" start="0" end="10" title="Çatalhöyük" label="Çatalhöyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="100" end="107" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34023" start="169" end="176" title="tumulus" label="tumulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q755017" start="189" end="193" title="Tell (archaeology)" label="tell"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="266" end="275" title="Neolithic" label="Neolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="280" end="292" title="Chalcolithic" label="Chalcolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251867" start="293" end="303" title="proto-city" label="proto-city"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="327" end="335" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="456" end="482" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815796" start="510" end="521" title="Konya Plain" label="Konya Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="560" end="565" title="Konya" label="Konya"/>
<link wikidata="Q79857" start="575" end="582" title="Iconium" label="Iconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="587" end="593" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302768" start="640" end="651" title="Mount Hasan" label="Mount Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="841" end="850" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="956" end="966" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="1068" end="1081" title="alluvium" label="alluvial clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34589" start="1171" end="1180" title="Euphrates" label="Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069362" start="1231" end="1245" title="James Mellaart" label="James Mellaart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243708" start="1757" end="1769" title="Dorak affair" label="Dorak affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q556140" start="1969" end="1979" title="Ian Hodder" label="Ian Hodder"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1993" end="2016" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489098" start="2189" end="2216" title="post-processual archaeology" label="post-processual archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2707" end="2723" title="Ali Umut Türkcan" label="Ali Umut Türkcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q483758" start="2729" end="2747" title="Anadolu University" label="Anadolu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="2903" end="2909" title="murals" label="murals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="3530" end="3538" title="mudbrick" label="mudbrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q274988" start="4017" end="4024" title="plaster" label="plaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q585473" start="4149" end="4163" title="cooking hearth" label="cooking hearth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="4641" end="4647" title="midden" label="midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18919" start="4684" end="4694" title="food waste" label="food waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q201097" start="5471" end="5478" title="baskets" label="baskets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474386" start="5878" end="5893" title="spindle whorl" label="spinning whorls"/>
<link wikidata="Q479448" start="5936" end="5946" title="stone axes" label="stone axes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589292" start="5953" end="5974" title="Plastered human skulls" label="skulls were plastered"/>
<link wikidata="Q194191" start="5992" end="5997" title="ochre" label="ochre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5687" start="6088" end="6095" title="Jericho" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="6128" end="6134" title="murals" label="murals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066288" start="6139" end="6147" title="figurine" label="figurine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233466" start="6266" end="6292" title="Seated Woman of Çatalhöyük" label="Seated Woman of Çatalhöyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q697295" start="6552" end="6558" title="shrine" label="shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q168903" start="6684" end="6691" title="aurochs" label="aurochs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="6710" end="6715" title="stags" label="stags"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="6765" end="6771" title="Relief" label="Relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302768" start="6965" end="6974" title="Mount Hasan" label="Hasan Dağ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293621" start="7021" end="7044" title="History of cartography" label="world&amp;#x27;s oldest map"/>
<link wikidata="Q107425" start="7060" end="7069" title="landscape" label="landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="7468" end="7474" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="7491" end="7500" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="7502" end="7508" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="7519" end="7525" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q143447" start="7527" end="7536" title="alabaster" label="alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q205985" start="7562" end="7574" title="female deity" label="female deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="7641" end="7646" title="deity" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q189233" start="7921" end="7927" title="throne" label="throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q334486" start="8428" end="8442" title="Mother Goddess" label="Mother Goddess"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="8572" end="8582" title="matriarchy" label="matriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181339" start="8586" end="8596" title="patriarchy" label="patriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507755" start="8626" end="8644" title="Turkish Daily News" label="Turkish Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q60608081" start="9410" end="9422" title="Lynn Meskell" label="Lynn Meskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q594450" start="9650" end="9660" title="Uku Masing" label="Uku Masing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="10088" end="10099" title="Egalitarianism" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="10162" end="10169" title="Monarch" label="royalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="10173" end="10192" title="priest" label="religious hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q841628" start="10280" end="10298" title="social stratification" label="social distinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40203" start="10429" end="10440" title="Paleolithic" label="Paleolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11577" start="11370" end="11376" title="barley" label="barley"/>
<link wikidata="Q25237" start="11448" end="11452" title="Peas" label="Peas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="11474" end="11481" title="almonds" label="almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q36071" start="11483" end="11492" title="pistachio" label="pistachio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="11557" end="11562" title="domestic sheep" label="Sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q11395" start="11627" end="11640" title="domestication" label="domestication"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="11659" end="11666" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="11725" end="11732" title="Pottery" label="Pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q53754" start="11737" end="11745" title="obsidian" label="obsidian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="11863" end="11876" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="11892" end="11897" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="11903" end="11908" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="11943" end="11962" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q315910" start="12001" end="12016" title="Murray Bookchin" label="Murray Bookchin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188670" start="12068" end="12085" title="anarcho-communism" label="anarcho-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543947" start="12284" end="12295" title="quern-stone" label="quern-stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q124937040" start="13086" end="13096" title="Körtiktepe" label="Körtiktepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q214944" start="13098" end="13110" title="Göbekli Tepe" label="Göbekli Tepe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099672" start="13112" end="13126" title="Boncuklu Höyük" label="Boncuklu Höyük"/>
<link wikidata="Q63780" start="13128" end="13159" title="Cities of the ancient Near East" label="Cities of the ancient Near East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162419" start="13161" end="13188" title="Cucuteni–Trypillian culture" label="Cucuteni–Trypillian culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q926255" start="13190" end="13204" title="Kamyana Mohyla" label="Kamyana Mohyla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625002" start="13206" end="13247" title="List of largest cities throughout history" label="List of largest cities throughout history"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634750" start="13249" end="13270" title="List of Stone Age art" label="List of Stone Age art"/>
<link wikidata="Q185681" start="13272" end="13282" title="Matriarchy" label="Matriarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q180548" start="13284" end="13304" title="Neolithic Revolution" label="Neolithic Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241067" start="13306" end="13330" title="Old Europe (archaeology)" label="Old Europe (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427313" start="13332" end="13343" title="Sacred bull" label="Sacred bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q248726" start="13345" end="13360" title="Venus figurines" label="Venus figurines"/>
<link wikidata="Q12326888" start="13558" end="13573" title="Michael Balter" label="Balter, Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q556140" start="14080" end="14091" title="Ian Hodder" label="Hodder, Ian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069362" start="15151" end="15166" title="James Mellaart" label="Mellaart, James"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5766" wikidata="Q129006" url="?curid=5766" title="Clement Attlee">
<text>Clement Richard Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee (3 January 18838 October 1967) was a British statesman who was Prime Minister of the United Kingdom from 1945 to 1951 and Leader of the Labour Party from 1935 to 1955. Attlee was Deputy Prime Minister during the wartime coalition government under Winston Churchill, and Leader of the Opposition on three occasions: from 1935 to 1940, briefly in 1945 and from 1951 to 1955. He remains the longest serving Labour leader.

Attlee was born into an upper middle class family, the son of a wealthy London solicitor. After attending Haileybury College and the University of Oxford, he practised as a barrister. The volunteer work he carried out in London&#x27;s East End exposed him to poverty, and his political views shifted leftwards thereafter. He joined the Independent Labour Party, gave up his legal career, and began lecturing at the London School of Economics; with his work briefly interrupted by service as an officer in the First World War. In 1919, he became mayor of Stepney and in 1922 was elected to Parliament as the Member for Limehouse. Attlee served in the first Labour minority government led by Ramsay MacDonald in 1924, and then joined the Cabinet during MacDonald&#x27;s second minority (1929–1931). After retaining his seat in Labour&#x27;s landslide defeat of 1931, he became the party&#x27;s Deputy Leader. Elected Leader of the Labour Party in 1935, and at first advocating pacificism and opposing re-armament, he became a critic of Neville Chamberlain&#x27;s policy of appeasement in the lead-up to the Second World War. Attlee took Labour into the wartime coalition government in 1940 and served under Winston Churchill, initially as Lord Privy Seal and then as Deputy Prime Minister from 1942.

The Labour Party, led by Attlee, won a landslide victory in the 1945 general election, on their post-war recovery platform. They inherited a country close to bankruptcy following the Second World War and beset by food, housing and resource shortages. Attlee led the construction of the first Labour majority government, which aimed to maintain full employment, a mixed economy and a greatly enlarged system of social services provided by the state. To this end, it undertook the nationalisation of public utilities and major industries, and implemented wide-ranging social reforms, including the passing of the National Insurance Act 1946 and National Assistance Act 1948, the formation of the National Health Service (NHS) in 1948, and the enlargement of public subsidies for council house building. His government also reformed trade union legislation, working practices and children&#x27;s services; it created the National Parks system, passed the New Towns Act 1946 and established the town and country planning system. Attlee&#x27;s foreign policy focused on decolonisation efforts, including the partition of India (1947), the independence of Burma and Ceylon, and the dissolution of the British mandates of Palestine and Transjordan. Attlee and Bevin encouraged the United States to take a vigorous role in the Cold War. He supported the Marshall Plan to rebuild Western Europe with American money and, in 1949, promoted the NATO military alliance against the Soviet bloc. After leading Labour to a narrow victory at the 1950 general election, he sent British troops to fight alongside South Korea in the Korean War.

Despite his social reforms and economic programme, the pre-existing wartime shortages of food, housing and resources persisted throughout his premiership, alongside recurrent currency crises and dependence on US aid. His party was narrowly defeated by the Conservatives in the 1951 general election, despite winning the most votes. He continued as Labour leader but retired after losing the 1955 general election and was elevated to the House of Lords, where he served until his death in 1967. In public, he was modest and unassuming, but behind the scenes his depth of knowledge, quiet demeanour, objectivity and pragmatism proved decisive. He is often ranked as one of the greatest British prime ministers, receiving particular praise for his government&#x27;s welfare state reforms, creation of the NHS, continuation of the &quot;Special Relationship&quot; with the US, and involvement in NATO.

==Early life==
Attlee was born on 3 January 1883 in Putney, Surrey (now part of London), into an upper middle class family, the seventh of eight children. His father was Henry Attlee, a solicitor, and his mother was Ellen Bravery Watson, daughter of Thomas Simons Watson, secretary for the Art Union of London. His parents were &quot;committed Anglicans&quot; who read prayers and psalms each morning at breakfast.

Attlee grew up in a two-storey villa with a large garden and tennis court, staffed by three servants and a gardener. His father, a political Liberal, had inherited family interests in milling and brewing, and became a senior partner in the law firm of Druces, also serving a term as president of the Law Society of England and Wales. In 1898 he purchased a estate, Comarques in Thorpe-le-Soken, Essex. At the age of nine, Attlee was sent to board at Northaw Place, a boys&#x27; preparatory school in Hertfordshire. In 1896 he followed his brothers to Haileybury College, where he was a middling student. He was influenced by the Darwinist views of his housemaster Frederick Webb Headley, and in 1899 he published an attack on striking London cab-drivers in the school magazine, predicting they would soon have to &quot;beg for their fares&quot;.

In 1901, Attlee went up to University College, Oxford, reading modern history. He and his brother Tom &quot;were given a generous stipend by their father and embraced the university lifestyle—rowing, reading and socializing&quot;. He was later described by a tutor as &quot;level-headed, industrious, dependable man with no brilliance of style ... but with excellent sound judgement&quot;. At university he had little interest in politics or economics, later describing his views at this time as &quot;good old fashioned imperialist conservative&quot;. He graduated Bachelor of Arts in 1904 with second-class honours.

Attlee then trained as a barrister at the Inner Temple and was called to the bar in March 1906. He worked for a time at his father&#x27;s law firm Druces and Attlee but did not enjoy the work, and had no particular ambition to succeed in the legal profession. He also played football for non-League club Fleet. Attlee&#x27;s father died in 1908, leaving an estate valued for probate at £75,394 (equivalent to £ in ).

=== Early career ===
In 1906, Attlee became a volunteer at Haileybury House, a charitable club for working-class boys in Stepney in the East End of London run by his old school, and from 1907 to 1909 he served as the club&#x27;s manager. Until then, his political views had been more conservative. However, after his shock at the poverty and deprivation he saw while working with the slum children, he came to the view that private charity would never be sufficient to alleviate poverty and that only direct action and income redistribution by the state would have any serious effect. This sparked a process that caused him to convert to socialism. He joined the Independent Labour Party (ILP) in 1908 and became active in local politics. In 1909, he stood unsuccessfully at his first election, as an ILP candidate for Stepney Borough Council.

He also worked briefly as a secretary for Beatrice Webb in 1909, before becoming a secretary for Toynbee Hall. He worked for Webb&#x27;s campaign of popularisation of the Minority Report as he was very active in Fabian Society circles, in which he would go round visiting many political societies—Liberal, Conservative and socialist—to explain and popularise the ideas, as well as recruiting lecturers deemed suitable to work on the campaign. In 1911, he was employed by the Government as an &quot;official explainer&quot;—touring the country to explain Chancellor of the Exchequer David Lloyd George&#x27;s National Insurance Act. He spent the summer of that year touring Essex and Somerset on a bicycle, explaining the Act at public meetings. A year later, he became a lecturer at the London School of Economics, teaching social science and public administration.

=== Military service ===
Following the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914, Attlee applied to join the British Army. Initially his application was turned down, as his age of 31 was seen as being too old; however, he was eventually commissioned as a temporary lieutenant in the 6th (Service) Battalion, South Lancashire Regiment, on 30 September 1914. On 9 February 1915 he was promoted to captain, and on 14 March was appointed battalion adjutant. The 6th South Lancashires were part of the 38th Brigade of the 13th (Western) Division, which served in the Gallipoli campaign in Turkey. Attlee&#x27;s decision to fight caused a rift between him and his older brother Tom, who, as a conscientious objector, spent much of the war in prison.

After a period spent fighting in Gallipoli, Attlee collapsed after falling ill with dysentery and was put on a ship bound for England to recover. When he woke up he wanted to get back to action as soon as possible, and asked to be let off the ship in Malta, where he stayed in hospital in order to recover. His hospitalisation coincided with the Battle of Sari Bair, which saw a large number of his comrades killed. Upon returning to action, he was informed that his company had been chosen to hold the final lines during the evacuation of Suvla. As such, he was the penultimate man to be evacuated from Suvla Bay, the last being General Stanley Maude.

The Gallipoli Campaign had been engineered by the First Lord of the Admiralty, Winston Churchill. Although it was unsuccessful, Attlee believed that it was a bold strategy which could have been successful if it had been better implemented on the ground. This led to an admiration for Churchill as a military strategist, something which would make their working relationship in later years productive.

He later served in the Mesopotamian campaign in what is now Iraq, where in April 1916 he was badly wounded, being hit in the leg by shrapnel from friendly fire while storming an enemy trench during the Battle of Hanna. The battle was an unsuccessful attempt to relieve the Siege of Kut, and many of Attlee&#x27;s fellow soldiers were also wounded or killed. He was sent firstly to India, and then back to the UK to recover. On 18 December 1916 he was transferred to the Heavy Section of the Machine Gun Corps, and 1 March 1917 he was promoted to the temporary rank of major, leading him to be known as &quot;Major Attlee&quot; for much of the inter-war period. He would spend most of 1917 training soldiers at various locations in England. From 2 to 9 July 1917, he was the temporary commanding officer (CO) of the newly formed L (later 10th) Battalion, the Tank Corps at Bovington Camp, Dorset. From 9 July, he assumed command of the 30th Company of the same battalion; however, he did not deploy to France with it in December 1917, as he was transferred back to the South Lancashire Regiment on 28 November.

After fully recovering from his injuries, he was sent to France in June 1918 to serve on the Western Front for the final months of the war. After being discharged from the Army in January 1919, he returned to Stepney, and returned to his old job lecturing part-time at the London School of Economics.

==Early political career==

===Local politics===
Attlee returned to local politics in the immediate post-war period, becoming mayor of the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney, one of London&#x27;s most deprived inner-city boroughs, in 1919. During his time as mayor, the council undertook action to tackle slum landlords who charged high rents but refused to spend money on keeping their property in habitable condition. The council served and enforced legal orders on homeowners to repair their property. It also appointed health visitors and sanitary inspectors, reducing the infant mortality rate, and took action to find work for returning unemployed ex-servicemen.

In 1920, while mayor, he wrote his first book, &quot;The Social Worker&quot;, which set out many of the principles that informed his political philosophy and that were to underpin the actions of his government in later years. The book attacked the idea that looking after the poor could be left to voluntary action. He wrote that:In a civilised community, although it may be composed of self-reliant individuals, there will be some persons who will be unable at some period of their lives to look after themselves, and the question of what is to happen to them may be solved in three ways – they may be neglected, they may be cared for by the organised community as of right, or they may be left to the goodwill of individuals in the community. [...] Charity is only possible without loss of dignity between equals. A right established by law, such as that to an old age pension, is less galling than an allowance made by a rich man to a poor one, dependent on his view of the recipient&#x27;s character, and terminable at his caprice. In 1921, George Lansbury, the Labour mayor of the neighbouring borough of Poplar, and future Labour Party leader, launched the Poplar Rates Rebellion; a campaign of disobedience seeking to equalise the poor relief burden across all the London boroughs. Attlee, who was a personal friend of Lansbury, strongly supported this. However, Herbert Morrison, the Labour mayor of nearby Hackney, and one of the main figures in the London Labour Party, strongly denounced Lansbury and the rebellion. During this period, Attlee developed a lifelong dislike of Morrison.

===Member of Parliament===
At the 1922 general election, Attlee became the Member of Parliament (MP) for the constituency of Limehouse in Stepney. At the time, he admired Ramsay MacDonald and helped him get elected as Labour Party leader at the 1922 leadership election. He served as MacDonald&#x27;s Parliamentary Private Secretary for the brief 1922 parliament. His first taste of ministerial office came in 1924, when he served as Under-Secretary of State for War in the short-lived first Labour government, led by MacDonald.

Attlee opposed the 1926 General Strike, believing that strike action should not be used as a political weapon. However, when it happened, he did not attempt to undermine it. At the time of the strike, he was chairman of the Stepney Borough Electricity Committee. He negotiated a deal with the Electrical Trade Union so that they would continue to supply power to hospitals, but would end supplies to factories. One firm, Scammell and Nephew Ltd, took a civil action against Attlee and the other Labour members of the committee (although not against the Conservative members who had also supported this). The court found against Attlee and his fellow councillors and they were ordered to pay £300 damages. The decision was later reversed on appeal, but the financial problems caused by the episode almost forced Attlee out of politics.

In 1927, he was appointed a member of the multi-party Simon Commission, a royal commission set up to examine the possibility of granting self-rule to India. Due to the time he needed to devote to the commission, and contrary to a promise MacDonald made to Attlee to induce him to serve on the commission, he was not initially offered a ministerial post in the second Labour government, which entered office after the 1929 general election. Attlee&#x27;s service on the Commission equipped him with a thorough exposure to India and many of its political leaders. By 1933 he argued that British rule was alien to India and was unable to make the social and economic reforms necessary for India&#x27;s progress. He became the British leader most sympathetic to Indian independence (as a dominion), preparing him for his role in deciding on independence in 1947.

In May 1930, Labour MP Oswald Mosley left the party after its rejection of his proposals for solving the unemployment problem, and Attlee was given Mosley&#x27;s post of Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster. In March 1931, he became Postmaster General, a post he held for five months until August, when the Labour government fell, after failing to agree on how to tackle the financial crisis of the Great Depression. That month MacDonald and a few of his allies formed a National Government with the Conservatives and Liberals, leading them to be expelled from Labour. MacDonald offered Attlee a job in the National Government, but he turned down the offer and opted to stay loyal to the main Labour party.

After Ramsay MacDonald formed the National Government, Labour was deeply divided. Attlee had long been close to MacDonald and now felt betrayed—as did most Labour politicians. During the course of the second Labour government, Attlee had become increasingly disillusioned with MacDonald, whom he came to regard as vain and incompetent, and of whom he later wrote scathingly in his autobiography. He would write:

In the old days I had looked up to MacDonald as a great leader. He had a fine presence and great oratorical power. The unpopular line which he took during the First World War seemed to mark him as a man of character. Despite his mishandling of the Red Letter episode, I had not appreciated his defects until he took office a second time. I then realised his reluctance to take positive action and noted with dismay his increasing vanity and snobbery, while his habit of telling me, a junior Minister, the poor opinion he had of all his Cabinet colleagues made an unpleasant impression. I had not, however, expected that he would perpetrate the greatest betrayal in the political history of this country ... The shock to the Party was very great, especially to the loyal workers of the rank-and-file who had made great sacrifices for these men.

===Deputy Labour Leader===
The general election held in October 1931 proved disastrous for the Labour Party, which lost over 200 seats, returning only 52 MPs to Parliament. The vast majority of the party&#x27;s senior figures, including the Leader Arthur Henderson, lost their seats. Attlee, however, narrowly retained his Limehouse seat, with his majority being slashed from 7,288 to just 551. He was one of only three Labour MPs who had experience of government to retain their seats, along with George Lansbury and Stafford Cripps. Accordingly, Lansbury was elected Leader unopposed, with Attlee as his deputy.

Most of the remaining Labour MPs after 1931 were elderly trade-union officials who could not contribute much to debates; Lansbury was in his 70s, and Stafford Cripps – another main figure of the Labour front-bench who had entered Parliament in January 1931 – lacked parliamentary experience. As one of the most capable and experienced of the remaining Labour MPs, Attlee therefore shouldered a lot of the burden of providing an opposition to the National Government in the years 1931 to 1935; during this time he had to extend his knowledge of subjects which he had not studied in any depth before (such as finance and foreign affairs) in order to provide an effective opposition to the government.

Attlee effectively served as Labour&#x27;s acting-leader for nine months from December 1933, after Lansbury fractured his thigh in an accident; this raised Attlee&#x27;s public profile considerably. It was during this period, however, that personal financial problems almost forced Attlee to quit politics altogether. His wife had become ill, and at that time there was no separate salary for the Leader of the Opposition. On the verge of resigning from Parliament, he was persuaded to stay by Stafford Cripps, a wealthy socialist, who agreed to make a donation to party funds to pay him an additional salary until Lansbury could take over again.

During 1932–33 Attlee flirted with, and then drew back from radicalism – influenced by Stafford Cripps, who was then on the radical wing of the party. He was briefly a member of the Socialist League, which had been formed by former Independent Labour Party (ILP) members who opposed the ILP&#x27;s disaffiliation from the main Labour Party in 1932. At one point he agreed with the proposition put forward by Cripps that gradual reform was inadequate and that a socialist government would have to pass an emergency powers act, allowing it to rule by decree to overcome any opposition by vested interests until it was safe to restore democracy. He admired Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s strong-armed rule and use of major generals to control England. After looking more closely at Hitler, Mussolini, Stalin, and even his former colleague Oswald Mosley (leader of the new blackshirt fascist movement in Britain), Attlee retreated from radicalism, distanced himself from the League, and argued instead that the Labour Party must adhere to constitutional methods and stand forthright for democracy and against totalitarianism either of the left or of the right. He always supported the crown, and as Prime Minister was close to King George VI.

===Leader of the Opposition===
George Lansbury, a committed pacifist, resigned as the Leader of the Labour Party at the 1935 Party Conference on 8 October, after delegates voted in favour of sanctions against Italy for its aggression against Abyssinia. Lansbury had strongly opposed the policy, and felt unable to continue leading the party. Taking advantage of the disarray in the Labour Party, the Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin announced on 19 October that a general election would be held on 14 November. With no time for a leadership contest, the party agreed that Attlee should serve as interim leader, on the understanding that a leadership election would be held after the general election. Attlee therefore led Labour through the 1935 election, which saw the party stage a partial comeback from its disastrous 1931 performance, winning 38 per cent of the vote, the highest share Labour had won up to that point, and gaining over one hundred seats.

Attlee stood in the subsequent leadership election, held soon afterward, where he was opposed by Herbert Morrison, who had just re-entered parliament in the recent election, and Arthur Greenwood: Morrison was seen as the favourite, but was distrusted by many sections of the party, especially the left wing. Arthur Greenwood meanwhile was a popular figure in the party; however, his leadership bid was severely hampered by his alcohol problem. Attlee was able to come across as a competent and unifying figure, particularly having already led the party through a general election. He went on to come first in both the first and second ballots, formally being elected Leader of the Labour Party on 3 December 1935.

Throughout the 1920s and most of the 1930s, the Labour Party&#x27;s official policy had been to oppose rearmament, instead supporting internationalism and collective security under the League of Nations. At the 1934 Labour Party Conference, Attlee declared that, &quot;We have absolutely abandoned any idea of nationalist loyalty. We are deliberately putting a world order before our loyalty to our own country. We say we want to see put on the statute book something which will make our people citizens of the world before they are citizens of this country&quot;. During a debate on defence in Commons a year later, Attlee said &quot;We are told (in the White Paper) that there is danger against which we have to guard ourselves. We do not think you can do it by national defence. We think you can only do it by moving forward to a new world. A world of law, the abolition of national armaments with a world force and a world economic system. I shall be told that that is quite impossible&quot;. Shortly after those comments, Adolf Hitler proclaimed that German rearmament offered no threat to world peace. Attlee responded the next day noting that Hitler&#x27;s speech, although containing unfavourable references to the Soviet Union, created &quot;A chance to call a halt in the armaments race ... We do not think that our answer to Herr Hitler should be just rearmament. We are in an age of rearmaments, but we on this side cannot accept that position&quot;.

Attlee played little part in the events that would lead up to the abdication of Edward VIII, for despite Baldwin&#x27;s threat to step down if Edward attempted to remain on the throne after marrying Wallis Simpson, Labour was widely accepted not to be a viable alternative government, owing to the National Government&#x27;s overwhelming majority in the Commons. Attlee, along with Liberal leader Archibald Sinclair, was eventually consulted with by Baldwin on 24 November 1936, and Attlee agreed with both Baldwin and Sinclair that Edward could not remain on the throne, firmly eliminating any prospect of any alternative government forming were Baldwin to resign.

In April 1936, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Neville Chamberlain, introduced a Budget which increased the amount spent on the armed forces. Attlee made a radio broadcast in opposition to it, saying:
In June 1936, the Conservative MP Duff Cooper called for an Anglo-French alliance against possible German aggression and called for all parties to support one. Attlee condemned this: &quot;We say that any suggestion of an alliance of this kind—an alliance in which one country is bound to another, right or wrong, by some overwhelming necessity—is contrary to the spirit of the League of Nations, is contrary to the Covenant, is contrary to Locarno is contrary to the obligations which this country has undertaken, and is contrary to the professed policy of this Government&quot;. At the Labour Party conference at Edinburgh in October Attlee reiterated that &quot;There can be no question of our supporting the Government in its rearmament policy&quot;.

However, with the rising threat from Nazi Germany, and the ineffectiveness of the League of Nations, this policy eventually lost credibility. By 1937, Labour had jettisoned its pacifist position and came to support rearmament and oppose Neville Chamberlain&#x27;s policy of appeasement. However Attlee and the Labour Party strongly opposed conscription when it was passed in April 1939.

At the end of 1937, Attlee and a party of three Labour MPs visited Spain and visited the British Battalion of the International Brigades fighting in the Spanish Civil War. One of the companies was named the &quot;Major Attlee Company&quot; in his honour. Attlee was supportive of the Republican government in Spain, and at the 1937 Labour conference moved the wider Labour Party towards opposing what he considered the &quot;farce&quot; of the Non-Intervention Committee organised by the British and French governments. In the House of Commons, Attlee stated, &quot;I cannot understand the delusion that if Franco wins with Italian and German aid, he will immediately become independent. I think it is a ridiculous proposition.&quot; Dalton, the Labour Party&#x27;s spokesman on foreign policy, also thought that Franco would ally with Germany and Italy. However, Franco&#x27;s subsequent behaviour proved it was not such a ridiculous proposition. As Dalton later acknowledged, Franco skilfully maintained Spanish neutrality, whereas Hitler would likely have occupied Spain if Franco had lost the Civil War.

In 1938, Attlee opposed the Munich Agreement, in which Chamberlain negotiated with Hitler to give Germany the German-speaking parts of Czechoslovakia, the Sudetenland: We all feel relief that war has not come this time... we cannot, however, feel that peace has been established, but that we have nothing but an armistice in a state of war. We have been unable to go in for care-free rejoicing. We have felt that we are in the midst of a tragedy... [and] humiliation. This has not been a victory for reason and humanity. It has been a victory for brute force. At every stage of the proceedings there have been time limits laid down... [the] terms laid down as ultimata. We have seen to-day a gallant, civilised and democratic people betrayed and handed over to a ruthless despotism... The events of these last few days constitute one of the greatest diplomatic defeats that this country and France have ever sustained. There can be no doubt that it is a tremendous victory for Herr Hitler. Without firing a shot, by the mere display of military force, he has achieved a dominating position in Europe which Germany failed to win after four years of war. He has overturned the balance of power in Europe... [and] destroyed the last fortress of democracy in Eastern Europe which stood in the way of his ambition. He has opened his way to the food, the oil and the resources which he requires in order to consolidate his military power, and he has successfully defeated and reduced to impotence the forces that might have stood against the rule of violence. [...] The cause [of the crisis which we have undergone] was not the existence of minorities in Czechoslovakia; it was not that the position of the Sudeten Germans had become intolerable. It was not the wonderful principle of self-determination. It was because Herr Hitler had decided that the time was ripe for another step forward in his design to dominate Europe... The minorities question is no new one. [...] [And] short of a drastic and entire reshuffling of these populations there is no possible solution to the problem of minorities in Europe except toleration.

However, the new Czechoslovakian state did not provide equal rights to the Slovaks and Sudeten Germans, with the historian Arnold J. Toynbee already having noted that &quot;for the Germans, Magyars and Poles, who account between them for more than one quarter of the whole population, the present regime in Czechoslovakia is not essentially different from the regimes in the surrounding countries&quot;. Anthony Eden in the Munich debate acknowledged that there had been &quot;discrimination, even severe discrimination&quot; against the Sudeten Germans.

In 1937, Attlee wrote a book entitled &quot;The Labour Party in Perspective&quot; that sold fairly well in which he set out some of his views. He argued that there was no point in Labour compromising on its socialist principles in the belief that this would achieve electoral success. He wrote: &quot;I find that the proposition often reduces itself to this – that if the Labour Party would drop its socialism and adopt a Liberal platform, many Liberals would be pleased to support it. I have heard it said more than once that if Labour would only drop its policy of nationalisation everyone would be pleased, and it would soon obtain a majority. I am convinced it would be fatal for the Labour Party.&quot; He also wrote that there was no point in &quot;watering down Labour&#x27;s socialist creed in order to attract new adherents who cannot accept the full socialist faith. On the contrary, I believe that it is only a clear and bold policy that will attract this support&quot;.

In the late 1930s, Attlee sponsored a Jewish mother and her two children, enabling them to leave Germany in 1939 and move to the UK. On arriving in Britain, Attlee invited one of the children into his home in Stanmore, north-west London, where he stayed for several months.

==Deputy Prime Minister==
Attlee remained as Leader of the Opposition when the Second World War broke out in September 1939. The ensuing disastrous Norwegian campaign would result in a motion of no confidence in Neville Chamberlain. Although Chamberlain survived this, the reputation of his administration was so badly and publicly damaged that it became clear a coalition government would be necessary. Even if Attlee had personally been prepared to serve under Chamberlain in an emergency coalition government, he would never have been able to carry Labour with him. Consequently, Chamberlain tendered his resignation, and Labour and the Conservatives entered a coalition government led by Winston Churchill on 10 May 1940, with Attlee joining the Cabinet as Lord Privy Seal on 12 May.

Attlee and Churchill quickly agreed that the War Cabinet would consist of three Conservatives (initially Churchill, Chamberlain and Lord Halifax) and two Labour members (initially himself and Arthur Greenwood) and that Labour should have slightly more than one third of the posts in the coalition government. Attlee and Greenwood played a vital role in supporting Churchill during a series of War Cabinet debates over whether or not to negotiate peace terms with Hitler following the Fall of France in May 1940; both supported Churchill and gave him the majority he needed in the War Cabinet to continue Britain&#x27;s resistance.

Only Attlee and Churchill remained in the War Cabinet from the formation of the Government of National Unity in May 1940 through to the election in May 1945. Attlee was initially the Lord Privy Seal, before becoming Britain&#x27;s first ever Deputy Prime Minister in 1942, as well as becoming the Dominions Secretary and Lord President of the Council on 28 September 1943.

Attlee himself played a generally low key but vital role in the wartime government, working behind the scenes and in committees to ensure the smooth operation of government. In the coalition government, three inter-connected committees effectively ran the country. Churchill chaired the first two, the War cabinet and the Defence Committee, with Attlee deputising for him in these, and answering for the government in Parliament when Churchill was absent. Attlee himself instituted, and later chaired the third body, the Lord President&#x27;s Committee, which was responsible for overseeing domestic affairs. As Churchill was most concerned with overseeing the war effort, this arrangement suited both men. Attlee himself had largely been responsible for creating these arrangements with Churchill&#x27;s backing, streamlining the machinery of government and abolishing many committees. He also acted as a conciliator in the government, smoothing over tensions which frequently arose between Labour and Conservative Ministers.

Many Labour activists were baffled by the top leadership role for a man they regarded as having little charisma; Beatrice Webb wrote in her diary in early 1940:
:He looked and spoke like an insignificant elderly clerk, without distinction in the voice, manner or substance of his discourse. To realise that this little nonentity is the Parliamentary Leader of the Labour Party ... and presumably the future P.M. [Prime Minister] is pitiable&quot;.

=== 1945 election ===

Following the defeat of Nazi Germany and the end of the War in Europe in May 1945, Attlee and Churchill favoured the coalition government remaining in place until Japan had been defeated. However, Herbert Morrison made it clear that the Labour Party would not be willing to accept this, and Churchill was forced to tender his resignation as Prime Minister and call an immediate election.

The war had set in motion profound social changes within Britain and had ultimately led to a widespread popular desire for social reform. This mood was epitomised in the Beveridge Report of 1942, by the Liberal economist William Beveridge. The &quot;Report&quot; assumed that the maintenance of full employment would be the aim of post-war governments, and that this would provide the basis for the welfare state. Immediately upon its release, it sold hundreds of thousands of copies. All major parties committed themselves to fulfilling this aim, but most historians say that Attlee&#x27;s Labour Party was seen by the electorate as the party most likely to follow it through.

Labour campaigned on the theme of &quot;Let Us Face the Future&quot;, positioning themselves as the party best placed to rebuild Britain following the war, and were widely viewed as having run a strong and positive campaign, while the Conservative campaign centred entirely on Churchill. Despite opinion polls indicating a strong Labour lead, opinion polls were then viewed as a novelty which had not proven their worth, and most commentators expected that Churchill&#x27;s prestige and status as a &quot;war hero&quot; would ensure a comfortable Conservative victory. Before polling day, &quot;The Manchester Guardian&quot; surmised that &quot;the chances of Labour sweeping the country and obtaining a clear majority ... are pretty remote&quot;. The &quot;News of the World&quot; predicted a working Conservative majority, while in Glasgow a pundit forecast the result as Conservatives 360, Labour 220, Others 60. Churchill, however, made some costly errors during the campaign. In particular, his suggestion during one radio broadcast that a future Labour Government would require &quot;some form of a gestapo&quot; to implement their policies was widely regarded as being in very bad taste and massively backfired.

When the results of the election were announced on 26 July, they came as a surprise to most, including Attlee himself. Labour had won power by a huge landslide, winning 47.7 per cent of the vote to the Conservatives&#x27; 36 per cent. This gave them 393 seats in the House of Commons, a working majority of 146. This was the first time in history that the Labour Party had won a majority in Parliament. When Attlee went to see King George VI at Buckingham Palace to be appointed Prime Minister, the notoriously Attlee and the famously tongue-tied King stood in silence; Attlee finally volunteered the remark, &quot;I&#x27;ve won the election&quot;. The King replied &quot;I know. I heard it on the Six O&#x27;Clock News&quot;.

==Prime Minister==

===Domestic policy===
Francis (1995) argues there was consensus both in the Labour&#x27;s national executive committee and at party conferences on a definition of socialism that stressed moral improvement as well as material improvement. The Attlee government was committed to rebuilding British society as an ethical commonwealth, using public ownership and controls to abolish extremes of wealth and poverty. Labour&#x27;s ideology contrasted sharply with the contemporary Conservative Party&#x27;s defence of individualism, inherited privileges, and income inequality. On 5 July 1948, Clement Attlee replied to a letter dated 22 June from James Murray and ten other MPs who raised concerns about West Indians who arrived on board the . As for the prime minister himself, he was not much focused on economic policy, letting others handle the issues.

====Nationalisation====
Attlee&#x27;s government also carried out their manifesto commitment for nationalisation of basic industries and public utilities. The Bank of England and civil aviation were nationalised in 1946. Coal mining, the railways, road haulage, canals and Cable and Wireless were nationalised in 1947, and electricity and gas followed in 1948. The steel industry was nationalised in 1951. By 1951 about 20 per cent of the British economy had been taken into public ownership.

Nationalisation failed to provide workers with a greater say in the running of the industries in which they worked. It did, however, bring about significant material gains for workers in the form of higher wages, reduced working hours, and improvements in working conditions, especially in regards to safety. As historian Eric Shaw noted of the years following nationalisation, the electricity and gas supply companies became &quot;impressive models of public enterprise&quot; in terms of efficiency, and the National Coal Board was not only profitable, but working conditions for miners had significantly improved as well.

Within a few years of nationalisation, a number of progressive measures had been carried out which did much to improve conditions in the mines, including better pay, a five-day working week, a national safety scheme (with proper standards at all the collieries), a ban on boys under the age of 16 going underground, the introduction of training for newcomers before going down to the coalface, and the making of pithead baths into a standard facility.

The newly established National Coal Board offered sick pay and holiday pay to miners. As noted by Martin Francis:
Union leaders saw nationalisation as a means to pursue a more advantageous position within a framework of continued conflict, rather than as an opportunity to replace the old adversarial form of industrial relations. Moreover, most workers in nationalised industries exhibited an essentially instrumentalist attitude, favouring public ownership because it secured job security and improved wages rather than because it promised the creation of a new set of socialist relationships in the workplace.

====Health====

Attlee&#x27;s Health Minister, Aneurin Bevan, fought hard against the general disapproval of the medical establishment, including the British Medical Association, by creating the National Health Service in 1948. This was a publicly funded healthcare system, which offered treatment for all, regardless of income, free of charge at the point of use. Reflecting pent-up demand that had long existed for medical services, the NHS treated some 8.5 million dental patients and dispensed more than 5 million pairs of spectacles during its first year of operation.

Consultants benefited from the new system by being paid salaries that provided an acceptable standard of living without the need for them to resort to private practice. The NHS brought major improvements in the health of working-class people, with deaths from diphtheria, pneumonia, and tuberculosis significantly reduced. Although there were often disputes about its organisation and funding, British political parties continued to voice their general support for the NHS in order to remain electable.

In the field of health care, funds were allocated to modernisation and extension schemes aimed at improving administrative efficiency. Improvements were made in nursing accommodation in order to recruit more nurses and reduce labour shortages which were keeping 60,000 beds out of use, and efforts were made to reduce the imbalance &quot;between an excess of fever and tuberculosis (TB) beds and a shortage of maternity beds&quot;.

BCG vaccinations were introduced for the protection of medical students, midwives, nurses, and contacts of patients with tuberculosis, a pension scheme was set up for employees of the newly established NHS, The National Health Service (Superannuation) Regulations 1947 laid down a number of provisions for beneficiaries including an officer&#x27;s pension and retiring allowance, an injury allowance, a short service gratuity, a death gratuity, a widow&#x27;s pension, and supplementary payments in the case of special classes of officers. Provision was also made for the allocation of part of pension or injury allowance to spouse of dependent.

The Radioactive Substances Act 1948 set out general provisions to control radioactive substances. Numerous lesser reforms were also introduced, some of which were of great benefit to certain segments of British society, such as the mentally deficient and the blind. Between 1948 and 1951, Attlee&#x27;s government increased spending on health from £6 billion to £11 billion: an increase of over 80%, and from 2.1% to 3.6% of GDP.

====Welfare====
The government set about implementing the Wartime plans of William Beveridge&#x27;s plans for the creation of a &#x27;cradle to grave&#x27; welfare state, and set in place an entirely new system of social security. Among the most important pieces of legislation was the National Insurance Act 1946, in which people in work paid a flat rate of national insurance. In return, they (and the wives of male contributors) were eligible for flat-rate pensions, sickness benefit, unemployment benefit, and funeral benefit. Various provisions were included in the National Insurance Act 1946 including unemployment and sickness benefit, maternity grant and attendance allowance, maternity allowance, widow&#x27;s benefit, widow&#x27;s pensions in special cases, guardian&#x27;s allowance, retirement pension, and death grant.

Various other pieces of legislation provided for child benefit and support for people with no other source of income. In 1949, unemployment, sickness and maternity benefits were exempted from taxation.

A block grant introduced in 1948 helped the social services provided by local authorities. Personal Social Services or welfare services were developed in 1948 for individual and families in general, particularly special groups such as the mentally disordered, deprived children, the elderly, and the handicapped.

The Attlee Government increased pensions and other benefits, with pensions raised to become more of a living income than they had ever been. War pensions and allowances (for both World Wars) were increased by an act of 1946 which gave the wounded man with an allowance for his wife and children if he married after he had been wounded, thereby removing a grievance of more than twenty years standing. Other improvements were made in war pensions during Attlee&#x27;s tenure as prime minister. A Constant Attendance Allowance was tripled, an Unemployability Allowance was tripled from 10s to 30s a week, and a special hardship allowance of up to £1 a week was introduced. In addition, the 1951 Budget made further improvements in the supplementary allowances for many war pensioners. From 1945 onwards, three out of every four pension claims had been successful, whilst after the First World War only one pension claim in three was allowed. Under the Superannuation (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1948, employees of a body representative of local authorities or of the officers of local authorities could be admitted &quot;on suitable terms to the superannuation fund of a local authority&quot;. In 1951, a comforts allowance was introduced that was automatically paid to war pensioners &quot;receiving unemployability supplement and constant attendance allowance&quot;.

The Personal injuries (Civilians) Scheme of 1947 included various benefits such as an exceptional maximum rate of constant attendance allowance of 40s a week, and an allowance for wear and tear of clothing caused by the use of artificial limbs and appliances. In addition, allowances payable while a pensioner underwent inpatient treatment &quot;are normally no longer subject to a deduction in respect of decreased home expenditure.&quot; Various changes were also made in respect of gainfully employed persons who sustained war injuries and civil defence volunteers who war service injuries. These included the provision of allowances for the wife and children for injured persons receiving injury allowance or disablement pension, amendments to the provisions for an allowance to a pensioner deemed unemployable by reason of his pensioned disablement &quot;to secure that he receives in the aggregate by way of unemployability allowance and any social service benefits for which he is eligible at least 20s. a week in addition to his pension,&quot; increases in the allowance payable for a wife of a person receiving treatment allowance, unemployability allowance or injury allowance under certain conditions and &quot;if no allowance is payable for a wife, an allowance may be granted for a dependant adult,&quot; and a social hardship allowance for partially disabled men &quot;who, though not unemployable, is prevented by his pensioned disablement from resuming his former occupation or taking up one of equivalent standard.&quot; Also, &quot;Where a man dies as the direct result of a qualifying injury his widow may be awarded a pension (with allowances for his children) without regard to the date of marriage.&quot;

A more extensive system of social welfare benefits had been established by the Attlee Government, which did much to reduce acute social deprivation. The cumulative impact of the Attlee&#x27;s Government&#x27;s health and welfare policies was such that all the indices of health (such as statistics of school medical or dental officers, or of medical officers of health) showed signs of improvement, with continual improvements in survival rates for infants and increased life expectancy for the elderly. The success of the Attlee Government&#x27;s welfare legislation in reducing poverty was such that, in the general election of 1950, according to one study, &quot;Labour propaganda could make much of the claim that social security had eradicated the most abject destitution of the 1930s&quot;.

====Education====
The Attlee government ensured provisions of the Education Act 1944 were fully implemented, with free secondary education becoming a right for the first time. Fees in state grammar schools were eliminated, while new, modern secondary schools were constructed.

The school leaving age was raised to 15 in 1947, an accomplishment helped brought into fruition by initiatives such as the HORSA (&quot;Huts Operation for Raising the School-leaving Age&quot;) scheme and the S.F.O.R.S.A. (furniture) scheme. University scholarships were introduced to ensure that no one who was qualified &quot;should be deprived of a university education for financial reasons&quot;, while a large school building programme was organised. A rapid increase in the number of trained teachers took place, and the number of new school places was increased. Under the Education Act of 1946 and the Education (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1948, local authorities were empowered to provide clothing to pupils.

Increased Treasury funds were made available for education, particularly for upgrading school buildings suffering from years of neglect and war damage. Prefabricated classrooms were built, and 928 new primary schools were constructed between 1945 and 1950. The provision of free school meals was expanded, and opportunities for university entrants were increased. State scholarships to universities were increased, and the government adopted a policy of supplementing university scholarships awards to a level sufficient to cover fees plus maintenance.

Many thousands of ex-servicemen were assisted to go through college who could never have contemplated it before the war. Free milk was also made available to all schoolchildren for the first time. In addition, spending on technical education rose, and the number of nursery schools was increased. Salaries for teachers were also improved, and funds were allocated towards improving existing schools.

In 1947 the Arts Council of Great Britain was set up to encourage the arts.

The Ministry of Education was established under the 1944 Act, and free County Colleges were set up for the compulsory part-time instruction of teenagers between the ages of 15 and 18 who were not in full-time education. An Emergency Training Scheme was also introduced which turned out an extra 25,000 teachers in 1945–1951. In 1947, Regional Advisory Councils were set up to bring together industry and education to find out the needs of young workers &quot;and advise on the provision required, and to secure reasonable economy of provision&quot;. That same year, thirteen Area Training Organisations were set up in England and one in Wales to coordinate teacher training.

Attlee&#x27;s government, however, failed to introduce the comprehensive education for which many socialists had hoped. This reform was eventually carried out by Harold Wilson&#x27;s government. During its time in office, the Attlee government increased spending on education by over 50 per cent, from £6.5 billion to £10 billion.

====Economy====

The most significant problem facing Attlee and his ministers remained the economy, as the war effort had left Britain nearly bankrupt. Overseas investments had been used up to pay for the war. The transition to a peacetime economy, and the maintaining of strategic military commitments abroad led to continuous and severe problems with the balance of trade. This resulted in strict rationing of food and other essential goods continuing in the post war period to force a reduction in consumption in an effort to limit imports, boost exports, and stabilise the Pound Sterling so that Britain could trade its way out of its financial state.

The abrupt end of the American Lend-Lease programme in August 1945 almost caused a crisis. Some relief was provided by the Anglo-American loan, negotiated in December 1945. The conditions attached to the loan included making the pound fully convertible to the US dollar. When this was introduced in July 1947, it led to a currency crisis and convertibility had to be suspended after just five weeks. The UK benefited from the American Marshall Aid program in 1948, and the economic situation improved significantly. Another balance of payments crisis in 1949 forced Chancellor of the Exchequer, Stafford Cripps, into devaluation of the pound.

Despite these problems, one of the main achievements of Attlee&#x27;s government was the maintenance of near full employment. The government maintained most of the wartime controls over the economy, including control over the allocation of materials and manpower, and unemployment rarely rose above 500,000, or 3 per cent of the total workforce. Labour shortages proved a more frequent problem. The inflation rate was also kept low during his term. The rate of unemployment rarely rose above 2 per cent during Attlee&#x27;s time in office, whilst there was no hard-core of long-term unemployed. Both production and productivity rose as a result of new equipment, while the average working week was shortened.

The government was less successful in housing, which was the responsibility of Aneurin Bevan. The government had a target to build 400,000 new houses a year to replace those which had been destroyed in the war, but shortages of materials and manpower meant that less than half this number were built. Nevertheless, millions of people were rehoused as a result of the Attlee government&#x27;s housing policies. Between August 1945 and December 1951, 1,016,349 new homes were completed in England, Scotland, and Wales.

When the Attlee government was voted out of office in 1951, the economy had been improved compared to 1945. The period from 1946 to 1951 saw continuous full employment and steadily rising living standards, which increased by about 10 per cent each year. During that same period, the economy grew by 3 per cent a year, and by 1951 the UK had &quot;the best economic performance in Europe, while output per person was increasing faster than in the United States&quot;. Careful planning after 1945 also ensured that demobilisation was carried out without having a negative impact upon economic recovery, and that unemployment stayed at very low levels. In addition, the number of motor cars on the roads rose from 3 million to 5 million from 1945 to 1951, and seaside holidays were taken by far more people than ever before. A Monopolies and Restrictive Practices (Inquiry and Control) Act was passed in 1948, which allowed for investigations of restrictive practices and monopolies. However, some economic historians have argued that the UK failed to develop economically after the war, with failure to support industry leaving the economy not recovering as effectively as Germany.

====Energy====
1947 proved a particularly difficult year for the government; an exceptionally cold winter that year caused coal mines to freeze and cease production, creating widespread power cuts and food shortages. The Minister of Fuel and Power, Emanuel Shinwell was widely blamed for failing to ensure adequate coal stocks, and soon resigned from his post. The Conservatives capitalised on the crisis with the slogan &#x27;Starve with Strachey and shiver with Shinwell&#x27; (referring to the Minister of Food John Strachey).

The crisis led to an unsuccessful plot by Hugh Dalton to replace Attlee as Prime Minister with Ernest Bevin. Later that year Stafford Cripps tried to persuade Attlee to stand aside for Bevin. These plots petered out after Bevin refused to cooperate. Later that year, Dalton resigned as Chancellor after inadvertently leaking details of the budget to a journalist. He was replaced by Cripps.

===Foreign policy===
In foreign affairs, the Attlee government was concerned with four main issues: post-war Europe, the onset of the Cold War, the establishment of the United Nations, and decolonisation. The first two were closely related, and Attlee was assisted by Foreign Secretary Ernest Bevin. Attlee also attended the later stages of the Potsdam Conference, where he negotiated with President Harry S. Truman and Joseph Stalin.In the immediate aftermath of the war, the Government faced the challenge of managing relations with Britain&#x27;s former war-time ally, Stalin and the Soviet Union. Ernest Bevin was a passionate anti-communist, based largely on his experience of fighting communist influence in the trade union movement. Bevin&#x27;s initial approach to the USSR as Foreign Secretary was &quot;wary and suspicious, but not automatically hostile&quot;. Attlee himself sought warm relations with Stalin. He put his trust in the United Nations, rejected notions that the Soviet Union was bent on world conquest, and warned that treating Moscow as an enemy would turn it into one. This put Attlee at sword&#x27;s point with his foreign minister, the Foreign Office, and the military who all saw the Soviets as a growing threat to Britain&#x27;s role in the Middle East. Suddenly in January 1947, Attlee reversed his position and agreed with Bevin on a hardline anti-Soviet policy.

In an early &quot;good-will&quot; gesture that was later heavily criticised, the Attlee government allowed the Soviets to purchase, under the terms of a 1946 UK-USSR Trade agreement, a total of 25 Rolls-Royce Nene jet engines in September 1947 and March 1948. The agreement included an agreement not to use them for military purposes. The price was fixed under a commercial contract; a total of 55 jet engines were sold to the USSR in 1947. However, the Cold War intensified during this period and the Soviets, who at the time were well behind the West in jet technology, reverse-engineered the Nene and installed their own version in the MiG-15 interceptor. This was used to good effect against US-UK forces in the subsequent Korean War, as well as in several later MiG models.

After Stalin took political control of most of Eastern Europe, and began to subvert other governments in the Balkans, Attlee&#x27;s and Bevin&#x27;s worst fears of Soviet intentions were realised. The Attlee government then became instrumental in the creation of the successful NATO defence alliance to protect Western Europe against any Soviet expansion. In a crucial contribution to the economic stability of post-war Europe, Attlee&#x27;s Cabinet was instrumental in promoting the American Marshall Plan for the economic recovery of Europe. He called it one of the &quot;most bold, enlightened and good-natured acts in the history of nations&quot;.

A group of Labour MPs, organised under the banner of &quot;Keep Left&quot;, urged the government to steer a middle way between the two emerging superpowers, and advocated the creation of a &quot;third force&quot; of European powers to stand between the US and USSR. However, deteriorating relations between Britain and the USSR, as well as Britain&#x27;s economic reliance on America following the Marshall Plan, steered policy towards supporting the US. In January 1947, fear of both Soviet and American nuclear intentions led to a secret meeting of the Cabinet, where the decision was made to press ahead with the development of Britain&#x27;s independent nuclear deterrent, an issue which later caused a split in the Labour Party. Britain&#x27;s first successful nuclear test, however, did not occur until 1952, one year after Attlee had left office.

The London dock strike of July 1949, led by Communists, was suppressed when the Attlee government sent in 13,000 Army troops and passed special legislation to promptly end the strike. His response reveals Attlee&#x27;s growing concern that Soviet expansionism, supported by the British Communist Party, was a genuine threat to national security, and that the docks were highly vulnerable to sabotage ordered by Moscow. He noted that the strike was caused not by local grievances, but to help communist unions who were on strike in Canada. Attlee agreed with MI5 that he faced &quot;a very present menace&quot;.

====Decolonisation====
Decolonisation was never a major election issue, but Attlee gave the matter a great deal of attention and was the chief leader in beginning the process of decolonisation of the British Empire.

===== East Asia =====
In August 1948, the Chinese Communists&#x27; victories caused Attlee to begin preparing for a Communist takeover of China. It kept open consulates in Communist-controlled areas and rejected the Chinese Nationalists&#x27; requests that British citizens assist in the defence of Shanghai. By December, the government concluded that although British property in China would likely be nationalised, British traders would benefit in the long run from a stable, industrialising Communist China. Retaining Hong Kong was especially important to him; although the Chinese Communists promised to not interfere with its rule, Britain reinforced the Hong Kong Garrison during 1949. When the victorious Chinese Communists government declared on 1 October 1949 that it would exchange diplomats with any country that ended relations with the Chinese Nationalists, Britain became the first western country to formally recognise the People&#x27;s Republic of China in January 1950. In 1954, a Labour Party delegation including Attlee visited China at the invitation of then Foreign Minister Zhou Enlai. Attlee became the first high-ranking western politician to meet Mao Zedong.

===== South Asia =====
Attlee orchestrated the granting of independence to India and Pakistan in 1947. Attlee in 1928–1934 had been a member of the Indian Statutory Commission (otherwise known as the Simon Commission). He became the Labour Party expert on India and by 1934 was committed to granting India the same independent dominion status that Canada, Australia, New Zealand and South Africa had recently been given. He faced strong resistance from the die-hard Conservative imperialists, led by Churchill, who opposed both independence and efforts led by Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin to set up a system of limited local control by Indians themselves. Attlee and the Labour leadership were sympathetic to both the Congress led by Jawaharlal Nehru and the Pakistan movement led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah. During the Second World War, Attlee was in charge of Indian affairs. He set up the Cripps Mission in 1942, which tried and failed to bring the factions together. When Congress called for passive resistance in the Quit India movement of 1942–1945, it was the British regime ordered the widespread arrest and internment for the duration of tens of thousands of Congress leaders as part of its efforts to crush the revolt.
Labour&#x27;s election Manifesto in 1945 called for &quot;the advancement of India to responsible self-government&quot;. In 1942 the British Raj tried to enlist all major political parties in support of the war effort. Congress, led by Nehru and Gandhi, demanded immediate independence and full control by Congress of all of India. That demand was rejected by the British, and Congress opposed the war effort with its &quot;Quit India&quot; campaign. The Raj immediately responded in 1942 by imprisoning the major national, regional and local Congress leaders for the duration. Attlee did not object. By contrast, the Muslim League, led by Muhammad Ali Jinnah, strongly supported the war effort. They greatly enlarged their membership and won favour from London for their decision. Attlee retained a fondness for Congress and until 1946, accepted their thesis that they were a non-religious party that accepted Hindus, Muslims, Sikhs, and everyone else. Nevertheless, this difference in opinion between the Congress and the Muslim League towards the British war effort encouraged Attlee and his government to consider further negotiations with the Muslim League.

The Muslim League insisted that it was the only true representative of all of the Muslims of India. With violence escalating in India after the war, but with British financial power at a low ebb, large-scale military involvement was impossible. Viceroy Wavell said he needed a further seven army divisions to prevent communal violence if independence negotiations failed. No divisions were available; independence was the only option. Given the increasing demands of the Muslim League, independence implied a partition that set off heavily Muslim Pakistan from the main portion of India. After becoming Prime Minister in 1945 Attlee originally planned to give India Dominion status in 1948.

Attlee suggested in his memoirs that &quot;traditional&quot; colonial rule in Asia was no longer viable. He said that he expected it to meet renewed opposition after the war both by local national movements as well as by the United States. The prime minister&#x27;s biographer John Bew says that Attlee hoped for a transition to a multilateral world order and a Commonwealth, and that the old British empire &quot;should not be supported beyond its natural lifespan&quot; and instead be ended &quot;on the right note.&quot; His exchequer Hugh Dalton meanwhile feared that post-war Britain could no longer afford to garrison its empire.

Ultimately the Labour government gave full independence to India and Pakistan in 1947 through the Indian Independence Act. This involved creating a demarcation between the two regions which was known as the Radcliffe Line. The boundary between the newly created states of Pakistan and India involved the widespread resettlement of millions of Hindus, Sikhs and Muslims. Almost immediately, extreme anti-Hindu and anti-Sikh violence ensued in Lahore, Multan and Dacca when the Punjab province and the Bengal province were split in the Partition of India. This was followed by a rapid increase in widespread anti-Muslim violence in several areas including Amritsar, Rajkot, Jaipur, Calcutta and Delhi. Historian Yasmin Khan estimates that over a million people were killed of which several were women and children. Gandhi himself was assassinated in January 1948. Attlee remarked Gandhi as the &quot;greatest citizen&quot; of India and added, &quot;this one man has been the major factor in every consideration of the Indian problem. He had become the expression of the aspirations of the Indian people for independence&quot;.

Historian Andrew Roberts says the independence of India was a &quot;national humiliation&quot; but it was necessitated by urgent financial, administrative, strategic and political needs. Churchill in 1940–1945 had tightened the hold on India and imprisoned the Congress leadership, with Attlee&#x27;s approval. Labour had looked forward to making it a fully independent dominion like Canada or Australia. Many of the Congress leaders in the India had studied in England, and were highly regarded as fellow idealistic socialists by Labour leaders. Attlee was the Labour expert on India and took special charge of decolonisation. Attlee found that Churchill&#x27;s viceroy, Field Marshal Wavell, was too imperialistic, too keen on military solutions, and too neglectful of Indian political alignments. The eventual appointee for new Viceroy, Lord Mountbatten, the dashing war hero and a cousin of the King, was put forward by V. K. Krishna Menon as a candidate acceptable to all, in a series of clandestine meetings with Sir Stafford Scripps, and with Attlee.

Attlee also sponsored the peaceful transition to independence in 1948 of Burma (Myanmar) and Ceylon (Sri Lanka).

===== Palestine =====

One of the most urgent problems facing Attlee concerned the future of the British mandate in Palestine, which had become too troublesome and expensive to handle. British policies in Palestine were perceived by the Zionist movement and the Truman administration to be pro-Arab and anti-Jewish, and Britain soon found itself unable to maintain public order in the face of a Jewish insurgency and a civil war.

During this period, 70,000 Holocaust survivors attempted to reach Palestine as part of the Aliyah Bet refugee movement. Attlee&#x27;s government tried several tactics to prevent the migration. Five ships were bombed by the Secret Intelligence Service (though with no casualties) with a fake Palestinian group created to take responsibility. The navy apprehended over 50,000 refugees en route, interning them in detention camps in Cyprus. Conditions in the camps were harsh and faced global criticism. Later, the refugee ship Exodus 1947 would be sent back to mainland Europe, instead of being taken to Cyprus.

In response to the increasingly unpopular mandate, Attlee ordered the evacuation of all British military personnel and handed over the issue to the United Nations, a decision which was widely supported by the general public in Britain. With the establishment of the state of Israel in 1948, the camps in Cyprus were eventually closed, with their former occupants finally completing their journey to the new country.

Attlee remained hostile to Israel years after its establishment. In 1958, describing the Israelis as extremely aggressive against the neighbouring Arab states and describing the Balfour Declaration as a mistake.

===== Africa =====
The government&#x27;s policies with regard to the other colonies, particularly those in Africa, focused on keeping them as strategic Cold War assets while modernising their economies. The Labour Party had long attracted aspiring leaders from Africa and had developed elaborate plans before the war. Implementing them overnight with an empty treasury proved too challenging. A major military base was built in Kenya, and the African colonies came under an unprecedented degree of direct control from London. Development schemes were implemented to help solve Britain&#x27;s post-war balance of payments crisis and raise African living standards. This &quot;new colonialism&quot; worked slowly, and had failures such as the Tanganyika groundnut scheme.

===Elections===
The 1950 election gave Labour a massively reduced majority of five seats compared to the triple-digit majority of 1945. Although re-elected, the result was seen by Attlee as very disappointing, and was widely attributed to the effects of post-war austerity denting Labour&#x27;s appeal to middle-class voters. With such a small majority leaving him dependent on a small number of MPs to govern, Attlee&#x27;s second term was much tamer than his first. Some major reforms were nevertheless passed, particularly regarding industry in urban areas and regulations to limit air and water pollution.

By 1951, the Attlee government was exhausted, with several of its most senior ministers ailing or ageing, and with a lack of new ideas. Attlee&#x27;s record for settling internal differences in the Labour Party fell in April 1951, when there was a damaging split over an austerity Budget brought in by the Chancellor, Hugh Gaitskell, to pay for the cost of Britain&#x27;s participation in the Korean War. Aneurin Bevan resigned to protest against the new charges for &quot;teeth and spectacles&quot; in the National Health Service introduced by that Budget, and was joined in this action by several senior ministers, including the future Prime Minister Harold Wilson, then the President of the Board of Trade. Thus escalated a battle between the left and right wings of the Party that continues today. Finding it increasingly impossible to govern, Attlee&#x27;s only chance was to call a snap election in October 1951, in the hope of achieving a more workable majority and to regain authority. The gamble failed: Labour narrowly lost to the Conservative Party, despite winning considerably more votes (achieving the largest Labour vote in electoral history). Attlee tendered his resignation as Prime Minister the following day, after six years and three months in office.

==Return to opposition==
Following the defeat in 1951, Attlee continued to lead the party as Leader of the Opposition. His last four years as leader were, however, widely seen as one of the Labour Party&#x27;s weaker periods.

The period was dominated by infighting between the Labour Party&#x27;s right wing, led by Hugh Gaitskell, and its left, led by Aneurin Bevan. Many Labour MPs felt that Attlee should have retired following 1951 election and allowed a younger man to lead the party. Bevan openly called for him to stand down in the summer of 1954. One of his main reasons for staying on as leader was to frustrate the leadership ambitions of Herbert Morrison, whom Attlee disliked for both political and personal reasons. At one time, Attlee had favoured Aneurin Bevan to succeed him as leader, but this became problematic after Bevan almost irrevocably split the party.

Attlee, now aged 72, contested the 1955 general election against Anthony Eden, which saw Labour lose 18 seats, and the Conservatives increase their majority.

In an interview with the &quot;News Chronicle&quot; columnist Percy Cudlipp in mid-September 1955, Attlee made clear his own thinking together with his preference for the leadership succession, stating:

He retired as Leader of the Labour Party on 7 December 1955, having led the party for twenty years, and on 14 December Hugh Gaitskell was elected as his successor.

== Global policy ==
He was one of the signatories of the agreement to convene a convention for drafting a world constitution. As a result, for the first time in human history, a World Constituent Assembly convened to draft and adopt a Constitution for the Federation of Earth.

Attlee was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize in 1954 for his support of the League of Nations and the United Nations, and received further nominations in 1955 and 1964, but was unsuccessful on each occasion.

==Retirement==

He subsequently retired from the House of Commons and was elevated to the peerage as Earl Attlee and Viscount Prestwood on 16 December 1955, taking his seat in the House of Lords on 25 January. He believed Eden had been forced into taking a strong stand on the Suez Crisis by his backbenchers. In 1958, Attlee, along with numerous notables, established the Homosexual Law Reform Society: this campaigned for the decriminalisation of homosexual acts in private by consenting adults, a reform that was voted through Parliament nine years later. In May 1961, he travelled to Washington, D.C., to meet with President Kennedy.

In 1962, he spoke twice in the House of Lords against the British government&#x27;s application for the UK to join the European Communities (&quot;Common Market&quot;). In his second speech delivered in November, Attlee claimed that Britain had a separate parliamentary tradition from the Continental European countries that comprised the EC. He also claimed that if Britain became a member, EC rules would prevent the British government from planning the economy and that Britain&#x27;s traditional policy had been outward-looking rather than Continental.

He attended Winston Churchill&#x27;s funeral in January 1965. He was frail by that time, and had to remain seated in the freezing cold as the coffin was carried, having tired himself out by standing at the rehearsal the previous day. He lived to see the Labour Party return to power under Harold Wilson in 1964, and also to see his old constituency of Walthamstow West fall to the Conservatives in a by-election in September 1967.

==Death==
Attlee died peacefully in his sleep of pneumonia, at the age of 84 at Westminster Hospital on 8 October 1967. Two thousand people attended his funeral in November, including the then-Prime Minister Harold Wilson and the Duke of Kent, representing the Queen. He was cremated and his ashes were buried at Westminster Abbey.

Upon his death, the title passed to his son Martin Richard Attlee, 2nd Earl Attlee (1927–1991), who defected from Labour to the SDP in 1981. It is now held by Clement Attlee&#x27;s grandson John Richard Attlee, 3rd Earl Attlee. The third earl (a member of the Conservative Party) retained his seat in the Lords as one of the hereditary peers to remain under an amendment to Labour&#x27;s House of Lords Act 1999.

Attlee&#x27;s estate was sworn for probate purposes at a value of £7,295, (equivalent to £ in ) a relatively modest sum for so prominent a figure, and only a fraction of the £75,394 in his father&#x27;s estate when he died in 1908.

==Legacy==

The quotation about Attlee, &quot;A modest man, but then he has so much to be modest about&quot;, is commonly ascribed to Churchill—though Churchill denied saying it, and respected Attlee&#x27;s service in the War cabinet. Attlee&#x27;s modesty and quiet manner hid a great deal that has only come to light with historical reappraisal. Attlee himself is said to have responded to critics with a limerick: &quot;There were few who thought him a starter, Many who thought themselves smarter. But he ended PM, CH and OM, an Earl and a Knight of the Garter&quot;.

His leadership style of consensual government, acting as a chairman rather than a president, won him much praise from historians and politicians alike. Christopher Soames, the British Ambassador to France during the Conservative government of Edward Heath and cabinet minister under Margaret Thatcher, remarked that &quot;Mrs Thatcher was not really running a team. Every time you have a Prime Minister who wants to make all the decisions, it mainly leads to bad results. Attlee didn&#x27;t. That&#x27;s why he was so damn good&quot;. The journalist and broadcaster Anthony Howard called him &quot;the greatest Prime Minister of the 20th century&quot;.

Thatcher herself wrote in her 1995 memoirs, which charted her life from her beginnings in Grantham to her victory at the 1979 general election, that she admired Attlee, writing: &quot;Of Clement Attlee, however, I was an admirer. He was a serious man and a patriot. Quite contrary to the general tendency of politicians in the 1990s, he was all substance and no show&quot;.

Attlee&#x27;s government presided over the successful transition from a wartime economy to peacetime, tackling problems of demobilisation, shortages of foreign currency, and adverse deficits in trade balances and government expenditure. Further domestic policies that he brought about included the creation of the National Health Service and the post-war welfare state, which became key to the reconstruction of post-war Britain. Attlee and his ministers did much to transform the UK into a more prosperous and egalitarian society during their time in office with reductions in poverty and a rise in the general economic security of the population.

In foreign affairs, he did much to assist with the post-war economic recovery of Europe. He proved a loyal ally of the US at the onset of the Cold War. Due to his style of leadership, it was not he, but Ernest Bevin who masterminded foreign policy. It was Attlee&#x27;s government that decided Britain should have an independent nuclear weapons programme, and work on it began in 1947.

Bevin, Attlee&#x27;s Foreign Secretary, famously stated that &quot;We&#x27;ve got to have it [nuclear weapons] and it&#x27;s got to have a bloody Union Jack on it&quot;. The first operational British nuclear bomb was not detonated until October 1952, about one year after Attlee had left office. Independent British atomic research was prompted partly by the US McMahon Act, which nullified wartime expectations of postwar US–UK collaboration in nuclear research, and prohibited Americans from communicating nuclear technology even to allied countries. British atomic bomb research was kept secret even from some members of Attlee&#x27;s own cabinet, whose loyalty or discretion seemed uncertain.

Although a socialist, Attlee still believed in the British Empire of his youth. He thought of it as an institution that was a power for good in the world. Nevertheless, he saw that a large part of it needed to be self-governing. Using the Dominions of Canada, Australia, and New Zealand as a model, he continued the transformation of the empire into the modern-day British Commonwealth.

His greatest achievement, surpassing many of these, was perhaps the establishment of a political and economic consensus about the governance of Britain that all three major parties subscribed to for three decades, fixing the arena of political discourse until the late-1970s. In 2004, he was voted the most successful British Prime Minister of the 20th century by a poll of 139 academics organised by Ipsos MORI.
A blue plaque unveiled in 1979 commemorates Attlee at 17 Monkhams Avenue, in Woodford Green in the London Borough of Redbridge.

Attlee was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1947. Attlee was awarded an Honorary Fellowship of Queen Mary College on 15 December 1948.

In the 1960s a new suburb near Curepipe in British Mauritius was given the name &quot;Cité Atlee&quot; in his honour.

=== Statues ===

On 30 November 1988, a bronze statue of Clement Attlee was unveiled by Harold Wilson (the next Labour Prime Minister after Attlee) outside Limehouse Library in Attlee&#x27;s former constituency. By then Wilson was the last surviving member of Attlee&#x27;s cabinet, and the unveiling of the statue would be one of the last public appearances by Wilson, who was by that point in the early stages of Alzheimer&#x27;s disease; he died at the age of 79 in May 1995.

Limehouse Library was closed in 2003, after which the statue was vandalised. The council surrounded it with protective hoarding for four years, before eventually removing it for repair and recasting in 2009. The restored statue was unveiled by Peter Mandelson in April 2011, in its new position less than a mile away at the Queen Mary University of London&#x27;s Mile End campus.

There is also a statue of Clement Attlee in the Houses of Parliament that was erected, instead of a bust, by parliamentary vote in 1979. The sculptor was Ivor Roberts-Jones.

=== Cultural depictions ===
==Personal life==
Attlee met Violet Millar while on a long trip with friends to Italy in 1921. They fell in love and were soon engaged, marrying at Christ Church, Hampstead, on 10 January 1922. It would come to be a devoted marriage, with Attlee providing protection and Violet providing a home that was an escape for Attlee from political turmoil. She died in 1964. They had four children:
* Lady Janet Helen (1923–2019), she married the scientist Harold Shipton (1920–2007) at Ellesborough Parish Church in 1947.
* Lady Felicity Ann (1925–2007), married the business executive John Keith Harwood (1926–1989) at Little Hampden in 1955
* Martin Richard, Viscount Prestwood, later 2nd Earl Attlee (1927–1991), married Anne Henderson on 16 February 1955.
* Lady Alison Elizabeth (1930–2016), married Richard Davis at Great Missenden in 1952.

=== Religious views ===
Although his parents were devout Anglicans, with one of his brothers becoming a clergyman and one of his sisters a missionary, Attlee himself is usually regarded as an agnostic. In an interview he described himself as &quot;incapable of religious feeling&quot;, saying that he believed in &quot;the ethics of Christianity&quot; but not &quot;the mumbo-jumbo&quot;. When asked whether he was an agnostic, Attlee replied &quot;I don&#x27;t know&quot;.

==Honours and arms==

==See also==
*Briggs Plan
*Ethical socialism
*Information Research Department
*Malayan Emergency
*New village
*History of the United Kingdom (1945–present)

==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Notes ===
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* Harris, Kenneth. (1982) &quot;Attlee&quot; W.W. Norton.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Pearce, Robert. (1967) &quot;Attlee&quot; Longman.
* 
* 


==Further reading==
Biographical

* Beckett, Francis. &quot;Clem Attlee&quot; (1998) – updated and expanded under the title &quot;Clem Attlee: Labour&#x27;s Great Reformer&quot; (2015)
* Bew, John. &quot;Citizen Clem: A Biography of Attlee,&quot; (London: 2016, British edition); &quot;Clement Attlee: The Man Who Made Modern Britain&quot; (New York: Oxford University Press, 2017, U.S. edition)
* Burridge, Trevor. &quot;Clement Attlee: A Political Biography&quot; (1985), scholarly
* Cohen, David. &quot;Churchill &amp; Attlee: The Unlikely Allies who Won the War&quot; (Biteback Publishing, 2018), popular
* Crowcroft, Robert. &quot;Attlee&#x27;s War: World War II and the Making of a Labour Leader&quot; (IB Tauris, 2011)
* Harris, Kenneth. &quot;Attlee&quot; (1982), scholarly authorised biography
* Howell, David. &quot;Attlee&quot; (2006)
* Jago, Michael. &quot;Clement Attlee: The Inevitable Prime Minister&quot; (2014)
* Pearce, Robert. &quot;Attlee&quot; (1997), 206pp
* Thomas-Symonds, Nicklaus. &quot;Attlee: A Life in Politics&quot; (IB Tauris, 2010).
* Whiting, R. C. &quot;Attlee, Clement Richard, first Earl Attlee (1883–1967)&quot;, &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, 2004; online edn, Jan 2011 accessed 12 June 2013 doi:10.1093/ref:odnb/30498
Biographies of his cabinet and associates

* Rosen, Greg. ed. &quot;Dictionary of Labour Biography&quot;. (Politicos Publishing, 2002); 
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;Labour people: Leaders and Lieutenants, Hardie to Kinnock&quot; (1987)
Scholarly studies

* Addison, Paul. &quot;No Turning Back: The Peaceful Revolutions of Post-War Britain&quot; (2011) excerpt and text search 
* , detailed coverage of nationalisation, welfare state and planning.
* Crowcroft, Robert, and Kevin Theakston. &quot;The Fall of the Attlee Government, 1951&quot;, in Timothy Heppell and Kevin Theakston, eds. &quot;How Labour Governments Fall&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2013). pp. 61–82.
* Francis, Martin. &quot;Ideas and policies under Labour, 1945–1951: building a new Britain&quot; (Manchester University Press, 1997).
* Golant, W. &quot;The Emergence of CR Attlee as Leader of the Parliamentary Labour Party in 1935&quot;, &quot;Historical Journal&quot;, 13#2 (1970): 318–332. in JSTOR 
* online
* Jackson, Ben. &quot;Citizen and Subject: Clement Attlee&#x27;s Socialism&quot;, &quot;History Workshop Journal&quot; (2018). Vol. 86 pp. 291–298. online.
* Jefferys, Kevin. &quot;The Attlee Years, 1935–1955&quot;, in Brivati, Brian, and Heffernan, Richard, eds., &quot;The Labour Party: A Centenary History&quot;, Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2000. 68–86.
* Kynaston, David. &quot;Austerity Britain, 1945–1951&quot; (2008).
* Mioni, Michele. &quot;The Attlee government and welfare state reforms in post-war Italian Socialism (1945–51): Between universalism and class policies&quot;, &quot;Labor History&quot;, 57#2 (2016): 277–297. DOI:10.1080/0023656X.2015.1116811
* Morgan, Kenneth O. &quot;Labour in Power 1945–1951&quot; (1984), 564 pp.. an influential scholarly study online
* Ovendale, R. ed., &quot;The foreign policy of the British Labour governments, 1945–51&quot; (1984) ·
* Pugh, Martin. &quot;Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party&quot; (2011) excerpt and text search 
* Swift, John. &quot;Labour in Crisis: Clement Attlee &amp; the Labour Party in Opposition, 1931–1940&quot; (2001)
* Thornton, Stephen. &quot;The brace of the Cabinet: the legacy of Clement Attlee as deputy prime minister.&quot; &quot;Contemporary British History&quot; (2024): 1–24.
* Tomlinson, Jim. &quot;Democratic Socialism and Economic Policy: The Attlee Years, 1945–1951&quot; (2002) Excerpt and text search 
* Weiler, Peter. &quot;British Labour and the cold war: the foreign policy of the Labour governments, 1945–1951&quot;, &quot;Journal of British Studies&quot;, 26#1 (1987): 54–82. in JSTOR 
=== Works ===

* Clement Attlee published his memoirs, &quot;As it Happened&quot;, in 1954.
* Francis Williams&#x27; &quot;A Prime Minister Remembers&quot;, based on interviews with Attlee, was published in 1961.
;Attlee&#x27;s other publications

* &quot;The Social Worker&quot; (1920)
* &quot;Metropolitan Borough Councils Their Constitution, Powers and Duties&quot; – Fabian Tract No 190 (1920)
* &quot;The Town Councillor&quot; (1925)
* &quot;The Will and the Way to Socialism&quot; (1935)
* &quot;The Labour Party in Perspective&quot; (1937)
* &quot;Collective Security Under the United Nations&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Empire into Commonwealth&quot; (1961)
==External links==
* 
*Clement Attlee – Thanksgiving Speech 1950 – UK Parliament Living Heritage
* More about Clement Attlee on the Downing Street website.
* 
* 
* Annotated bibliography for Clement Attlee from the Alsos Digital Library for Nuclear Issues
* 
*Drawing of Clement Attlee in the UK Parliamentary Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="0" end="39" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Richard Attlee, 1st Earl Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="103" end="139" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615378" start="162" end="188" title="Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507619" start="219" end="240" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118241" start="252" end="280" title="Churchill war ministry" label="wartime coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="287" end="304" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="310" end="334" title="Leader of the Opposition (United Kingdom)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751085" start="484" end="502" title="upper middle class" label="upper middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="566" end="584" title="Haileybury College" label="Haileybury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="593" end="613" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863778" start="633" end="642" title="Barristers in England and Wales" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="681" end="703" title="London&amp;#x27;s East End" label="London&amp;#x27;s East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="796" end="820" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="875" end="901" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="969" end="984" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123627" start="1014" end="1021" title="Stepney" label="Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084303" start="1029" end="1033" title="1922 United Kingdom general election" label="1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549174" start="1078" end="1087" title="Limehouse (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Limehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="1110" end="1142" title="First MacDonald ministry" label="first Labour minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="1150" end="1166" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q769284" start="1211" end="1243" title="Second MacDonald ministry" label="MacDonald&amp;#x27;s second minority"/>
<link wikidata="Q918375" start="1319" end="1323" title="1931 United Kingdom general election" label="1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261043" start="1352" end="1365" title="Deputy Leader of the Labour Party (UK)" label="Deputy Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467475" start="1367" end="1401" title="1935 Labour Party leadership election" label="Elected Leader of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122820" start="1435" end="1445" title="pacificism" label="pacificism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570488" start="1459" end="1470" title="British re-armament" label="re-armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="1494" end="1513" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="1531" end="1542" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1565" end="1581" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="1697" end="1712" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q918397" start="1823" end="1844" title="1945 United Kingdom general election" label="1945 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724649" start="2051" end="2077" title="Attlee ministry" label="Labour majority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q384136" start="2103" end="2118" title="full employment" label="full employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q191675" start="2122" end="2135" title="mixed economy" label="mixed economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="2238" end="2253" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998494" start="2370" end="2397" title="National Insurance Act 1946" label="National Insurance Act 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970549" start="2402" end="2430" title="National Assistance Act 1948" label="National Assistance Act 1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="2453" end="2476" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="2536" end="2549" title="council house" label="council house"/>
<link wikidata="Q104591398" start="2589" end="2600" title="Trade unions in the United Kingdom" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q354009" start="2677" end="2691" title="National parks of the United Kingdom" label="National Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7012153" start="2711" end="2729" title="New Towns Act 1946" label="New Towns Act 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000360" start="2750" end="2782" title="Town and country planning in the United Kingdom" label="town and country planning system"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="2824" end="2838" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="2862" end="2880" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="2909" end="2914" title="British rule in Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="2919" end="2925" title="British Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="2974" end="2983" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="2988" end="2999" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q115519686" start="3078" end="3086" title="Cold War (1947–1953)" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="3105" end="3118" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3192" end="3196" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q170541" start="3227" end="3238" title="Soviet bloc" label="Soviet bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="3288" end="3309" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="3372" end="3382" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="3662" end="3683" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="1951 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="3776" end="3797" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="3822" end="3836" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774362" start="4060" end="4092" title="Historical rankings of prime ministers of the United Kingdom" label="greatest British prime ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904466" start="4218" end="4238" title="Special Relationship" label="Special Relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465220" start="4336" end="4342" title="Putney" label="Putney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751085" start="4381" end="4399" title="upper middle class" label="upper middle class"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013265" start="4574" end="4593" title="Art Union of London" label="Art Union of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="4841" end="4848" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q85977419" start="5000" end="5032" title="Law Society of England and Wales" label="Law Society of England and Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17532763" start="5065" end="5074" title="Comarques, Thorpe-le-Soken" label="Comarques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368943" start="5078" end="5093" title="Thorpe-le-Soken" label="Thorpe-le-Soken"/>
<link wikidata="Q17555637" start="5150" end="5163" title="Northaw Place" label="Northaw Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="5200" end="5213" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5639263" start="5251" end="5269" title="Haileybury College" label="Haileybury College"/>
<link wikidata="Q183493" start="5329" end="5338" title="Darwinist" label="Darwinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499008" start="5364" end="5386" title="Frederick Webb Headley" label="Frederick Webb Headley"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="5574" end="5600" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281534" start="5610" end="5624" title="modern history" label="modern history"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971470" start="6143" end="6163" title="British undergraduate degree classification" label="second-class honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q808967" start="6191" end="6200" title="barrister" label="barrister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="6208" end="6220" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="6229" end="6246" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="6454" end="6464" title="non-League" label="non-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5212771" start="6470" end="6475" title="Fleet Town F.C." label="Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123627" start="6705" end="6712" title="Stepney" label="Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="6720" end="6738" title="East End of London" label="East End of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="6968" end="6972" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155757" start="7103" end="7124" title="income redistribution" label="income redistribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="7222" end="7231" title="socialism" label="socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="7247" end="7271" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q242666" start="7471" end="7484" title="Beatrice Webb" label="Beatrice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164207" start="7526" end="7538" title="Toynbee Hall" label="Toynbee Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869258" start="7600" end="7615" title="Minority report (Poor Law)" label="Minority Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q192186" start="7641" end="7655" title="Fabian Society" label="Fabian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="7904" end="7914" title="Government of the United Kingdom" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q531471" start="7983" end="8010" title="Chancellor of the Exchequer" label="Chancellor of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134982" start="8011" end="8029" title="David Lloyd George" label="David Lloyd George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336898" start="8037" end="8059" title="National Insurance Act" label="National Insurance Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="8102" end="8107" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="8112" end="8120" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="8216" end="8242" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="8253" end="8267" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="8272" end="8293" title="public administration" label="public administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8351" end="8366" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="8410" end="8422" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567789" start="8609" end="8634" title="South Lancashire Regiment" label="South Lancashire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="8696" end="8703" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="8745" end="8753" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636000" start="8798" end="8810" title="38th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="38th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4549391" start="8818" end="8841" title="13th (Western) Division" label="13th (Western) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="8863" end="8881" title="Gallipoli campaign" label="Gallipoli campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="8885" end="8891" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930613" start="8988" end="9010" title="conscientious objector" label="conscientious objector"/>
<link wikidata="Q129279" start="9130" end="9139" title="dysentery" label="dysentery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775801" start="9392" end="9411" title="Battle of Sari Bair" label="Battle of Sari Bair"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9572" end="9591" title="Gallipoli Campaign#Evacuation" label="evacuation of Suvla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776241" start="9650" end="9659" title="Landing at Suvla Bay" label="Suvla Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320918" start="9684" end="9697" title="Stanley Maude" label="Stanley Maude"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561383" start="9750" end="9777" title="First Lord of the Admiralty" label="First Lord of the Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="9779" end="9796" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18937" start="10125" end="10146" title="Mesopotamian campaign" label="Mesopotamian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="10162" end="10166" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q750604" start="10234" end="10242" title="Shrapnel shell" label="shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729793" start="10304" end="10319" title="Battle of Hanna" label="Battle of Hanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q815166" start="10375" end="10387" title="Siege of Kut" label="Siege of Kut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="10483" end="10488" title="Presidencies and provinces of British India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10572" end="10585" title="Royal Tank Regiment#History" label="Heavy Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723656" start="10593" end="10610" title="Machine Gun Corps" label="Machine Gun Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896145" start="10670" end="10675" title="Major (United Kingdom)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="10745" end="10761" title="inter-war period" label="inter-war period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421600" start="10960" end="10970" title="Royal Tank Regiment" label="Tank Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="10990" end="10996" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="11306" end="11319" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q123627" start="11422" end="11429" title="Stepney" label="Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="11486" end="11512" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="11583" end="11597" title="local politics" label="local politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925834" start="11654" end="11685" title="Metropolitan Borough of Stepney" label="Metropolitan Borough of Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="11817" end="11821" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q618532" start="11822" end="11830" title="landlord" label="landlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q247589" start="13227" end="13242" title="George Lansbury" label="George Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925826" start="13292" end="13298" title="Metropolitan Borough of Poplar" label="Poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229419" start="13345" end="13367" title="Poplar Rates Rebellion" label="Poplar Rates Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q335791" start="13552" end="13568" title="Herbert Morrison" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796224" start="13597" end="13604" title="Metropolitan Borough of Hackney" label="Hackney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089288" start="13641" end="13660" title="London Labour Party" label="London Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084303" start="13813" end="13834" title="1922 United Kingdom general election" label="1922 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="13854" end="13874" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="13888" end="13900" title="constituency" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549174" start="13904" end="13913" title="Limehouse (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Limehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q123627" start="13917" end="13924" title="Stepney" label="Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="13950" end="13966" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467474" start="14024" end="14048" title="1922 Labour Party leadership election (UK)" label="1922 leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477321" start="14080" end="14111" title="Parliamentary Private Secretary" label="Parliamentary Private Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="14265" end="14288" title="first Labour government" label="first Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745155" start="14328" end="14347" title="1926 General Strike" label="1926 General Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642187" start="15199" end="15215" title="Simon Commission" label="Simon Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="15219" end="15235" title="royal commission" label="royal commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q417633" start="15282" end="15291" title="self-rule" label="self-rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="15295" end="15300" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q769284" start="15505" end="15529" title="second Labour government" label="second Labour government"/>
<link wikidata="Q517639" start="15562" end="15583" title="1929 United Kingdom general election" label="1929 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332400" start="16028" end="16041" title="Oswald Mosley" label="Oswald Mosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="16175" end="16211" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581578" start="16238" end="16256" title="Postmaster General of the United Kingdom" label="Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16312" end="16334" title="History of the British Labour Party#Great Depression and the split under MacDonald" label="Labour government fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599058" start="16404" end="16420" title="Great Depression in the United Kingdom" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926884" start="16476" end="16495" title="National Government (United Kingdom)" label="National Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="16505" end="16518" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q622441" start="16523" end="16531" title="Liberal Party (UK)" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="16719" end="16735" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="17285" end="17300" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591374" start="17374" end="17384" title="Zinoviev letter" label="Red Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q918375" start="18002" end="18039" title="1931 United Kingdom general election" label="general election held in October 1931"/>
<link wikidata="Q208665" start="18219" end="18235" title="Arthur Henderson" label="Arthur Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q247589" start="18469" end="18484" title="George Lansbury" label="George Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q332405" start="18489" end="18504" title="Stafford Cripps" label="Stafford Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981489" start="18788" end="18799" title="front-bench" label="front-bench"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191221" start="19032" end="19077" title="National Government (1931–1935)" label="National Government in the years 1931 to 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741536" start="19683" end="19707" title="Leader of the Opposition (UK)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551596" start="20116" end="20132" title="Socialist League (UK, 1932)" label="Socialist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507913" start="20166" end="20190" title="Independent Labour Party" label="Independent Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="20588" end="20603" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="20705" end="20711" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="20713" end="20722" title="Mussolini" label="Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="20724" end="20730" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q920343" start="20795" end="20822" title="British Union of Fascists" label="blackshirt fascist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="21031" end="21046" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q739941" start="21107" end="21112" title="Monarchy of the United Kingdom" label="crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="21154" end="21163" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q247589" start="21197" end="21212" title="George Lansbury" label="George Lansbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="21226" end="21234" title="pacifist" label="pacifist"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="21385" end="21399" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="its aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702431" start="21408" end="21417" title="Abyssinia" label="Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="21581" end="21596" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q918378" start="21905" end="21918" title="1935 United Kingdom general election" label="1935 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6467475" start="22155" end="22174" title="1935 Labour Party leadership election" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q335791" start="22221" end="22237" title="Herbert Morrison" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q333174" start="22302" end="22318" title="Arthur Greenwood" label="Arthur Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="22551" end="22566" title="alcohol problem" label="alcohol problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237584" start="22994" end="23013" title="collective security" label="collective security"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="23024" end="23041" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="23866" end="23878" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="24062" end="24074" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24369" end="24394" title="abdication of Edward VIII" label="abdication of Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="24446" end="24452" title="Edward VIII" label="Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q209417" start="24502" end="24516" title="Wallis Simpson" label="Wallis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786520" start="24700" end="24718" title="Archibald Sinclair" label="Archibald Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="25018" end="25037" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q335324" start="25206" end="25217" title="Duff Cooper" label="Duff Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="25965" end="25977" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16254377" start="26202" end="26213" title="European foreign policy of the Chamberlain ministry" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121289" start="26405" end="26422" title="British Battalion" label="British Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q132518" start="26430" end="26452" title="International Brigades" label="International Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="26469" end="26486" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q525466" start="26760" end="26786" title="Non-intervention in the Spanish Civil War" label="Non-Intervention Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q154255" start="27453" end="27469" title="Munich Agreement" label="Munich Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="27560" end="27574" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194242" start="27580" end="27591" title="Sudetenland" label="Sudetenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q185381" start="29673" end="29690" title="Arnold J. Toynbee" label="Arnold J. Toynbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="29954" end="29966" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="30673" end="30688" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279685" start="31298" end="31306" title="Stanmore" label="Stanmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31443" end="31459" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="31512" end="31530" title="Norwegian campaign" label="Norwegian campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q128535" start="31549" end="31572" title="Norway Debate" label="motion of no confidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="31576" end="31595" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="31727" end="31747" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="32056" end="32073" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q910308" start="32125" end="32140" title="Lord Privy Seal" label="Lord Privy Seal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32198" end="32209" title="War cabinet#Churchill war ministry" label="War Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="32285" end="32297" title="Lord Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q333174" start="32345" end="32361" title="Arthur Greenwood" label="Arthur Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796272" start="32546" end="32565" title="1940 British war cabinet crisis" label="War Cabinet debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="32637" end="32651" title="Fall of France" label="Fall of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507619" start="33027" end="33048" title="Deputy Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Deputy Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444340" start="33082" end="33101" title="Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs" label="Dominions Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q943379" start="33106" end="33135" title="Lord President of the Council" label="Lord President of the Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118241" start="33340" end="33360" title="Churchill war ministry" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788796" start="33461" end="33472" title="War cabinet" label="War cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679861" start="33680" end="33711" title="Lord President&amp;#x27;s Committee" label="Lord President&amp;#x27;s Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q242666" start="34300" end="34313" title="Beatrice Webb" label="Beatrice Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="34715" end="34728" title="European theatre of World War II" label="War in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="34822" end="34827" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335791" start="34856" end="34872" title="Herbert Morrison" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="35000" end="35014" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323572" start="35171" end="35184" title="social reform" label="social reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583737" start="35218" end="35234" title="Beveridge Report" label="Beveridge Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q335049" start="35269" end="35286" title="William Beveridge" label="William Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="35447" end="35460" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="36322" end="36345" title="The Manchester Guardian" label="The Manchester Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q190534" start="36485" end="36502" title="News of the World" label="News of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="36561" end="36568" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="37338" end="37348" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37379" end="37388" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q42182" start="37392" end="37409" title="Buckingham Palace" label="Buckingham Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003888" start="38337" end="38349" title="James Murray (Durham politician)" label="James Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="38645" end="38660" title="nationalisation" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183231" start="38707" end="38722" title="Bank of England" label="Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971538" start="38769" end="38780" title="National Coal Board" label="Coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="38786" end="38794" title="British Rail" label="railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024869" start="38821" end="38839" title="Cable &amp;amp; Wireless plc" label="Cable and Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q6072904" start="38913" end="38927" title="Iron and Steel Corporation of Great Britain" label="steel industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2396633" start="39023" end="39039" title="public ownership" label="public ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971538" start="39551" end="39570" title="National Coal Board" label="National Coal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q47530504" start="40218" end="40232" title="Martin Francis" label="Martin Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397406" start="40764" end="40779" title="Secretary of State for Health" label="Health Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="40781" end="40794" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q919715" start="40884" end="40911" title="British Medical Association" label="British Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q294308" start="40973" end="40999" title="publicly funded healthcare" label="publicly funded healthcare"/>
<link wikidata="Q798309" start="42246" end="42262" title="BCG vaccinations" label="BCG vaccinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q335049" start="43399" end="43416" title="William Beveridge" label="William Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="43480" end="43493" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="43538" end="43553" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998494" start="43610" end="43637" title="National Insurance Act 1946" label="National Insurance Act 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q647883" start="43683" end="43701" title="national insurance" label="national insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998494" start="43895" end="43922" title="National Insurance Act 1946" label="National Insurance Act 1946"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455934" start="44207" end="44220" title="child benefit" label="child benefit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340874" start="48638" end="48656" title="Education Act 1944" label="Education Act 1944"/>
<link wikidata="Q25182612" start="48973" end="48978" title="HORSA" label="HORSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q59746" start="50539" end="50568" title="Arts Council of Great Britain" label="Arts Council of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866852" start="50608" end="50629" title="Ministry of Education (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="51339" end="51362" title="comprehensive education" label="comprehensive education"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="51442" end="51455" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049087" start="51719" end="51729" title="war effort" label="war effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="51969" end="51985" title="balance of trade" label="balance of trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q843478" start="52011" end="52020" title="rationing" label="rationing"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="52300" end="52310" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763587" start="52392" end="52411" title="Anglo-American loan" label="Anglo-American loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="52498" end="52503" title="pound sterling" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q397840" start="52510" end="52521" title="convertibility" label="convertible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417912" start="52591" end="52606" title="currency crisis" label="currency crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="52704" end="52716" title="Marshall Aid" label="Marshall Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q332405" start="52864" end="52879" title="Stafford Cripps" label="Stafford Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q384136" start="53022" end="53037" title="full employment" label="full employment"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="53702" end="53715" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137667" start="55402" end="55427" title="Winter of 1946–47 in the United Kingdom" label="exceptionally cold winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q828827" start="55508" end="55518" title="power cuts" label="power cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5927441" start="55543" end="55569" title="Minister of Fuel and Power" label="Minister of Fuel and Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q333582" start="55571" end="55587" title="Emanuel Shinwell" label="Emanuel Shinwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q334116" start="55836" end="55849" title="John Strachey (politician)" label="John Strachey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26207" start="55895" end="55906" title="Hugh Dalton" label="Hugh Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="55948" end="55960" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q332405" start="55978" end="55993" title="Stafford Cripps" label="Stafford Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="56513" end="56530" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="56531" end="56543" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="56590" end="56608" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="56645" end="56660" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="56665" end="56678" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="56832" end="56844" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="56876" end="56890" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q252550" start="57808" end="57823" title="Trade agreement" label="Trade agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q639668" start="57839" end="57855" title="Rolls-Royce Nene" label="Rolls-Royce Nene"/>
<link wikidata="Q178777" start="57856" end="57866" title="jet engine" label="jet engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="58096" end="58104" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q269608" start="58214" end="58232" title="reverse-engineered" label="reverse-engineered"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="58281" end="58287" title="MiG-15" label="MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="58369" end="58379" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="58700" end="58704" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="58915" end="58928" title="Marshall Plan" label="Marshall Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383019" start="59134" end="59143" title="Keep Left (pamphlet)" label="Keep Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291690" start="59733" end="59750" title="nuclear deterrent" label="nuclear deterrent"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="60720" end="60734" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="60742" end="60756" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q832561" start="61419" end="61437" title="Hong Kong Garrison" label="Hong Kong Garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="61855" end="61865" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="61931" end="61941" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="61987" end="62037" title="Partition of India" label="the granting of independence to India and Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642187" start="62092" end="62119" title="Indian Statutory Commission" label="Indian Statutory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q166635" start="62519" end="62534" title="Stanley Baldwin" label="Stanley Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="62680" end="62696" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q160554" start="62730" end="62749" title="Muhammad Ali Jinnah" label="Muhammad Ali Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512311" start="62834" end="62848" title="Cripps Mission" label="Cripps Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="62964" end="62974" title="Quit India" label="Quit India"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="63304" end="63315" title="British Raj" label="British Raj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="63417" end="63423" title="Gandhi" label="Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="63595" end="63605" title="Quit India" label="Quit India"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="63789" end="63802" title="All-India Muslim League" label="Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661579" start="65762" end="65785" title="Indian Independence Act 1947" label="Indian Independence Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419358" start="65871" end="65885" title="Radcliffe Line" label="Radcliffe Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="66106" end="66112" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q185453" start="66114" end="66120" title="Multan" label="Multan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354" start="66125" end="66130" title="Dacca" label="Dacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629708" start="66140" end="66146" title="Punjab Province (British India)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="66198" end="66216" title="Partition of India" label="Partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="66318" end="66326" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11854" start="66328" end="66334" title="Rajkot" label="Rajkot"/>
<link wikidata="Q66485" start="66336" end="66342" title="Jaipur" label="Jaipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="66344" end="66352" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="66357" end="66362" title="New Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350154" start="66496" end="66508" title="Assassination of Mahatma Gandhi" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="67462" end="67482" title="Field Marshal Wavell" label="Field Marshal Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="67630" end="67646" title="Lord Mountbatten" label="Lord Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595860" start="67714" end="67733" title="V. K. Krishna Menon" label="V. K. Krishna Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="67942" end="67948" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="68060" end="68088" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="British mandate in Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="68200" end="68216" title="Zionist movement" label="Zionist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190058" start="68358" end="68375" title="Jewish insurgency in Mandatory Palestine" label="Jewish insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379101" start="68382" end="68391" title="1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305697" start="68485" end="68495" title="Aliyah Bet" label="Aliyah Bet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184560" start="68617" end="68644" title="Secret Intelligence Service" label="Secret Intelligence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200532" start="68805" end="68830" title="Cyprus internment camps" label="detention camps in Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384118" start="68919" end="68930" title="Exodus 1947" label="Exodus 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="69280" end="69286" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187152" start="69600" end="69619" title="Balfour Declaration" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q140845" start="70236" end="70255" title="balance of payments" label="balance of payments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392428" start="70376" end="70403" title="Tanganyika groundnut scheme" label="Tanganyika groundnut scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q748667" start="70426" end="70439" title="1950 United Kingdom general election" label="1950 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="71335" end="71349" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="71410" end="71420" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="71422" end="71435" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="71670" end="71683" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q27037814" start="71694" end="71725" title="President of the Board of Trade" label="President of the Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722280" start="71903" end="71918" title="1951 United Kingdom general election" label="a snap election"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="72607" end="72621" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="72644" end="72657" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q335791" start="72940" end="72956" title="Herbert Morrison" label="Herbert Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q918412" start="73205" end="73226" title="1955 United Kingdom general election" label="1955 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="73235" end="73247" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q11695544" start="73360" end="73374" title="News Chronicle" label="News Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167294" start="73391" end="73404" title="Percy Cudlipp" label="Percy Cudlipp"/>
<link wikidata="Q337380" start="73652" end="73666" title="Hugh Gaitskell" label="Hugh Gaitskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q120735527" start="73804" end="73822" title="world constitution" label="world constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q120401897" start="73876" end="73902" title="World Constituent Assembly" label="World Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q120735527" start="73933" end="73973" title="Constitution for the Federation of Earth" label="Constitution for the Federation of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="74005" end="74022" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="74054" end="74071" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="74080" end="74094" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="74236" end="74252" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q477631" start="74288" end="74299" title="Earl Attlee" label="Earl Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="74367" end="74381" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="74464" end="74475" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928497" start="74560" end="74589" title="Homosexual Law Reform Society" label="Homosexual Law Reform Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="74806" end="74823" title="President Kennedy" label="President Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q993160" start="74945" end="74965" title="European Communities" label="European Communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="75115" end="75133" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q60766993" start="75396" end="75428" title="Death and state funeral of Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill&amp;#x27;s funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="75673" end="75686" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966639" start="75736" end="75752" title="Walthamstow West" label="Walthamstow West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966638" start="75784" end="75813" title="1967 Walthamstow West by-election" label="by-election in September 1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="75865" end="75874" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989168" start="75896" end="75916" title="Westminster Hospital" label="Westminster Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="76024" end="76037" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q158258" start="76046" end="76058" title="Prince Edward, Duke of Kent" label="Duke of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="76073" end="76082" title="Elizabeth II" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="76129" end="76146" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774910" start="76193" end="76231" title="Martin Richard Attlee, 2nd Earl Attlee" label="Martin Richard Attlee, 2nd Earl Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560656" start="76339" end="76375" title="John Richard Attlee, 3rd Earl Attlee" label="John Richard Attlee, 3rd Earl Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="76409" end="76427" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="76474" end="76489" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="76537" end="76560" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788796" start="77018" end="77029" title="War cabinet" label="War cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q204698" start="77203" end="77211" title="limerick (poetry)" label="limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q336050" start="77521" end="77539" title="Christopher Soames" label="Christopher Soames"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="77612" end="77624" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="77652" end="77669" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q573388" start="77935" end="77949" title="Anthony Howard (journalist)" label="Anthony Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q846683" start="78113" end="78121" title="Grantham" label="Grantham"/>
<link wikidata="Q918450" start="78144" end="78165" title="1979 United Kingdom general election" label="1979 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476218" start="78470" end="78485" title="wartime economy" label="wartime economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929688" start="78611" end="78633" title="government expenditure" label="government expenditure"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="78712" end="78735" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="78753" end="78766" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q188958" start="78909" end="78920" title="egalitarian" label="egalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="79190" end="79198" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q332365" start="79251" end="79263" title="Ernest Bevin" label="Ernest Bevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="79581" end="79591" title="Union Jack" label="Union Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q924138" start="79627" end="79647" title="Operation Hurricane" label="British nuclear bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817269" start="79797" end="79808" title="McMahon Act" label="McMahon Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="80144" end="80153" title="socialist" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="80184" end="80198" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="80498" end="80518" title="British Commonwealth" label="British Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105865" start="80608" end="80640" title="Post-war consensus" label="political and economic consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5774362" start="80806" end="80818" title="Historical rankings of prime ministers of the United Kingdom" label="he was voted"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065484" start="80922" end="80932" title="Ipsos MORI" label="Ipsos MORI"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="80936" end="80947" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q208955" start="81033" end="81060" title="London Borough of Redbridge" label="London Borough of Redbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000692" start="81084" end="81119" title="List of fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1947" label="Fellow of the Royal Society in 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002525" start="81238" end="81246" title="Curepipe" label="Curepipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053604" start="81250" end="81267" title="British Mauritius" label="British Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q96803388" start="81373" end="81397" title="statue of Clement Attlee" label="statue of Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="81414" end="81427" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="81438" end="81444" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="81445" end="81459" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549179" start="81482" end="81499" title="Limehouse Library" label="Limehouse Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="81741" end="81765" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q310046" start="82050" end="82065" title="Peter Mandelson" label="Peter Mandelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q195668" start="82130" end="82161" title="Queen Mary University of London" label="Queen Mary University of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q124004" start="82169" end="82177" title="Mile End" label="Mile End"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402750" start="82341" end="82359" title="Ivor Roberts-Jones" label="Ivor Roberts-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560420" start="82419" end="82432" title="Violet Millar" label="Violet Millar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108689" start="82538" end="82562" title="Christ Church, Hampstead" label="Christ Church, Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82839" end="82853" title="Harold Shipton" label="Harold Shipton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740409" start="82869" end="82881" title="Ellesborough" label="Ellesborough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="82969" end="82987" title="J. Keith Harwood" label="John Keith Harwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880581" start="83003" end="83017" title="Little Hampden" label="Little Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774910" start="83028" end="83085" title="Martin Attlee, 2nd Earl Attlee" label="Martin Richard, Viscount Prestwood, later 2nd Earl Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817504" start="83205" end="83220" title="Great Missenden" label="Great Missenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="83370" end="83380" title="missionary" label="missionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967244" start="83742" end="83753" title="Briggs Plan" label="Briggs Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403429" start="83755" end="83772" title="Ethical socialism" label="Ethical socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q599835" start="83774" end="83805" title="Information Research Department" label="Information Research Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="83807" end="83824" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360037" start="83826" end="83837" title="New village" label="New village"/>
<link wikidata="Q28530378" start="83839" end="83883" title="History of the United Kingdom (1945–present)" label="History of the United Kingdom (1945–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480171" start="84131" end="84147" title="Beckett, Francis" label="Beckett, Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296078" start="85481" end="85501" title="Politicos Publishing" label="Politicos Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149011" start="85630" end="85643" title="Addison, Paul" label="Addison, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747553" start="86142" end="86169" title="Manchester University Press" label="Manchester University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q39078678" start="87238" end="87250" title="Martin Pugh (author)" label="Pugh, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="87258" end="87311" title="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party" label="Speak for Britain!: A New History of the Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q169101" start="88746" end="88760" title="10 Downing Street" label="Downing Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5768" wikidata="Q163079" url="?curid=5768" title="Catullus">
<text>Gaius Valerius Catullus (; 84 – 54 BC), known as Catullus (), was a Latin neoteric poet of the late Roman Republic. His surviving works remain widely read due to their popularity as teaching tools and because of their personal or sexual themes.

==Life==
Gāius Valerius Catullus was born to a leading equestrian family of Verona, in Cisalpine Gaul. The social prominence of the Catullus family allowed the father of Gaius Valerius to entertain Julius Caesar when he was the Promagistrate (proconsul) of both Gallic provinces. In a poem, Catullus describes his happy homecoming to the family villa at Sirmio, on Lake Garda, near Verona; he also owned a villa near the resort of Tibur (modern Tivoli).

Catullus appears to have spent most of his young adult years in Rome. His friends there included the poets Licinius Calvus and Helvius Cinna, Quintus Hortensius (son of the orator and rival of Cicero), and the biographer Cornelius Nepos, to whom Catullus dedicated a &quot;libellus&quot; of poems, the relation of which to the extant collection remains a matter of debate. He appears to have been acquainted with the poet Marcus Furius Bibaculus. A number of prominent contemporaries appear in his poetry, including Cicero, Caesar and Pompey. According to an anecdote preserved by Suetonius, Caesar did not deny that Catullus&#x27;s lampoons left an indelible stain on his reputation, but when Catullus apologized, he invited the poet for dinner the very same day.
The &quot;Lesbia&quot; of his poems is usually identified with Clodia Metelli, a sophisticated woman from the aristocratic house of patrician family Claudii Pulchri, sister of the infamous Publius Clodius Pulcher, and wife to Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer (consul of 60 BC). In his poems Catullus describes several stages of their relationship: initial euphoria, doubts, separation, and his wrenching feelings of loss. Clodia had several other partners; &quot;From the poems one can adduce no fewer than five lovers in addition to Catullus: Egnatius (poem 37), Gellius (poem 91), Quintius (poem 82), Rufus (poem 77), and Lesbius (poem 79).&quot; There is also some question surrounding her husband&#x27;s mysterious death in 59 BC: in his speech &quot;Pro Caelio&quot; Cicero hints that he may have been poisoned. However, a sensitive and passionate Catullus could not relinquish his flame for Clodia, regardless of her obvious indifference to his desire for a deep and permanent relationship. In his poems, Catullus wavers between devout, sweltering love and bitter, scornful insults that he directs at her blatant infidelity (as demonstrated in poems 11 and 58). His passion for her is unrelenting—yet it is unclear when exactly the couple split up for good. Catullus&#x27;s poems about the relationship display striking depth and psychological insight.
He spent the year from summer 57 to summer 56 BC in Bithynia on the staff of the commander Gaius Memmius. While in the East, he traveled to the Troad to perform rites at his brother&#x27;s tomb, an event recorded in a moving poem (101).

No ancient biography of Catullus has survived. His life has to be pieced together from scattered references to him in other ancient authors and from his poems. Thus it is uncertain when he was born and when he died. Jerome stated that he was born in 87 BC and died in Rome in his 30th year. However, Catullus&#x27;s poems include references to events of 55 BC. Since the Roman consular fasti make it somewhat easy to confuse 87–57 BC with 84–54 BC, many scholars accept the dates 84 BC–54 BC, supposing that his latest poems and the publication of his &quot;libellus&quot; coincided with the year of his death. Other authors suggest 52 or 51 BC as the year of the poet&#x27;s death. Though upon his elder brother&#x27;s death Catullus lamented that their &quot;whole house was buried along&quot; with the deceased, the existence (and prominence) of &quot;Valerii Catulli&quot; is attested in the following centuries. T. P. Wiseman argues that after the brother&#x27;s death Catullus could have married, and that, in this case, the later &quot;Valerii Catulli&quot; may have been his descendants.

==Poetry==

===Sources and organization===
Catullus&#x27;s poems have been preserved in an anthology of 116 &quot;carmina&quot; (the actual number of poems may slightly vary in various editions), which can be divided into three parts according to their form: approximately sixty short poems in varying meters, called &quot;polymetra&quot;, nine longer poems, and forty-eight epigrams in elegiac couplets. Each of these three parts – approximately 860 (or more), 1136, and 330 lines respectively – would fit onto a single scroll.

There is no scholarly consensus on whether Catullus himself arranged the order of the poems. The longer poems differ from the &quot;polymetra&quot; and the epigrams not only in length but also in their subjects: several of them are based on the theme of marriage. The longest (64) of 408 lines, contains two myths (the abandonment of Ariadne and the marriage of Peleus and Thetis), one story included inside the other.

The &quot;polymetra&quot; and the epigrams can be divided into four major thematic groups (ignoring a rather large number of poems that elude such categorization):

* poems to and about his friends (e.g., an invitation like poem 13).
* erotic poems: some of them about his attraction for a boy named Juventius, but others about women, especially about one he calls &quot;Lesbia&quot; (which served as a false name for his married girlfriend, Clodia, source and inspiration of many of his poems).
* invectives: often rude and sometimes downright obscene poems targeted at friends-turned-traitors (e.g., poem 16), other lovers of Lesbia, well-known poets, and politicians (e.g., Julius Caesar and Cicero).
* condolences: some poems of Catullus are solemn in nature. 96 comforts a friend in the death of a loved one; several others, most famously 101, lament the death of his brother.

Above all other qualities, Catullus seems to have valued , or charm, in his acquaintances, a theme which he explores in a number of his poems.

===Intellectual influences===

Catullus&#x27;s poetry was influenced by the innovative poetry of the Hellenistic Age, and especially by Callimachus and the Alexandrian school, which had propagated a new style of poetry that deliberately turned away from the classical epic poetry in the tradition of Homer. Cicero called these local innovators &quot;neoteroi&quot; () or &quot;moderns&quot; (in Latin &quot;poetae novi&quot; or &#x27;new poets&#x27;), in that they cast off the heroic model handed down from Ennius in order to strike new ground and ring a contemporary note. Catullus and Callimachus did not describe the feats of ancient heroes and gods (except perhaps in re-evaluating and predominantly artistic circumstances, e.g. poem 64), focusing instead on small-scale personal themes. Although these poems sometimes seem quite superficial and their subjects often are mere everyday concerns, they are accomplished works of art. Catullus described his work as &quot;expolitum&quot;, or polished, to show that the language he used was very carefully and artistically composed.

Catullus was also an admirer of Sappho, a female poet of the seventh century BC. Catullus 51 partly translates, partly imitates, and transforms Sappho 31. Some hypothesize that 61 and 62 were perhaps inspired by lost works of Sappho but this is purely speculative. Both of the latter are &quot;epithalamia&quot;, a form of or erotic wedding-poetry that Sappho was famous for. Catullus twice used a meter that Sappho was known for, called the Sapphic stanza, in poems 11 and 51, perhaps prompting his successor Horace&#x27;s interest in the form.

Catullus, as was common to his era, was greatly influenced by stories from Greek and Roman myth. His longer poems—such as 63, 64, 65, 66, and 68—allude to mythology in various ways. Some stories he refers to are the wedding of Peleus and Thetis, the departure of the Argonauts, Theseus and the Minotaur, Ariadne&#x27;s abandonment, Tereus and Procne, as well as Protesilaus and Laodamia.

===Style===
Catullus wrote in many different meters including hendecasyllabic verse and elegiac couplets (common in love poetry). A great part of his poetry shows strong and occasionally wild emotions, especially in regard to Lesbia (e.g., poems 5 and 7). His love poems are very emotional and ardent, and are relatable to this day. Catullus describes his Lesbia as having multiple suitors and often showing little affection towards him. He also demonstrates a great sense of humour such as in Catullus 13.

==Musical settings==

The Hungarian-born British composer Matyas Seiber set poem 31 for unaccompanied mixed chorus Sirmio in 1957. The American composer Ned Rorem set Catullus 101 to music for voice and piano; the song, &quot;Catullus: On the Burial of His Brother&quot;, was originally published in 1969.

&quot;Catullus Dreams&quot; (2011) is a song cycle by David Glaser set to texts of Catullus, scored for soprano and eight instruments; it premiered at Symphony Space in New York by soprano Linda Larson and Sequitur Ensemble. is a song cycle arranged from 17 of Catullus&#x27;s poems by American composer Michael Linton. The cycle was recorded in December 2013 and premiered at Carnegie Hall&#x27;s Weill Recital Hall in March 2014 by French baritone Edwin Crossley-Mercer and pianist Jason Paul Peterson.

Thomas Campion also wrote a lute-song entitled &quot;My Sweetest Lesbia&quot; dating from 1601 using his own translation of the first six lines of Catullus 5 followed by two verses of his own; the translation by Richard Crashaw was set to music in a four-part glee by Samuel Webbe Jr. It was also set to music, in a three-part glee by John Stafford Smith.

Catullus 5, the love poem , in the translation by Ben Jonson, was set to music in 1606, (lute accompanied song) by Alfonso Ferrabosco the younger. Dutch composer Bertha Tideman-Wijers used Catullus&#x27;s text for her composition &quot;Variations on Valerius &quot;Where that one already turns or turns.&quot;&quot; The Icelandic composer Jóhann Jóhannsson set Catullus 85 to music; entitled , the song is found on Jóhannsson&#x27;s album &quot;Englabörn&quot;, and is sung through a vocoder, and the music is played by a string quartet and piano. &quot;Catulli Carmina&quot; is a cantata by Carl Orff dating from 1943 that sets texts from Catullus to music. Finnish jazz singer Reine Rimón has recorded poems of Catullus set to standard jazz tunes.

==Cultural depictions==
* The 1888 play &quot;Lesbia&quot; by Richard Davey depicts the relationship between Catullus and Lesbia, based on incidents from Catullus&#x27;s poems.
* Catullus was the main protagonist of the historical novel &quot;Farewell, Catullus&quot; (1953) by Pierson Dixon. The novel shows the corruption of Roman society.
*Vladimir Nabokov&#x27;s novel &quot;Lolita&quot; makes multiple explicit and implicit allusions to Catullus&#x27;s work.
*W. G. Hardy&#x27;s novel &quot;The City of Libertines&quot; (1957) tells the fictionalized story of Catullus and a love affair during the time of Julius Caesar. The &quot;Financial Post&quot; described the book as &quot;an authentic story of an absorbing era&quot;.
* A poem by Catullus is being recited to Cleopatra in the eponymous 1963 film when Julius Caesar comes to visit her; they talk about him (Cleopatra: &#x27;Catullus doesn&#x27;t approve of you. Why haven&#x27;t you had him killed?&#x27; Caesar: &#x27;Because I approve of him.&#x27;) and Caesar then recites other poems by him.
*The American poet Louis Zukofsky in 1969 wrote a set of homophonic translations of Catullus that attempted in English to replicate the sound as primary emphasis, rather than the more common emphasis on sense of the originals (although the relationship between sound and sense there is often misrepresented and has been clarified by careful study); his Catullus versions have had extensive influence on contemporary innovative poetry and homophonic translation, including the work of poets Robert Duncan, Robert Kelly, and Charles Bernstein.
*Robert de Maria wrote a fictional account of Catullus’s life in his 1965 novel “Clodia”.
*Catullus is the protagonist of Tom Holland&#x27;s 1995 novel &quot;Attis&quot;.
*Catullus appears in Steven Saylor&#x27;s 1995 novel &quot;The Venus Throw&quot; as the embittered ex-lover of Clodia, sister of Publius Clodius Pulcher, whom he calls Lesbia.

==See also==
*Poetry of Catullus
*List of poems by Catullus
*Codex Vaticanus Ottobonianus Latinus 1829
*Prosody (Latin)

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* Calinski, T. (2021). &quot;&quot;. Darmstadt: WBG Academic
* Claes, P. (2002). &quot;Concatenatio Catulliana, A New Reading of the Carmina.&quot; Amsterdam: J.C. Gieben 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Hild, Christian (2013). &quot;&quot;. St. Ingbert: Röhrig. .
*Kaggelaris, N. (2015), &quot;Wedding Cry: Sappho (Fr. 109 LP, Fr. 104(a) LP)- Catullus (c. 62. 20-5)- modern greek folk songs&quot; [in Greek] in Avdikos, E.- Koziou-Kolofotia, B. (ed.)&quot; Modern Greek folk songs and history&quot;, Karditsa, pp. 260–70 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Radici Colace, P., , 1985, pp. 53–71.
* Radici Colace, P., , 1987, 39–57.
* Radici Colace, P., , Reggio Calabria 1989, 137–142.
* Radici Colace, P., , in AA.VV., &quot;&quot;, Pisa 1992, 1–13.
* Radici Colace, P., , Messana n.s.15, 1993, 23–44.
* Radici Colace, P., , (Napoli 9 maggio 1995)—A.I.O.N.‖ XVIII, 1996, 155–167.
* Radici Colace, P., , in Paideia‖ LXIV, 2009, 553–561
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==


* Works by Catullus at Perseus Digital Library
* 
* Catullus translations: Catullus&#x27;s work in Latin and multiple (ten or more) modern languages, including scanned versions of every poem
* Catullus in Latin and English
* Catullus translated exclusively in English Translated by A. S. Kline
* Catullus Online: searchable Latin text, repertory of conjectures, and images of the most important manuscripts
* Catullus: Latin text, concordances and frequency list
* Catullus purified: a brief history of Carmen 16 by Thomas Nelson Winter
* SORGLL: Catullus 5, read by Robert Sonkowsky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="0" end="23" title="Catullus" label="Gaius Valerius Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q163079" start="49" end="57" title="Catullus" label="Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6496542" start="68" end="73" title="Latin poetry" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q266459" start="74" end="82" title="neoteric" label="neoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="100" end="114" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779919" start="116" end="135" title="Poetry of Catullus" label="His surviving works"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="301" end="311" title="Equestrian (Roman)" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028" start="322" end="328" title="Verona, Italy" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q199728" start="333" end="347" title="Cisalpine Gaul" label="Cisalpine Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="444" end="457" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q731997" start="474" end="487" title="Promagistrate" label="Promagistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="508" end="514" title="Gaul" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="515" end="524" title="Roman province" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530508" start="600" end="606" title="Sirmio" label="Sirmio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414" start="611" end="621" title="Lake Garda" label="Lake Garda"/>
<link wikidata="Q159605" start="677" end="682" title="Tivoli, Italy" label="Tibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q551668" start="808" end="823" title="Licinius Macer Calvus" label="Licinius Calvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q372100" start="828" end="841" title="Helvius Cinna" label="Helvius Cinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q320902" start="870" end="880" title="Quintus Hortensius" label="the orator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="894" end="900" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q109594" start="922" end="937" title="Cornelius Nepos" label="Cornelius Nepos"/>
<link wikidata="Q442154" start="974" end="982" title="libellus" label="libellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q250668" start="1123" end="1146" title="Marcus Furius Bibaculus" label="Marcus Furius Bibaculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="1236" end="1242" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="1282" end="1291" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235482" start="1476" end="1482" title="Lesbia" label="Lesbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102155" start="1529" end="1543" title="Clodia Metelli" label="Clodia Metelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q313664" start="1655" end="1678" title="Publius Clodius Pulcher" label="Publius Clodius Pulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q505341" start="1692" end="1724" title="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer" label="Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559179" start="2221" end="2231" title="Pro Caelio" label="Pro Caelio"/>
<link wikidata="Q373189" start="2877" end="2885" title="Bithynia" label="Bithynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472899" start="2916" end="2929" title="Gaius Memmius (praetor 58 BC)" label="Gaius Memmius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454671" start="2969" end="2974" title="Troad" label="Troad"/>
<link wikidata="Q44248" start="3279" end="3285" title="Jerome" label="Jerome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236466" start="3440" end="3454" title="fasti consulares" label="consular fasti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7668586" start="3980" end="3993" title="T. P. Wiseman" label="T. P. Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q105420" start="4251" end="4260" title="anthology" label="anthology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="4535" end="4542" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q184874" start="5024" end="5031" title="Ariadne" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="5052" end="5058" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="5063" end="5069" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053916" start="5184" end="5192" title="Theme (literature)" label="thematic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519050" start="5346" end="5352" title="erotic" label="erotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235482" start="5481" end="5487" title="Lesbia" label="Lesbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102155" start="5552" end="5558" title="Clodia (wife of Metellus)" label="Clodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054330" start="5608" end="5617" title="invective" label="invective"/>
<link wikidata="Q31110" start="5655" end="5662" title="Obscenity" label="obscene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992858" start="5717" end="5719" title="Catullus 16" label="16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="5787" end="5800" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="5805" end="5811" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206972" start="5816" end="5826" title="condolence" label="condolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779919" start="5874" end="5876" title="Catullus 96" label="96"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054180" start="5954" end="5957" title="Catullus 101" label="101"/>
<link wikidata="Q428995" start="6238" end="6253" title="Hellenistic Age" label="Hellenistic Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="6273" end="6284" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622189" start="6293" end="6311" title="Alexandrian school" label="Alexandrian school"/>
<link wikidata="Q37484" start="6405" end="6416" title="epic poetry" label="epic poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="6437" end="6442" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q266459" start="6487" end="6495" title="neoteroi" label="neoteroi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6544" end="6555" title="Neoteric#Latin Neoterics" label="poetae novi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6571" end="6580" title="Neoteric#Latin Neoterics" label="new poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q47130" start="6645" end="6651" title="Ennius" label="Ennius"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="6775" end="6779" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q17892" start="7253" end="7259" title="Sappho" label="Sappho"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054187" start="7302" end="7313" title="Catullus 51" label="Catullus 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q17079267" start="7365" end="7374" title="Sappho 31" label="Sappho 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="7433" end="7442" title="Lost literary work" label="lost work"/>
<link wikidata="Q686027" start="7515" end="7526" title="Epithalamium" label="epithalamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q545332" start="7663" end="7677" title="Sapphic stanza" label="Sapphic stanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205874" start="7688" end="7690" title="Catullus 11" label="11"/>
<link wikidata="Q111021452" start="7890" end="7892" title="Catullus 63" label="63"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054191" start="7894" end="7896" title="Catullus 64" label="64"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779919" start="7898" end="7900" title="Catullus 65" label="65"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779919" start="7902" end="7904" title="Catullus 66" label="66"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054192" start="7910" end="7912" title="Catullus 68" label="68"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="7995" end="8001" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="8006" end="8012" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="8035" end="8044" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="8046" end="8053" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184874" start="8072" end="8079" title="Ariadne" label="Ariadne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138506" start="8100" end="8106" title="Tereus" label="Tereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231743" start="8111" end="8117" title="Procne" label="Procne"/>
<link wikidata="Q871361" start="8130" end="8154" title="Protesilaus" label="Protesilaus and Laodamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235482" start="8383" end="8389" title="Lesbia" label="Lesbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054190" start="8403" end="8404" title="Catullus 5" label="5"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054183" start="8651" end="8662" title="Catullus 13" label="Catullus 13"/>
<link wikidata="Q214123" start="8723" end="8736" title="Matyas Seiber" label="Matyas Seiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q733299" start="8818" end="8827" title="Ned Rorem" label="Ned Rorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q455618" start="9478" end="9492" title="Thomas Campion" label="Thomas Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q553900" start="9690" end="9705" title="Richard Crashaw" label="Richard Crashaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q663979" start="9738" end="9742" title="Glee (music)" label="glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917443" start="9746" end="9762" title="Samuel Webbe Jr." label="Samuel Webbe Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q663979" start="9805" end="9809" title="Glee (music)" label="glee"/>
<link wikidata="Q563098" start="9813" end="9832" title="John Stafford Smith" label="John Stafford Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054190" start="9835" end="9845" title="Catullus 5" label="Catullus 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="9885" end="9895" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="9924" end="9928" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q726038" start="9950" end="9980" title="Alfonso Ferrabosco the younger" label="Alfonso Ferrabosco the younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q107502302" start="9997" end="10018" title="Bertha Tideman-Wijers" label="Bertha Tideman-Wijers"/>
<link wikidata="Q428347" start="10174" end="10191" title="Jóhann Jóhannsson" label="Jóhann Jóhannsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667148" start="10196" end="10207" title="Catullus 85" label="Catullus 85"/>
<link wikidata="Q48990066" start="10280" end="10289" title="Englabörn" label="Englabörn"/>
<link wikidata="Q908562" start="10319" end="10326" title="vocoder" label="vocoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="10357" end="10371" title="string quartet" label="string quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="10376" end="10381" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051366" start="10389" end="10404" title="Catulli Carmina" label="Catulli Carmina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174873" start="10416" end="10423" title="cantata" label="cantata"/>
<link wikidata="Q44086" start="10427" end="10436" title="Carl Orff" label="Carl Orff"/>
<link wikidata="Q60776258" start="10632" end="10638" title="Lesbia (play)" label="Lesbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64683032" start="10648" end="10661" title="Richard Davey (writer)" label="Richard Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094124" start="10864" end="10877" title="Pierson Dixon" label="Pierson Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="10913" end="10918" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="10929" end="10945" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q127149" start="10965" end="10971" title="Lolita" label="Lolita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507510" start="11051" end="11062" title="W. G. Hardy" label="W. G. Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072525" start="11222" end="11236" title="Financial Post" label="Financial Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="11358" end="11367" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430" start="11385" end="11394" title="Cleopatra (1963 film)" label="1963 film"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="11400" end="11413" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q975481" start="11663" end="11677" title="Louis Zukofsky" label="Louis Zukofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202336" start="11701" end="11723" title="homophonic translation" label="homophonic translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q964391" start="12134" end="12147" title="Robert Duncan (poet)" label="Robert Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q582796" start="12149" end="12161" title="Robert Kelly (poet)" label="Robert Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q966050" start="12167" end="12184" title="Charles Bernstein (poet)" label="Charles Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236243" start="12308" end="12319" title="Tom Holland (author)" label="Tom Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q918553" start="12378" end="12391" title="Steven Saylor" label="Steven Saylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7772193" start="12416" end="12431" title="The Venus Throw" label="The Venus Throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779919" start="12548" end="12566" title="Poetry of Catullus" label="Poetry of Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q110944970" start="12568" end="12593" title="List of poems by Catullus" label="List of poems by Catullus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140258" start="12595" end="12636" title="Codex Vaticanus Ottobonianus Latinus 1829" label="Codex Vaticanus Ottobonianus Latinus 1829"/>
<link wikidata="Q16153809" start="12638" end="12653" title="Prosody (Latin)" label="Prosody (Latin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q78437393" start="14170" end="14190" title="Thomas Nelson Winter" label="Thomas Nelson Winter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5769" wikidata="Q430182" url="?curid=5769" title="C. S. Forester">
<text>Cecil Louis Troughton Smith (27 August 1899 – 2 April 1966), known by his pen name Cecil Scott &quot;C. S.&quot; Forester, was an English novelist known for writing tales of naval warfare, such as the 12-book Horatio Hornblower series depicting a Royal Navy officer during the Napoleonic Wars. 

The Hornblower novels &quot;A Ship of the Line&quot; and &quot;Flying Colours&quot; were jointly awarded the 1938 James Tait Black Memorial Prize for fiction. Other works include &quot;The African Queen&quot; and &quot;The Good Shepherd&quot;, both of which were later adapted as movies. 

During World War II, he moved to Washington, D.C. where he worked for the British Ministry of Information, writing propaganda for the Allied cause. He subsequently settled in Fullerton, California, where he died in 1966 of complications arising from a stroke.

==Early years==
Forester was born in Cairo on 27 August 1899, fifth and youngest child of George Foster Smith and his wife Sarah. His father was an English teacher in a local school set up to give upper-class Egyptian boys an English education. His parents separated when he was young, and his mother took him to London, where he was educated at Alleyn&#x27;s School and Dulwich College. He began to study medicine at Guy&#x27;s Hospital, but left without completing his degree. He was somewhat athletic, wore glasses, and had a slender physique. He failed his Army physical and was told that there was no chance that he would be accepted. He began writing seriously, using his pen name, in around 1921.

==Second World War==
During the Second World War, Forester moved to the United States, where he worked for the British Ministry of Information and wrote propaganda to encourage the U.S. to join the Allies. He eventually settled in Berkeley, California.

In 1942, while he was living in Washington, D.C., he met the young British diplomat Roald Dahl and encouraged him to write about his experiences in the Royal Air Force. According to Dahl&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;Lucky Break&quot;, Forester asked him about his experiences as a fighter pilot, and this prompted Dahl to write his first story, &quot;A Piece of Cake&quot;.

==Literary career==

Forester wrote many novels, but he is best known for the 12-book Horatio Hornblower series about an officer in the Royal Navy during the Napoleonic Wars. He began the series with Hornblower a captain in the first novel, &quot;The Happy Return&quot;, which was published in 1937, but demand for more stories led him to fill in Hornblower&#x27;s life story, and he wrote novels detailing his rise from the rank of midshipman. The last completed novel was published in 1962. Hornblower&#x27;s fictional adventures were based on real events, but Forester wrote the body of the works carefully to avoid entanglements with real world history, so that Hornblower is always off on another mission when a great naval battle occurs during the Napoleonic Wars.

Forester&#x27;s other novels include &quot;The African Queen&quot; (1935) and &quot;The General&quot; (1936); two novels about the Peninsular War, &quot;Death to the French&quot; (published in the United States as &quot;Rifleman Dodd&quot;) and &quot;The Gun&quot; (filmed as &quot;The Pride and the Passion&quot; in 1957); and seafaring stories that do not involve Hornblower, such as &quot;Brown on Resolution&quot; (1929), &quot;The Captain from Connecticut&quot; (1941), &quot;The Ship&quot; (1943), and &quot;Hunting the Bismarck&quot; (1959), which was used as the basis of the screenplay for the film &quot;Sink the Bismarck!&quot; (1960). Several of his novels have been filmed, including &quot;The African Queen&quot; (1951), directed by John Huston. Forester is also credited as story writer on several films not based on his published novels, including &quot;Commandos Strike at Dawn&quot; (1942).

Forester also wrote several volumes of short stories set during the Second World War. Those in &quot;The Nightmare&quot; (1954) were based on events in Nazi Germany, ending at the Nuremberg trials. The linked stories in &quot;The Man in the Yellow Raft&quot; (1969) follow the career of the destroyer USS &quot;Boon&quot;, while many of the stories in &quot;Gold from Crete&quot; (1971) follow the destroyer HMS &quot;Apache&quot;. The last of the stories in &quot;Gold from Crete&quot; is &quot;If Hitler Had Invaded England&quot;, which offers an imagined sequence of events starting with Hitler&#x27;s attempt to implement Operation Sea Lion and culminating in the early military defeat of Nazi Germany in the summer of 1941.

His non-fiction works about seafaring include &quot;The Age of Fighting Sail&quot; (1956), an account of the sea battles between Great Britain and the United States in the War of 1812.

Forester also published the crime novels &quot;Payment Deferred&quot; (1926) and &quot;Plain Murder&quot; (1930), as well as two children&#x27;s books. &quot;Poo-Poo and the Dragons&quot; (1942) was created as a series of stories told to his son George to encourage him to finish his meals. George had mild food allergies and needed encouragement to eat. &quot;The Barbary Pirates&quot; (1953) is a children&#x27;s history of early 19th-century pirates.

Forester appeared as a contestant on the television quiz programme &quot;You Bet Your Life&quot;, hosted by Groucho Marx, in an episode broadcast on 1 November 1956.

A previously unknown novel of Forester&#x27;s, &quot;The Pursued&quot;, was discovered in 2003 and published by Penguin Classics on 3 November 2011.

== Personal life ==
Forester married Kathleen Belcher in 1926. They had two sons, John, born in 1929, and George, born in 1933. The couple divorced in 1945. In 1947 he married Dorothy Foster. Kathleen Belcher&#x27;s greatuncle was Capt. Edward Belcher, RN, who achieved renown as a hydrographer and explorer. After his retirement, Belcher devoted much of his time to writing. After penning biographical material, he turned his hand to naval fiction, inventing a character called &quot;Horatio Howard Brenton&quot;, and attributing great feats and adventures to him. It is possible that Forester found some inspiration in these stories for his own &quot;Horatio Hornblower&quot;.

Forester died in Fullerton, California on 2 April 1966.

John Forester wrote a two-volume biography of his father, including many elements of Forester&#x27;s life which became clear to his son only after his father&#x27;s death.

==Bibliography==
===Horatio Hornblower===
# 1950 &quot;Mr Midshipman Hornblower&quot;. Michael Joseph.
# 1941 &quot;The Hand of Destiny&quot;.&quot;Collier&#x27;s&quot;
# 1950 &quot;Hornblower and the Widow McCool&quot; (&quot;Hornblower’s Temptation&quot; &quot;&quot;Hornblower and the Big Decision&quot;). &quot;The Saturday Evening Post&quot;
# 1952 &quot;Lieutenant Hornblower&quot;. Michael Joseph.
# 1962 &quot;Hornblower and the Hotspur&quot;. Michael Joseph.
# 1967 &quot;Hornblower and the Crisis, an unfinished novel&quot;. Michael Joseph. Published in the US as &quot;Hornblower During the Crisis&quot; (posthumous)
# 1953 &quot;Hornblower and the Atropos&quot;. Michael Joseph.
# 1937 &quot;The Happy Return&quot;. Michael Joseph. Published in the US as &quot;Beat to Quarters&quot;
# 1938 &quot;A Ship of the Line&quot;. Michael Joseph.
# 1941 &quot;Hornblower&#x27;s Charitable Offering&quot;. &quot;Argosy&quot;
# 1938 &quot;Flying Colours&quot;. Michael Joseph.
# 1941 &quot;Hornblower and His Majesty&quot;. &quot;Collier&#x27;s&quot;
# 1945 &quot;The Commodore&quot;. Michael Joseph. Published in the US as &quot;Commodore Hornblower&quot;
# 1946 &quot;Lord Hornblower&quot;. Michael Joseph.
# 1958 &quot;Hornblower in the West Indies&quot;. Michael Joseph. Published in the US as &quot;Admiral Hornblower in the West Indies&quot;
# 1967 &quot;The Last Encounter&quot;. Sunday Mirror, 8 May 1966 (posthumous).
# 1964 &quot;The Hornblower Companion&quot;. Michael Joseph. (Supplementary book comprising another short story, &quot;The Point and the Edge&quot; only as an outline, &quot;The Hornblower Atlas&quot; and &quot;Some Personal Notes&quot;)

====Omnibus====
# 1964 &quot;The Young Hornblower&quot;. (a compilation of full-length books 1, 2 &amp; 3; numbers 1,4,5 above). Michael Joseph.
# 1965 &quot;Captain Hornblower&quot; (a compilation of full-length books 5, 6 &amp; 7; numbers 7,8,9 above). Michael Joseph.
# 1968 &quot;Admiral Hornblower&quot; (a compilation of full-length books 8, 9, 10 &amp; 11; numbers 11,13,14,15 above). Michael Joseph.
# 2011 &quot;Hornblower Addendum – Five Short Stories&quot; (originally published in magazines)

===Other novels===
* 1924 &quot;A Pawn among Kings&quot;. Methuen.
* 1924 &quot;The Paid Piper&quot;. Methuen.
* 1926 &quot;Payment Deferred&quot;. Methuen.
* 1927 &quot;Love Lies Dreaming&quot;. John Lane.
* 1927 &quot;The Wonderful Week&quot;. John Lane.
* 1928 &quot;The Daughter of the Hawk&quot;. John Lane.
* 1929 &quot;Brown on Resolution&quot;. John Lane.
* 1930 &quot;Plain Murder&quot;. John Lane.
* 1931 &quot;Two-and-Twenty&quot;. John Lane.
* 1932 &quot;Death to the French&quot;. John Lane. Published in the U.S. as &quot;Rifleman Dodd&quot;. Little Brown.
* 1933 &quot;The Gun&quot;. John Lane.
* 1934 &quot;The Peacemaker&quot;. Heinemann.
* 1935 &quot;The African Queen&quot;. Heinemann.
* 1935 &quot;The Pursued&quot; (a lost novel rediscovered in 1999 and published by Penguin Classics in 2011)
* 1936 &quot;The General&quot;. Michael Joseph. First published as a serial in the &quot;News Chronicle&quot; 14–18 January 1935
* 1940 &quot;The Earthly Paradise&quot;. Michael Joseph. Published in the U.S. as &quot;To the Indies&quot;.
* 1941 &quot;The Captain from Connecticut&quot;. Michael Joseph.
* 1942 &quot;Poo-Poo and the Dragons&quot;. Michael Joseph.
* 1943 &quot;The Ship&quot;. Michael Joseph.
* 1948 &quot;The Sky and the Forest&quot;. Michael Joseph.
* 1951 &quot;Randall and the River of Time&quot;. Michael Joseph.
* 1955 &quot;The Good Shepherd&quot;. Michael Joseph.

====Short stories====
*&quot;The Wandering Gentile&quot;, &quot;Liverpool Echo&quot;, 1955

===Posthumous===
* 1967 &quot;Long before Forty&quot; (autobiographical). Michael Joseph.
* 1971 &quot;Gold from Crete&quot; (short stories). Michael Joseph.
* 2011 &quot;The Pursued&quot; (novel). Penguin.

===Collections===
* 1944 &quot;The Bedchamber Mystery&quot;; to which is added the story of &quot;The Eleven Deckchairs&quot; and &quot;Modernity and Maternity&quot;. S. J. Reginald Saunders. Published in the US as &quot;Three Matronly Mysteries&quot;. eNet Press
* 1954 &quot;The Nightmare&quot;. Michael Joseph
* 1969 &quot;The Man in the Yellow Raft&quot;. Michael Joseph (posthumous)

===Plays in three acts; John Lane===
* 1931 &quot;U 97&quot;
* 1933 &quot;Nurse Cavell&quot;. (with C. E. Bechhofer Roberts)

===Non-fiction===
* 1922 &quot;Victor Emmanuel II&quot;. Methuen (?)
* 1927 &quot;Victor Emmanuel II and the Union of Italy&quot;. Methuen.
* 1924 &quot;Napoleon and his Court&quot;. Methuen.
* 1925 &quot;Josephine, Napoleon’s Empress&quot;. Methuen.
* 1928 &quot;Louis XIV, King of France and Navarre&quot;. Methuen.
* 1929 &quot;Lord Nelson&quot;. John Lane.
* 1929 &quot;The Voyage of the Annie Marble&quot;. John Lane.
* 1930 &quot;The Annie Marble in Germany&quot;. John Lane.
* 1936 &quot;Marionettes at Home&quot;. Michael Joseph Ltd.
* 1953 &quot;The Adventures of John Wetherell&quot;. Doubleday &amp; Company, Inc.
* 1953 &quot;The Barbary Pirates&quot;. Landmark Books, Random House. Published in the UK in 1956 by Macdonald &amp; Co.
* 1957 &quot;The Naval War of 1812&quot;. Michael Joseph. Published in the US as &quot;The Age of Fighting Sail&quot;
* 1959 &quot;Hunting the Bismarck&quot;. Michael Joseph. Published in the US as &quot;The Last Nine Days of the Bismark&quot; and &quot;Sink the Bismarck&quot;

====Non-fiction short pieces====
*&quot;Calmness under Air Raids in Franco Territory&quot;. &quot;Western Mail&quot;, 28 April 1937
*&quot;Who Is Financing Franco?&quot;. &quot;Aberdeen Press &amp; Journal&quot;, 5 May 1937
*”Sabotage&quot;. Sunday Graphic, 11 September 1938
*&quot;Saga of the Submarines&quot;. &quot;Falkirk Herald&quot;, 1 August 1945
*&quot;Hollywood Coincidence&quot;. &quot;Leicester Chronicle&quot;, 3 September 1955

== Film adaptations ==
In addition to providing the source material for numerous adaptations (not all of which are listed below), Forester was also credited as &quot;adapted for the screen by&quot; for &quot;Captain Horatio Hornblower&quot;.

* &quot;Payment Deferred&quot; (1932), based on a 1931 play which was in turn based on Forester&#x27;s novel of the same name
* &quot;Brown on Resolution&quot; (1935), based on the novel of the same name
* &quot;Eagle Squadron&quot; (1942), story
* &quot;Commandos Strike at Dawn&quot; (1942), short story &quot;The Commandos&quot;
* &quot;Forever and a Day&quot; (1943), story
* &quot;Captain Horatio Hornblower&quot; (1951), based on the novels &quot;The Happy Return&quot;, &quot;A Ship of the Line&quot; and &quot;Flying Colours&quot;
* &quot;The African Queen&quot; (1951), the novel of the same name
* &quot;Sailor of the King&quot; (1953), the novel &quot;Brown on Resolution&quot;
* &quot;The Pride and the Passion&quot; (1957), the novel &quot;The Gun&quot;
* &quot;Sink the Bismarck!&quot; (1960), the novel &quot;The Last Nine Days of the Bismarck&quot;
* &quot;Hornblower&quot; (1998–2003 series of made-for-television movies), based on the novels &quot;Mr. Midshipman Hornblower&quot;, &quot;Lieutenant Hornblower&quot; and &quot;Hornblower and the Hotspur&quot;
* &quot;Greyhound&quot; (2020), the novel &quot;The Good Shepherd&quot;

== See also ==
* Honor Harrington – a fictional space captain and admiral in the Honorverse novels by David Weber, inspired by Horatio Hornblower (see dedication in &quot;On Basilisk Station&quot;)
* Patrick O&#x27;Brian – author of the Aubrey–Maturin series
* Dudley Pope – author of the Ramage series
* Richard Woodman – author of the Nathaniel Drinkwater series
* Douglas Reeman (writing as Alexander Kent) – The Bolitho novels

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Sternlicht, Sanford V., &quot;C.S. Forester and the Hornblower saga&quot; (Syracuse University Press, 1999)
* Van der Kiste, John, &quot;C.S. Forester&#x27;s Crime Noir: A view of the murder stories&quot; (KDP, 2018)

== External links ==

;Digital editions
* 

;Other links
* C. S. Forester Collection at the Harry Ransom Center
* C. S. Forester Society, which publishes the e-journal &quot;Reflections&quot;
* C. S. Forester on &quot;You Bet Your Life&quot; in 1956</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q430182" start="0" end="27" title="C. S. Forester" label="Cecil Louis Troughton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q430182" start="83" end="94" title="C. S. Forester" label="Cecil Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q430182" start="101" end="106" title="C. S. Forester" label="C. S."/>
<link wikidata="Q430182" start="113" end="121" title="C. S. Forester" label="Forester"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424762" start="209" end="227" title="Horatio Hornblower" label="Horatio Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="247" end="257" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="277" end="292" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q482507" start="324" end="342" title="A Ship of the Line" label="A Ship of the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463385" start="359" end="373" title="Flying Colours (novel)" label="Flying Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q392586" start="410" end="441" title="James Tait Black Memorial Prize" label="James Tait Black Memorial Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821099" start="481" end="498" title="The African Queen (novel)" label="The African Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982310" start="515" end="532" title="The Good Shepherd (novel)" label="The Good Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="593" end="605" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="619" end="635" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q821726" start="660" end="691" title="Ministry of Information (United Kingdom)" label="British Ministry of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="720" end="732" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q494723" start="761" end="782" title="Fullerton, California" label="Fullerton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="884" end="889" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732213" start="1193" end="1213" title="Alleyn&amp;#x27;s School" label="Alleyn&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264867" start="1218" end="1233" title="Dulwich College" label="Dulwich College"/>
<link wikidata="Q777039" start="1265" end="1284" title="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Guy&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1584" end="1600" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q821726" start="1663" end="1694" title="Ministry of Information (United Kingdom)" label="British Ministry of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="1750" end="1756" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="1783" end="1803" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="1838" end="1854" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q25161" start="1890" end="1900" title="Roald Dahl" label="Roald Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1958" end="1973" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424762" start="2266" end="2284" title="Horatio Hornblower" label="Horatio Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="2338" end="2353" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194726" start="2427" end="2443" title="The Happy Return" label="The Happy Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821099" start="2995" end="3012" title="The African Queen (novel)" label="The African Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304541" start="3036" end="3047" title="The General (C. S. Forester novel)" label="The General"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="3083" end="3097" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247648" start="3105" end="3124" title="Death to the French" label="Death to the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738513" start="3203" end="3210" title="The Gun (novel)" label="The Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q611966" start="3234" end="3259" title="The Pride and the Passion" label="The Pride and the Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976397" start="3344" end="3363" title="Brown on Resolution" label="Brown on Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721291" start="3384" end="3412" title="The Captain from Connecticut" label="The Captain from Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763838" start="3433" end="3441" title="The Ship (novel)" label="The Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494541" start="3466" end="3486" title="The Last Nine Days of the Bismarck" label="Hunting the Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q698949" start="3566" end="3584" title="Sink the Bismarck!" label="Sink the Bismarck!"/>
<link wikidata="Q384397" start="3655" end="3672" title="The African Queen (film)" label="The African Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="3699" end="3710" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152257" start="3822" end="3846" title="Commandos Strike at Dawn" label="Commandos Strike at Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3930" end="3946" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="4014" end="4026" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="4042" end="4058" title="Nuremberg trials" label="Nuremberg trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="4453" end="4459" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="4488" end="4506" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="4764" end="4775" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156777" start="4825" end="4841" title="Payment Deferred" label="Payment Deferred"/>
<link wikidata="Q466776" start="5306" end="5323" title="You Bet Your Life" label="You Bet Your Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q103846" start="5341" end="5353" title="Groucho Marx" label="Groucho Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q11281443" start="5512" end="5528" title="Penguin Classics" label="Penguin Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q713398" start="5787" end="5801" title="Edward Belcher" label="Edward Belcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q494723" start="6247" end="6268" title="Fullerton, California" label="Fullerton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233633" start="6287" end="6300" title="John Forester (cyclist)" label="John Forester"/>
<link wikidata="Q10542382" start="6515" end="6539" title="Mr. Midshipman Hornblower" label="Mr Midshipman Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109549" start="6608" end="6622" title="Collier&amp;#x27;s" label="Collier&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16249982" start="6642" end="6673" title="Hornblower and the Widow McCool" label="Hornblower and the Widow McCool"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302345" start="6775" end="6800" title="The Saturday Evening Post" label="The Saturday Evening Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778338" start="6820" end="6841" title="Lieutenant Hornblower" label="Lieutenant Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904106" start="6878" end="6904" title="Hornblower and the Hotspur" label="Hornblower and the Hotspur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904098" start="6941" end="6966" title="Hornblower and the Crisis" label="Hornblower and the Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904102" start="7101" end="7127" title="Hornblower and the Atropos" label="Hornblower and the Atropos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194726" start="7164" end="7180" title="The Happy Return" label="The Happy Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q482507" start="7269" end="7287" title="A Ship of the Line" label="A Ship of the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q649812" start="7369" end="7387" title="Argosy (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Argosy&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463385" start="7401" end="7415" title="Flying Colours (novel)" label="Flying Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109549" start="7492" end="7506" title="Collier&amp;#x27;s" label="Collier&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7726999" start="7526" end="7539" title="The Commodore" label="The Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679385" start="7632" end="7647" title="Lord Hornblower" label="Lord Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q10526370" start="7684" end="7713" title="Hornblower in the West Indies" label="Hornblower in the West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386608" start="7823" end="7841" title="The Last Encounter" label="The Last Encounter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296078" start="8735" end="8742" title="Methuen Publishing" label="Methuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156777" start="8757" end="8773" title="Payment Deferred" label="Payment Deferred"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243946" start="8829" end="8838" title="John Lane (publisher)" label="John Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976397" start="8959" end="8978" title="Brown on Resolution" label="Brown on Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247648" start="9100" end="9119" title="Death to the French" label="Death to the French"/>
<link wikidata="Q552959" start="9190" end="9202" title="Little Brown" label="Little Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7738513" start="9217" end="9224" title="The Gun (novel)" label="The Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273015" start="9278" end="9287" title="Heinemann (publisher)" label="Heinemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821099" start="9302" end="9319" title="The African Queen (novel)" label="The African Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11281443" start="9421" end="9437" title="Penguin Classics" label="Penguin Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304541" start="9460" end="9471" title="The General (C. S. Forester novel)" label="The General"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999138" start="9479" end="9493" title="Michael Joseph (publisher)" label="Michael Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721291" start="9698" end="9726" title="The Captain from Connecticut" label="The Captain from Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763838" start="9823" end="9831" title="The Ship (novel)" label="The Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q16982310" start="9993" end="10010" title="The Good Shepherd (novel)" label="The Good Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086020" start="10824" end="10847" title="C. E. Bechhofer Roberts" label="C. E. Bechhofer Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251563" start="11445" end="11468" title="Doubleday &amp;amp; Company" label="Doubleday &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q201209" start="12525" end="12551" title="Captain Horatio Hornblower" label="Captain Horatio Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156778" start="12568" end="12584" title="Payment Deferred (film)" label="Payment Deferred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4976398" start="12694" end="12713" title="Brown on Resolution (film)" label="Brown on Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203198" start="12772" end="12786" title="Eagle Squadron (film)" label="Eagle Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152257" start="12815" end="12839" title="Commandos Strike at Dawn" label="Commandos Strike at Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402885" start="12900" end="12917" title="Forever and a Day (1943 film)" label="Forever and a Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q201209" start="12946" end="12972" title="Captain Horatio Hornblower" label="Captain Horatio Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194726" start="13013" end="13029" title="The Happy Return" label="The Happy Return"/>
<link wikidata="Q482507" start="13043" end="13061" title="A Ship of the Line" label="A Ship of the Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463385" start="13078" end="13092" title="Flying Colours (novel)" label="Flying Colours"/>
<link wikidata="Q384397" start="13107" end="13124" title="The African Queen (film)" label="The African Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293133" start="13174" end="13192" title="Sailor of the King" label="Sailor of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q611966" start="13257" end="13282" title="The Pride and the Passion" label="The Pride and the Passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q698949" start="13335" end="13353" title="Sink the Bismarck!" label="Sink the Bismarck!"/>
<link wikidata="Q735749" start="13433" end="13443" title="Hornblower (TV series)" label="Hornblower"/>
<link wikidata="Q50404285" start="13644" end="13653" title="Greyhound (film)" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052521" start="13726" end="13742" title="Honor Harrington" label="Honor Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052521" start="13790" end="13800" title="Honorverse" label="Honorverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q588653" start="13811" end="13822" title="David Weber" label="David Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316723" start="13880" end="13899" title="On Basilisk Station" label="On Basilisk Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q355438" start="13909" end="13929" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Brian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10376289" start="13946" end="13967" title="Aubrey–Maturin series" label="Aubrey–Maturin series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263756" start="13970" end="13981" title="Dudley Pope" label="Dudley Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679887" start="13998" end="14004" title="Lord Ramage" label="Ramage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322851" start="14014" end="14029" title="Richard Woodman" label="Richard Woodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252469" start="14076" end="14090" title="Douglas Reeman" label="Douglas Reeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719048" start="14121" end="14139" title="The Bolitho novels" label="The Bolitho novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="14490" end="14509" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5770" wikidata="Q34768" url="?curid=5770" title="List of telephone country codes">
<text>Telephone country codes, but also sometimes referred to as &quot;country dial-in codes&quot;, or historically &quot;international subscriber dialing&quot; (ISD) codes in the U.K., are telephone number dialing prefixes for reaching subscribers in foreign countries or areas via international telecommunication networks. Country codes are defined by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) in ITU-T standards E.123 and E.164. The prefixes enable international direct dialing (IDD).

Country codes constitute the international telephone numbering plan. They are used only when dialing a telephone number in a country or world region other than the caller&#x27;s. Country codes are dialed before the national telephone number, but require at least one additional prefix, the international call prefix which is an exit code from the national numbering plan to the international one. In most countries, this prefix is &quot;00&quot;, an ITU recommendation; it is &quot;011&quot; in the countries of the North American Numbering Plan while a minority of countries use other prefixes.

==Overview==
This table lists in its first column the initial digits of the country code shared by each country in each row, which is arranged in columns for the last digit (x). When three-digit codes share a common leading pair, the shared prefix is marked by an arrow, ( ↙ ) pointing down and left to the three-digit codes. Unassigned codes are denoted by a dash (—). Countries are identified by ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 country codes; codes for non-geographic services are denoted by two asterisks (**).

==World zones==
The nine world zones are generally defined geographically, with exceptions for political and historical alignment and some number shortages.
* Zone 1 uses closed numbering plan, identified by the digit &quot;1&quot; as country code. An area code of three digits dialed after the country code determines the area served in the United States and its territories, Canada, and much of the Caribbean.
* Zone 2 uses two 2-digit codes (20, 27) and eight sets of 3-digit codes (21x–26x, 28x, 29x), mostly to serve Africa, but also Aruba, Faroe Islands, Greenland and British Indian Ocean Territory.
* Zones 3 and 4 use sixteen 2-digit codes (30–34, 36, 39–41, 43–49) and four sets of 3-digit codes (35x, 37x, 38x, 42x) to serve Europe.
* Zone 5 uses eight 2-digit codes (51–58) and two sets of 3-digit codes (50x, 59x) to serve South and Central America.
* Zone 6 uses seven 2-digit codes (60–66) and three sets of 3-digit codes (67x–69x) to serve Southeast Asia and Oceania.
* Zone 7 uses an integrated numbering plan; two digits (7x) determine the area served: Russia or Kazakhstan.
* Zone 8 uses four 2-digit codes (81, 82, 84, 86) and four sets of 3-digit codes (80x, 85x, 87x, 88x) to serve East Asia, South Asia and special services. 83x and 89x are unallocated. 
* Zone 9 uses seven 2-digit codes (90–95, 98) and three sets of 3-digit codes (96x, 97x, 99x) to serve the Middle East, West Asia, Central Asia, parts of South Asia and Eastern Europe.

=== Zone 1: North American Numbering Plan (NANP)===

NANP members are assigned three-digit numbering plan area (NPA) codes under the common country code &quot;1&quot;, shown in the format &quot;1 (NPA)&quot;.

*1 North American Numbering Plan
* 1 – , including United States territories:
** 1 (340) – 
** 1 (670) – 
** 1 (671) – 
** 1 (684) – 
** 1 (787, 939) – 
* 1 – 
* 1 – Caribbean nations, Dutch and British Overseas Territories:
** 1 (242) – 
** 1 (246) – 
** 1 (264) – 
** 1 (268) – 
** 1 (284) – 
** 1 (345) – 
** 1 (441) – 
** 1 (473) – 
** 1 (649) – 
** 1 (658, 876) – 
** 1 (664) – 
** 1 (721) – 
** 1 (758) – 
** 1 (767) – 
** 1 (784) – 
** 1 (809, 829, 849) – 
** 1 (868) – 
** 1 (869) – 

=== Zone 2: Mostly Africa===
(but also Aruba, Faroe Islands, Greenland and British Indian Ocean Territory)

* 20 – 
* 210 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 211 – 
* 212 – (including Western Sahara)
* 213 – 
* 214 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 215 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 216 – 
* 217 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 218 – 
* 219 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 220 – 
* 221 – 
* 222 – 
* 223 – 
* 224 – 
* 225 – 
* 226 – 
* 227 – 
* 228 – 
* 229 – 
* 230 – 
* 231 – 
* 232 – 
* 233 – 
* 234 – 
* 235 – 
* 236 – 
* 237 – 
* 238 – 
* 239 – 
* 240 – 
* 241 – 
* 242 – 
* 243 – 
* 244 – 
* 245 – 
* 246 – 
* 247 – 
* 248 – 
* 249 – 
* 250 – 
* 251 – 
* 252 – (including )
* 253 – 
* 254 – 
* 255 – 
** 255 (24) – , &quot;in place of never-implemented 259&quot;
* 256 – 
* 257 – 
* 258 – 
* 259 – &quot;unassigned (was intended for People&#x27;s Republic of Zanzibar but never implemented – see 255 Tanzania)&quot;
* 260 – 
* 261 – 
* 262 – 
** 262 (269,639) – &quot;(formerly at 269 Comoros)&quot;
* 263 – 
* 264 – &quot;(formerly 27 (6x) as South West Africa)&quot;
* 265 – 
* 266 – 
* 267 – 
* 268 – 
* 269 – &quot;(formerly assigned to Mayotte, now at 262)&quot;
* 27 – 
* 28x – &quot;unassigned (reserved for country code expansion)&quot;
* 290 – 
** 290 (8) – 
* 291 – 
* 292 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 293 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 294 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 295 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to San Marino, now at 378)&quot;
* 296 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 297 – 
* 298 – 
* 299 – 

=== Zones 3–4: Europe===

Some of the larger countries were assigned two-digit codes to compensate for their usually longer domestic numbers. Small countries were assigned three-digit codes, which also has been the practice since the 1980s.
* 30 – 
* 31 – 
* 32 – 
* 33 – 
* 34 – 
* 350 – 
* 351 – 
** 351 (291) – (landlines only)
** 351 (292) – (landlines only, Horta, Azores area)
** 351 (295) – (landlines only, Angra do Heroísmo area)
** 351 (296) – (landlines only, Ponta Delgada and São Miguel Island area)
* 352 – 
* 353 – 
* 354 – 
* 355 – 
* 356 – 
* 357 – (including )
* 358 – 
** 358 (18) – 
* 359 – 
* 36 – &quot;(formerly assigned to Turkey, now at 90)&quot;
* 37 – &quot;formerly assigned to East Germany until its reunification with West Germany, now part of 49 Germany&quot;
* 370 – 
* 371 – 
* 372 – 
* 373 – 
* 374 – 
* 375 – 
* 376 – &quot;(formerly 33 628)&quot;
* 377 – &quot;(formerly 33 93)&quot;
* 378 – &quot;(interchangeably with 39 0549; earlier was allocated 295 but never used)&quot;
*379 – &quot;(assigned but uses 39 06698)&quot;.
* 38 – &quot;formerly assigned to Yugoslavia until its break-up in 1991&quot;
* 380 – 
* 381 – 
* 382 – 
* 383 – 
* 384 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 385 – 
* 386 – 
* 387 – 
* 388 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to the European Telephony Numbering Space)&quot;
* 389 – 
* 39 – 
** 39 (0549) – &quot;(interchangeably with 378)&quot;
** 39 (06 698) – &quot;(assigned 379 but not in use)&quot;
* 40 – 
* 41 – 
** 41 (91) – Campione d&#x27;Italia, an Italian enclave. 91 is the prefix for the Swiss canton Ticino in which the enclave resides. Its phone system is fully integrated into the Swiss system.
* 42 – &quot;formerly assigned to Czechoslovakia, later to its breakup successors (CZ, SK) until 1997&quot;
* 420 – 
* 421 – 
* 422 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 423 – &quot;(formerly at 41 (75))&quot;
* 424 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 425 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 426 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 427 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 428 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 429 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 43 – 
* 44 – 
** 44 (1481) – 
** 44 (1534) – 
** 44 (1624) – 
* 45 – 
* 46 – 
* 47 – 
** 47 (79) – 
* 48 – 
* 49 – 

=== Zone 5: South and Central Americas===
* 500 – 
** 500 – 
* 501 – 
* 502 – 
* 503 – 
* 504 – 
* 505 – 
* 506 – 
* 507 – 
* 508 – 
* 509 – 
* 51 – 
* 52 – 
* 53 – 
* 54 – 
* 55 – 
* 56 – 
* 57 – 
* 58 – 
* 590 – (including Saint Barthélemy, Saint Martin)
* 591 – 
* 592 – 
* 593 – 
* 594 – 
* 595 – 
* 596 – (&quot;formerly assigned to Peru, now 51&quot;)
* 597 – 
* 598 – 
* 599 – Former , now grouped as follows:
** 599 3 – 
** 599 4 – 
** 599 5 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Sint Maarten, now included in NANP as 1 (721))&quot;
** 599 7 – 
** 599 8 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Aruba, now at 297)&quot;
** 599 9 – 

=== Zone 6: Southeast Asia and Oceania===
* 60 – 
* 61 – &quot;(see also 672 below)&quot;
** 61 (8 9162) – 
** 61 (8 9164) – 
* 62 – 
* 63 – 
* 64 – 
** 64 – 
* 65 – 
* 66 – 
* 670 – &quot;(formerly 62/39 during the Indonesian occupation; formerly assigned to Northern Mariana Islands, now part of NANP as 1 (670))&quot;
* 671 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Guam, now part of NANP as 1 (671))&quot;
* 672 – Australian External Territories &quot;(see also 61 Australia above); formerly assigned to Portuguese Timor (see 670)&quot;
** 672 (1) – Australian Antarctic Territory
** 672 (3) – 
* 673 – 
* 674 – 
* 675 – 
* 676 – 
* 677 – 
* 678 – 
* 679 – 
* 680 – 
* 681 – 
* 682 – 
* 683 – 
* 684 &quot;– unassigned (formerly assigned to American Samoa, now part of NANP as 1 (684))&quot;
* 685 – 
* 686 – 
* 687 – 
* 688 – 
* 689 – 
* 690 – 
* 691 – 
* 692 – 
* 693 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 694 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 695 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 696 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 697 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 698 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 699 – &quot;unassigned&quot;

=== Zone 7: Russia and neighboring regions ===
Formerly assigned to the Soviet Union until its dissolution in 1991.
* 7 (1–5, 8–9) – 
** 7 (840, 940) – &quot;(formerly 995 (44))&quot;
** 7 (850, 929) – &quot;(formerly 995 (34))&quot;
* 7 (0, 6–7) – &quot;(reserved 997 but abandoned in November 2023)&quot;

=== Zone 8: East Asia, South Asia, and special services===
* &quot;800 – Universal International Freephone Service&quot;
* 801 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 802 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 803 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 804 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 805 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 806 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 807 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* &quot;808 – Universal International Shared Cost Numbers&quot;
* 809 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 81 – 
* 82 – 
* 83x – &quot;unassigned (reserved for country code expansion)&quot;
* 84 – 
* 850 – 
* 851 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 852 – 
* 853 – 
* 854 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 855 – 
* 856 – 
* 857 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to ANAC satellite service)&quot;
* 858 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to ANAC satellite service)&quot;
* 859 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 86 – 
* &quot;870 – Global Mobile Satellite System (Inmarsat)&quot; 
* 871 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Inmarsat Atlantic East, discontinued in 2008)&quot;
* 872 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Inmarsat Pacific, discontinued in 2008)&quot;
* 873 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Inmarsat Indian, discontinued in 2008)&quot;
* 874 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Inmarsat Atlantic West, discontinued in 2008)&quot;
* 875 – &quot;unassigned (reserved for future maritime mobile service)&quot;
* 876 – &quot;unassigned (reserved for future maritime mobile service)&quot;
* 877 – &quot;unassigned (reserved for future maritime mobile service)&quot;
* 878 – &quot;unassigned (formerly used for Universal Personal Telecommunications Service, discontinued in 2022)&quot;
* 879 – &quot;unassigned (reserved for national non-commercial purposes)&quot;
* 880 – 
* &quot;881 – Global Mobile Satellite System&quot;
* &quot;882 – International Networks&quot;
* &quot;883 – International Networks&quot;
* 884 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 885 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 886 – 
* 887 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 888 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to OCHA for Telecommunications for Disaster Relief service)&quot;
* 889 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 89x – &quot;unassigned (reserved for country code expansion)&quot;

=== Zone 9: West, Central, and South Asia, and part of Eastern Europe ===
* 90 – 
** 90 (392) – 
* 91 – 
** 91 (191) – Jammu
** 91 (194) – Kashmir
* 92 – 
** 92 (581) – 
** 92 (582) – 
* 93 – 
* 94 – 
* 95 – 
* 960 – 
* 961 – 
* 962 – 
* 963 – 
* 964 – 
* 965 – 
* 966 – 
* 967 – 
* 968 – 
* 969 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to South Yemen until its unification with North Yemen, now part of 967 Yemen)&quot;
* 970 – &quot;(interchangeably with 972)&quot;
* 971 – 
* 972 – &quot;(also , interchangeably with 970)&quot;
* 973 – 
* 974 – 
* 975 – 
* 976 – 
* 977 – 
* 978 – &quot;unassigned (formerly assigned to Dubai, now part of 971 United Arab Emirates)&quot;
* 979 – &quot;Universal International Premium Rate Service (UIPRS); (formerly assigned to Abu Dhabi, now part of 971 United Arab Emirates)&quot;
* 98 – 
* 990 – &quot;unassigned&quot;
* 991 – &quot;unassigned (formerly used for International Telecommunications Public Correspondence Service)&quot;
* 992 – 
* 993 – 
* 994 – 
* 995 – 
** 995 (34) – &quot;formerly (now 7 (850, 929))&quot;
** 995 (44) – &quot;formerly (now 7 (840, 940))&quot;
* 996 – 
* 997 – &quot;(reserved but abandoned in November 2023; uses 7 (6xx, 7xx))&quot;
* 998 – 
* 999 – &quot;unassigned (reserved for future global service)&quot;


==Alphabetical order==


==Locations without country code==
In Antarctica, telecommunication services are provided by the parent country of each base:


Other places with no country codes in use, although a code may be reserved:

==See also==

* List of mobile telephone prefixes by country
* National conventions for writing telephone numbers

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q906278" start="10" end="23" title="country codes" label="country codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q214995" start="184" end="200" title="telephone number" label="telephone number"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="352" end="389" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007363" start="399" end="404" title="ITU-T" label="ITU-T"/>
<link wikidata="Q390735" start="415" end="420" title="E.123" label="E.123"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273341" start="425" end="430" title="E.164" label="E.164"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242551" start="452" end="480" title="international direct dialing" label="international direct dialing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="532" end="556" title="telephone numbering plan" label="telephone numbering plan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="779" end="804" title="International direct dialing#International call prefix" label="international call prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="1005" end="1034" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="North American Numbering Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3190395" start="1065" end="1083" title="List of international call prefixes" label="use other prefixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140221" start="1484" end="1502" title="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2" label="ISO 3166-1 alpha-2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1747" end="1753" title="#Zone 1" label="Zone 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390458" start="1759" end="1780" title="closed numbering plan" label="closed numbering plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1930" end="1943" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1965" end="1971" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1989" end="1998" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2002" end="2008" title="#Zone 2" label="Zone 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="2110" end="2116" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="2127" end="2132" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="2134" end="2147" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="2149" end="2158" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43448" start="2163" end="2193" title="British Indian Ocean Territory" label="British Indian Ocean Territory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2203" end="2204" title="#Zone 3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2209" end="2210" title="#Zone 4" label="4"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="2324" end="2330" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2334" end="2340" title="#Zone 5" label="Zone 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="2424" end="2429" title="South America" label="South"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="2434" end="2441" title="Central America" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2453" end="2459" title="#Zone 6" label="Zone 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2544" end="2558" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="2563" end="2570" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2574" end="2580" title="#Zone 7" label="Zone 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="2659" end="2665" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="2669" end="2679" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2683" end="2689" title="#Zone 8" label="Zone 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="2792" end="2801" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="2803" end="2813" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2868" end="2874" title="#Zone 9" label="Zone 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="2973" end="2984" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="2986" end="2995" title="West Asia" label="West Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="2997" end="3009" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="3020" end="3030" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="3035" end="3049" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="3265" end="3294" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="North American Numbering Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150191" start="3343" end="3350" title="Area code 340" label="1 (340)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150256" start="3357" end="3364" title="Area code 670" label="1 (670)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150255" start="3371" end="3378" title="Area code 671" label="1 (671)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150258" start="3385" end="3392" title="Area code 684" label="1 (684)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150356" start="3399" end="3411" title="Telephone numbers in Puerto Rico" label="1 (787, 939)"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3428" end="3437" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="3457" end="3485" title="British Overseas Territories" label="British Overseas Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150170" start="3490" end="3497" title="Area code 242" label="1 (242)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150169" start="3504" end="3511" title="Area code 246" label="1 (246)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160839" start="3518" end="3525" title="Area code 264" label="1 (264)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150174" start="3532" end="3539" title="Area code 268" label="1 (268)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150172" start="3546" end="3553" title="Area code 284" label="1 (284)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150192" start="3560" end="3567" title="Area code 345" label="1 (345)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593784" start="3574" end="3581" title="Area code 441" label="1 (441)"/>
<link wikidata="Q749985" start="3588" end="3595" title="Area code 473" label="1 (473)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150248" start="3602" end="3609" title="Area code 649" label="1 (649)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150297" start="3616" end="3628" title="Telephone numbers in Jamaica" label="1 (658, 876)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150254" start="3635" end="3642" title="Area code 664" label="1 (664)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150265" start="3649" end="3656" title="Area code 721" label="1 (721)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150269" start="3663" end="3670" title="Area code 758" label="1 (758)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150270" start="3677" end="3684" title="Area code 767" label="1 (767)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150275" start="3691" end="3698" title="Area code 784" label="1 (784)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150360" start="3705" end="3722" title="Telephone numbers in the Dominican Republic" label="1 (809, 829, 849)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150295" start="3729" end="3736" title="Area code 868" label="1 (868)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068007" start="3743" end="3750" title="Area code 869" label="1 (869)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="3794" end="3799" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="3801" end="3814" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="3816" end="3825" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43448" start="3830" end="3860" title="British Indian Ocean Territory" label="British Indian Ocean Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119672" start="3865" end="3867" title="+20" label="20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696669" start="3904" end="3907" title="+211" label="211"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696621" start="3913" end="3916" title="+212" label="212"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250" start="3930" end="3944" title="Western Sahara" label="Western Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696514" start="3948" end="3951" title="+213" label="213"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696692" start="4019" end="4022" title="+216" label="216"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696603" start="4059" end="4062" title="+218" label="218"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696724" start="4099" end="4102" title="+220" label="220"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696658" start="4108" end="4111" title="+221" label="221"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023363" start="4117" end="4120" title="+222" label="222"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696610" start="4126" end="4129" title="+223" label="223"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696577" start="4135" end="4138" title="+224" label="224"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401496" start="4144" end="4147" title="+225" label="225"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696535" start="4153" end="4156" title="+226" label="226"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696632" start="4162" end="4165" title="+227" label="227"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696687" start="4171" end="4174" title="+228" label="228"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696528" start="4180" end="4183" title="+229" label="229"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696613" start="4189" end="4192" title="+230" label="230"/>
<link wikidata="Q17028497" start="4198" end="4201" title="+231" label="231"/>
<link wikidata="Q589773" start="4207" end="4210" title="+232" label="232"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696573" start="4216" end="4219" title="+233" label="233"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696633" start="4225" end="4228" title="+234" label="234"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696543" start="4234" end="4237" title="+235" label="235"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696713" start="4243" end="4246" title="+236" label="236"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696539" start="4252" end="4255" title="+237" label="237"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696541" start="4261" end="4264" title="+238" label="238"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696678" start="4270" end="4273" title="+239" label="239"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696562" start="4279" end="4282" title="+240" label="240"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696571" start="4288" end="4291" title="+241" label="241"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696731" start="4297" end="4300" title="+242" label="242"/>
<link wikidata="Q928519" start="4306" end="4309" title="+243" label="243"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696517" start="4315" end="4318" title="+244" label="244"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696578" start="4324" end="4327" title="+245" label="245"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696710" start="4333" end="4336" title="+246" label="246"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696520" start="4342" end="4345" title="+247" label="247"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696659" start="4351" end="4354" title="+248" label="248"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696671" start="4360" end="4363" title="+249" label="249"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696653" start="4369" end="4372" title="+250" label="250"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696566" start="4378" end="4381" title="+251" label="251"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696663" start="4387" end="4390" title="+252" label="252"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696556" start="4408" end="4411" title="+253" label="253"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696591" start="4417" end="4420" title="+254" label="254"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696682" start="4426" end="4429" title="+255" label="255"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696696" start="4497" end="4500" title="+256" label="256"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696537" start="4506" end="4509" title="+257" label="257"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696622" start="4515" end="4518" title="+258" label="258"/>
<link wikidata="Q157535" start="4565" end="4599" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Zanzibar" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Zanzibar"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="4632" end="4640" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17110404" start="4650" end="4653" title="+260" label="260"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696608" start="4659" end="4662" title="+261" label="261"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="4668" end="4671" title="+262" label="262"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="4678" end="4691" title="Telephone numbers in Mayotte" label="262 (269,639)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696548" start="4713" end="4716" title="+269" label="269"/>
<link wikidata="Q970" start="4717" end="4724" title="Comoros" label="Comoros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696707" start="4734" end="4737" title="+263" label="263"/>
<link wikidata="Q2401499" start="4743" end="4746" title="+264" label="264"/>
<link wikidata="Q953068" start="4776" end="4793" title="South West Africa" label="South West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696609" start="4803" end="4806" title="+265" label="265"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696601" start="4812" end="4815" title="+266" label="266"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696532" start="4821" end="4824" title="+267" label="267"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696674" start="4830" end="4833" title="+268" label="268"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696548" start="4839" end="4842" title="+269" label="269"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063" start="4873" end="4880" title="Mayotte" label="Mayotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="4889" end="4892" title="+262" label="262"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696664" start="4902" end="4904" title="+27" label="27"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696654" start="4979" end="4982" title="+290" label="290"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696654" start="4989" end="4996" title="Telephone numbers in Tristan da Cunha" label="290 (8)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696563" start="5002" end="5005" title="+291" label="291"/>
<link wikidata="Q238" start="5149" end="5159" title="San Marino" label="San Marino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696657" start="5168" end="5171" title="+378" label="378"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934192" start="5212" end="5215" title="+297" label="297"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696721" start="5221" end="5224" title="+298" label="298"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696575" start="5230" end="5233" title="+299" label="299"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565127" start="5481" end="5483" title="+30" label="30"/>
<link wikidata="Q575902" start="5489" end="5491" title="+31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933641" start="5497" end="5499" title="+32" label="32"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="5505" end="5507" title="+33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q6359015" start="5513" end="5515" title="+34" label="34"/>
<link wikidata="Q285665" start="5521" end="5524" title="+350" label="350"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681548" start="5530" end="5533" title="+351" label="351"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681548" start="5540" end="5543" title="Telephone numbers in Portugal" label="351"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681548" start="5572" end="5575" title="Telephone numbers in Portugal" label="351"/>
<link wikidata="Q990385" start="5601" end="5614" title="Horta, Azores" label="Horta, Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681548" start="5624" end="5627" title="Telephone numbers in Portugal" label="351"/>
<link wikidata="Q193677" start="5653" end="5670" title="Angra do Heroísmo" label="Angra do Heroísmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681548" start="5680" end="5683" title="Telephone numbers in Portugal" label="351"/>
<link wikidata="Q208149" start="5709" end="5722" title="Ponta Delgada" label="Ponta Delgada"/>
<link wikidata="Q209036" start="5727" end="5744" title="São Miguel Island" label="São Miguel Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167021" start="5753" end="5756" title="+352" label="352"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696729" start="5762" end="5765" title="+353" label="353"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696582" start="5771" end="5774" title="+354" label="354"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476506" start="5780" end="5783" title="+355" label="355"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696611" start="5789" end="5792" title="+356" label="356"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696553" start="5798" end="5801" title="+357" label="357"/>
<link wikidata="Q65240154" start="5819" end="5822" title="+358" label="358"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696735" start="5829" end="5837" title="+358 18" label="358 (18)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696534" start="5843" end="5846" title="+359" label="359"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055641" start="5852" end="5854" title="+36" label="36"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390121" start="5900" end="5902" title="+90" label="90"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631632" start="5912" end="5914" title="+37" label="37"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="5944" end="5956" title="East Germany" label="East Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56039" start="5967" end="5980" title="German reunification" label="reunification"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="5986" end="5998" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q62693" start="6012" end="6014" title="+49" label="49"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="6015" end="6022" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696605" start="6031" end="6034" title="+370" label="370"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696599" start="6040" end="6043" title="+371" label="371"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696565" start="6049" end="6052" title="+372" label="372"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981915" start="6058" end="6061" title="+373" label="373"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696518" start="6067" end="6070" title="+374" label="374"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395457" start="6076" end="6079" title="+375" label="375"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696516" start="6085" end="6088" title="+376" label="376"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="6107" end="6109" title="+33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696617" start="6123" end="6126" title="+377" label="377"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="6145" end="6147" title="+33" label="33"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696657" start="6160" end="6163" title="+378" label="378"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696588" start="6194" end="6196" title="+39" label="39"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023369" start="6252" end="6255" title="+379" label="379"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696588" start="6283" end="6285" title="+39" label="39"/>
<link wikidata="Q20378937" start="6302" end="6304" title="+38" label="38"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="6334" end="6344" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390259" start="6355" end="6363" title="Breakup of Yugoslavia" label="break-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454166" start="6380" end="6383" title="+380" label="380"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394428" start="6389" end="6392" title="+381" label="381"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696619" start="6398" end="6401" title="+382" label="382"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696595" start="6407" end="6410" title="+383" label="383"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270666" start="6447" end="6450" title="+385" label="385"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696662" start="6456" end="6459" title="+386" label="386"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470828" start="6465" end="6468" title="+387" label="387"/>
<link wikidata="Q972245" start="6523" end="6557" title="European Telephony Numbering Space" label="European Telephony Numbering Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q12909617" start="6567" end="6570" title="+389" label="389"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696588" start="6576" end="6578" title="+39" label="39"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696657" start="6585" end="6594" title="Telephone numbers in San Marino" label="39 (0549)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696657" start="6625" end="6628" title="+378" label="378"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023369" start="6639" end="6650" title="Telephone numbers in Vatican City" label="39 (06 698)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023369" start="6669" end="6672" title="Telephone numbers in Vatican City" label="379"/>
<link wikidata="Q657140" start="6697" end="6699" title="+40" label="40"/>
<link wikidata="Q683706" start="6705" end="6707" title="+41" label="41"/>
<link wikidata="Q683706" start="6714" end="6721" title="Telephone numbers in Switzerland" label="41 (91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q244207" start="6724" end="6746" title="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Campione d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12724" start="6806" end="6812" title="Ticino" label="Ticino"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="6937" end="6951" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059215" start="6966" end="6973" title="Dissolution of Czechoslovakia" label="breakup"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="6986" end="6988" title="Czech Republic" label="CZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="6990" end="6992" title="Slovakia" label="SK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696716" start="7013" end="7016" title="+420" label="420"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696661" start="7022" end="7025" title="+421" label="421"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696604" start="7062" end="7065" title="+423" label="423"/>
<link wikidata="Q876044" start="7290" end="7292" title="+43" label="43"/>
<link wikidata="Q848096" start="7298" end="7300" title="+44" label="44"/>
<link wikidata="Q848096" start="7307" end="7316" title="+44 1481" label="44 (1481)"/>
<link wikidata="Q848096" start="7323" end="7332" title="+44 1534" label="44 (1534)"/>
<link wikidata="Q848096" start="7339" end="7348" title="+44 1624" label="44 (1624)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696555" start="7354" end="7356" title="+45" label="45"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696675" start="7362" end="7364" title="+46" label="46"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696639" start="7370" end="7372" title="+47" label="47"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696673" start="7379" end="7386" title="Telephone numbers in Svalbard" label="47 (79)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696649" start="7392" end="7394" title="+48" label="48"/>
<link wikidata="Q62693" start="7400" end="7402" title="+49" label="49"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696720" start="7451" end="7454" title="+500" label="500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696665" start="7461" end="7464" title="Telephone numbers in South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands" label="500"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696527" start="7470" end="7473" title="+501" label="501"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696576" start="7479" end="7482" title="+502" label="502"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696561" start="7488" end="7491" title="+503" label="503"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696581" start="7497" end="7500" title="+504" label="504"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696631" start="7506" end="7509" title="+505" label="505"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696549" start="7515" end="7518" title="+506" label="506"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696645" start="7524" end="7527" title="+507" label="507"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="7533" end="7536" title="+508" label="508"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696580" start="7542" end="7545" title="+509" label="509"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696647" start="7551" end="7553" title="+51" label="51"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696616" start="7559" end="7561" title="+52" label="52"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696551" start="7567" end="7569" title="+53" label="53"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635092" start="7575" end="7577" title="+54" label="54"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945580" start="7583" end="7585" title="+55" label="55"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441322" start="7591" end="7593" title="+56" label="56"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696547" start="7599" end="7601" title="+57" label="57"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696701" start="7607" end="7609" title="+58" label="58"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="7615" end="7618" title="+590" label="590"/>
<link wikidata="Q25362" start="7632" end="7648" title="Saint Barthélemy" label="Saint Barthélemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q126125" start="7650" end="7662" title="Collectivity of Saint Martin" label="Saint Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696530" start="7666" end="7669" title="+591" label="591"/>
<link wikidata="Q17111401" start="7675" end="7678" title="+592" label="592"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696560" start="7684" end="7687" title="+593" label="593"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="7693" end="7696" title="+594" label="594"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696646" start="7702" end="7705" title="+595" label="595"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233100" start="7711" end="7714" title="+596" label="596"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696647" start="7755" end="7757" title="+51" label="51"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696672" start="7767" end="7770" title="+597" label="597"/>
<link wikidata="Q5803562" start="7776" end="7779" title="+598" label="598"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696552" start="7785" end="7788" title="+599" label="599"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696552" start="7827" end="7832" title="+599 3" label="599 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696552" start="7839" end="7844" title="+599 4" label="599 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150265" start="7851" end="7856" title="+599 5" label="599 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q26273" start="7898" end="7910" title="Sint Maarten" label="Sint Maarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="7928" end="7932" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="NANP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150265" start="7936" end="7943" title="Area code 721" label="1 (721)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696552" start="7954" end="7959" title="+599 7" label="599 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934192" start="7966" end="7971" title="+599 8" label="599 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="8013" end="8018" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934192" start="8027" end="8030" title="+297" label="297"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696552" start="8041" end="8046" title="+599 9" label="599 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398509" start="8095" end="8097" title="+60" label="60"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696522" start="8103" end="8105" title="Telephone numbers in Australia" label="61"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696714" start="8144" end="8155" title="Telephone numbers in the Cocos (Keeling) Islands" label="61 (8 9162)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696546" start="8162" end="8173" title="Telephone numbers in Christmas Island" label="61 (8 9164)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476072" start="8179" end="8181" title="+62" label="62"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051775" start="8187" end="8189" title="+63" label="63"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696629" start="8195" end="8197" title="+64" label="64"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696728" start="8204" end="8206" title="Telephone numbers in the Pitcairn Islands" label="64"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696660" start="8212" end="8214" title="+65" label="65"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641568" start="8220" end="8222" title="+66" label="66"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696557" start="8228" end="8231" title="+670" label="670"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665403" start="8267" end="8288" title="Indonesian occupation of East Timor" label="Indonesian occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16644" start="8311" end="8335" title="Northern Mariana Islands" label="Northern Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="8349" end="8353" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="NANP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150256" start="8357" end="8364" title="area code 670" label="1 (670)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="8419" end="8423" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="8437" end="8441" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="NANP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150255" start="8445" end="8452" title="Area code 671" label="1 (671)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696640" start="8462" end="8465" title="Telephone numbers in Oceania" label="672"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="8468" end="8499" title="Australian External Territories" label="Australian External Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8519" end="8528" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142965" start="8558" end="8574" title="Portuguese Timor" label="Portuguese Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696557" start="8580" end="8583" title="+670" label="670"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696709" start="8594" end="8601" title="Telephone numbers in the Australian Antarctic Territory" label="672 (1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q178994" start="8604" end="8634" title="Australian Antarctic Territory" label="Australian Antarctic Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696636" start="8638" end="8645" title="Telephone numbers in Norfolk Island" label="672 (3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696533" start="8651" end="8654" title="+673" label="673"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696625" start="8660" end="8663" title="+674" label="674"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398521" start="8669" end="8672" title="+675" label="675"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696689" start="8678" end="8681" title="+676" label="676"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696732" start="8687" end="8690" title="+677" label="677"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696699" start="8696" end="8699" title="+678" label="678"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696568" start="8705" end="8708" title="+679" label="679"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696644" start="8714" end="8717" title="+680" label="680"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696703" start="8723" end="8726" title="+681" label="681"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696715" start="8732" end="8735" title="+682" label="682"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042775" start="8741" end="8744" title="+683" label="683"/>
<link wikidata="Q16641" start="8795" end="8809" title="American Samoa" label="American Samoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13562566" start="8823" end="8827" title="North American Numbering Plan" label="NANP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150258" start="8831" end="8838" title="area code 684" label="1 (684)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696655" start="8848" end="8851" title="+685" label="685"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696593" start="8857" end="8860" title="+686" label="686"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696628" start="8866" end="8869" title="+687" label="687"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696695" start="8875" end="8878" title="+688" label="688"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696570" start="8884" end="8887" title="+689" label="689"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696688" start="8893" end="8896" title="+690" label="690"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696722" start="8902" end="8905" title="+691" label="691"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696726" start="8911" end="8914" title="+692" label="692"/>
<link wikidata="Q28736923" start="9183" end="9200" title="Telephone numbers in the Soviet Union" label="Formerly assigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9208" end="9220" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="9231" end="9242" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="9254" end="9266" title="Telephone numbers in Russia" label="7 (1–5, 8–9)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="9273" end="9285" title="Telephone numbers in Abkhazia" label="7 (840, 940)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="9304" end="9312" title="+995 44" label="995 (44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="9323" end="9335" title="Telephone numbers in South Ossetia" label="7 (850, 929)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="9354" end="9362" title="+995 34" label="995 (34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454157" start="9372" end="9382" title="Telephone numbers in Kazakhstan" label="7 (0, 6–7)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454157" start="9401" end="9404" title="+997" label="997"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="9456" end="9465" title="East Asia" label="East Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="9467" end="9477" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q348308" start="9511" end="9514" title="+800" label="800"/>
<link wikidata="Q348308" start="9517" end="9558" title="Universal International Freephone Service" label="Universal International Freephone Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q119804446" start="9790" end="9793" title="+808" label="808"/>
<link wikidata="Q119804446" start="9796" end="9838" title="Universal International Shared Cost Number" label="Universal International Shared Cost Number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642682" start="9879" end="9881" title="+81" label="81"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696666" start="9887" end="9889" title="+82" label="82"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696702" start="9964" end="9966" title="+84" label="84"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367318" start="9972" end="9975" title="+850" label="850"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454156" start="10012" end="10015" title="+852" label="852"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696606" start="10021" end="10024" title="+853" label="853"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696538" start="10061" end="10064" title="+855" label="855"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696598" start="10070" end="10073" title="+856" label="856"/>
<link wikidata="Q22070239" start="10264" end="10266" title="+86" label="86"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="10278" end="10281" title="+870" label="870"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570499" start="10284" end="10314" title="Global Mobile Satellite System" label="Global Mobile Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="10316" end="10324" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="10380" end="10388" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="10479" end="10487" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="10572" end="10580" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q827927" start="10664" end="10672" title="Inmarsat" label="Inmarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072503" start="10991" end="11036" title="Universal Personal Telecommunications" label="Universal Personal Telecommunications Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250222" start="11147" end="11150" title="Telephone numbers in Bangladesh" label="880"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570499" start="11162" end="11165" title="+881" label="881"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570499" start="11168" end="11198" title="Global Mobile Satellite System" label="Global Mobile Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041507" start="11213" end="11216" title="+882" label="882"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041507" start="11219" end="11241" title="International Networks (country code)" label="International Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041507" start="11256" end="11259" title="+883" label="883"/>
<link wikidata="Q4041507" start="11262" end="11284" title="International Networks (country code)" label="International Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696679" start="11355" end="11358" title="+886" label="886"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065854" start="11440" end="11444" title="Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs" label="OCHA"/>
<link wikidata="Q27293" start="11616" end="11620" title="West Asia" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="11622" end="11629" title="Central Asia" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="11635" end="11645" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="11659" end="11673" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390121" start="11680" end="11682" title="+90" label="90"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696638" start="11689" end="11697" title="+90 392" label="90 (392)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696584" start="11703" end="11705" title="+91" label="91"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817363" start="11723" end="11728" title="Jammu division" label="Jammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3712126" start="11743" end="11750" title="Kashmir division" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696642" start="11753" end="11755" title="+92" label="92"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250587" start="11791" end="11793" title="+93" label="93"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353021" start="11799" end="11801" title="+94" label="94"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696536" start="11807" end="11809" title="+95" label="95"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696725" start="11815" end="11818" title="+960" label="960"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696600" start="11824" end="11827" title="+961" label="961"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988270" start="11833" end="11836" title="+962" label="962"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696677" start="11842" end="11845" title="+963" label="963"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117401" start="11851" end="11854" title="+964" label="964"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696596" start="11860" end="11863" title="+965" label="965"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351882" start="11869" end="11872" title="+966" label="966"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696705" start="11878" end="11881" title="+967" label="967"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696641" start="11887" end="11890" title="+968" label="968"/>
<link wikidata="Q199841" start="11941" end="11952" title="South Yemen" label="South Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139876" start="11963" end="11974" title="Yemeni unification" label="unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q267584" start="11980" end="11991" title="Yemen Arab Republic" label="North Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696705" start="12005" end="12008" title="+967" label="967"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="12009" end="12014" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696727" start="12024" end="12027" title="+970" label="970"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892139" start="12058" end="12061" title="+972" label="972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696733" start="12071" end="12074" title="+971" label="971"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892139" start="12080" end="12083" title="+972" label="972"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696727" start="12121" end="12124" title="+970" label="970"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006658" start="12134" end="12137" title="+973" label="973"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696651" start="12143" end="12146" title="+974" label="974"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696529" start="12152" end="12155" title="+975" label="975"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696618" start="12161" end="12164" title="+976" label="976"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696627" start="12170" end="12173" title="+977" label="977"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="12224" end="12229" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696733" start="12243" end="12246" title="+971" label="971"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="12247" end="12267" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052541" start="12277" end="12280" title="+979" label="979"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052541" start="12289" end="12333" title="International Premium Rate Service" label="Universal International Premium Rate Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519" start="12365" end="12374" title="Abu Dhabi" label="Abu Dhabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696733" start="12388" end="12391" title="+971" label="971"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="12392" end="12412" title="United Arab Emirates" label="United Arab Emirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696586" start="12422" end="12424" title="+98" label="98"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974883" start="12461" end="12464" title="+991" label="991"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974883" start="12503" end="12565" title="International Telecommunications Public Correspondence Service" label="International Telecommunications Public Correspondence Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696680" start="12575" end="12578" title="+992" label="992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696693" start="12584" end="12587" title="+993" label="993"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246659" start="12593" end="12596" title="+994" label="994"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066643" start="12602" end="12605" title="+995" label="995"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="12612" end="12620" title="Telephone numbers in South Ossetia" label="995 (34)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="12643" end="12655" title="+7 850" label="7 (850, 929)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="12666" end="12674" title="Telephone numbers in Abkhazia" label="995 (44)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="12697" end="12709" title="+7 840" label="7 (840, 940)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071960" start="12719" end="12722" title="+996" label="996"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454157" start="12728" end="12731" title="+997" label="997"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454158" start="12787" end="12799" title="+7" label="7 (6xx, 7xx)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696698" start="12809" end="12812" title="+998" label="998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120401" start="12949" end="12959" title="telecommunications in Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250168" start="13132" end="13176" title="List of mobile telephone prefixes by country" label="List of mobile telephone prefixes by country"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664309" start="13179" end="13229" title="National conventions for writing telephone numbers" label="National conventions for writing telephone numbers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5771" wikidata="Q28975" url="?curid=5771" title="Christopher Marlowe">
<text>Christopher Marlowe ( ; baptised 26 February 156430 May 1593), also known as Kit Marlowe, was an English playwright, poet, and translator of the Elizabethan era. Marlowe is among the most famous of the Elizabethan playwrights. Based upon the &quot;many imitations&quot; of his play &quot;Tamburlaine&quot;, modern scholars consider him to have been the foremost dramatist in London in the years just before his mysterious early death. Some scholars also believe that he greatly influenced William Shakespeare, who was baptised in the same year as Marlowe and later succeeded him as the preeminent Elizabethan playwright. Marlowe was the first to achieve critical reputation for his use of blank verse, which became the standard for the era. His plays are distinguished by their overreaching protagonists. Themes found within Marlowe&#x27;s literary works have been noted as humanistic with realistic emotions, which some scholars find difficult to reconcile with Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;anti-intellectualism&quot; and his catering to the prurient tastes of his Elizabethan audiences for generous displays of extreme physical violence, cruelty, and bloodshed.

Events in Marlowe&#x27;s life were sometimes as extreme as those found in his plays. Differing sensational reports of Marlowe&#x27;s death in 1593 abounded after the event and are contested by scholars today owing to a lack of good documentation. There have been many conjectures as to the nature and reason for his death, including a vicious bar-room fight, blasphemous libel against the church, homosexual intrigue, betrayal by another playwright, and espionage from the highest level: the Privy Council of Elizabeth I. An official coroner&#x27;s account of Marlowe&#x27;s death was discovered only in 1925, and it did little to persuade all scholars that it told the whole story, nor did it eliminate the uncertainties present in his biography.

==Early life==

Christopher Marlowe, the second of nine children, and oldest child after the death of his sister Mary in 1568, was born to Canterbury shoemaker John Marlowe and his wife Katherine, daughter of William Arthur of Dover. He was baptised at St George&#x27;s Church, Canterbury, on 26 February 1564 (1563 in the old style dates in use at the time, which placed the new year on 25 March). Marlowe&#x27;s birth was likely to have been a few days before, making him about two months older than William Shakespeare, who was baptised on 26 April 1564 in Stratford-upon-Avon.

By age 14, Marlowe was a pupil at The King&#x27;s School, Canterbury on a scholarship and two years later a student at Corpus Christi College, Cambridge, where he also studied through a scholarship with expectation that he would become an Anglican clergyman. Instead, he received his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1584. Marlowe mastered Latin during his schooling, reading and translating the works of Ovid. In 1587, the university hesitated to award his Master of Arts degree because of a rumour that he intended to go to the English seminary at Rheims in northern France, presumably to prepare for ordination as a Roman Catholic priest. If true, such an action on his part would have been a direct violation of royal edict issued by Queen Elizabeth I in 1585 criminalising any attempt by an English citizen to be ordained in the Roman Catholic Church.

Large-scale violence between Protestants and Catholics on the European continent has been cited by scholars as the impetus for the Protestant English Queen&#x27;s defensive anti-Catholic laws issued from 1581 until her death in 1603. Despite the dire implications for Marlowe, his degree was awarded on schedule when the Privy Council intervened on his behalf, commending him for his &quot;faithful dealing&quot; and &quot;good service&quot; to the Queen. The nature of Marlowe&#x27;s service was not specified by the council, but its letter to the Cambridge authorities has provoked much speculation by modern scholars, notably the theory that Marlowe was operating as a secret agent for Privy Council member Sir Francis Walsingham. The only surviving evidence of the Privy Council&#x27;s correspondence is found in their minutes, the letter being lost. There is no mention of espionage in the minutes, but its summation of the lost Privy Council letter is vague in meaning, stating that &quot;it was not Her Majesties pleasure&quot; that persons employed as Marlowe had been &quot;in matters touching the benefit of his country should be defamed by those who are ignorant in th&#x27;affaires he went about.&quot; Scholars agree the vague wording was typically used to protect government agents, but they continue to debate what the &quot;matters touching the benefit of his country&quot; actually were in Marlowe&#x27;s case and how they affected the 23-year-old writer as he began his literary career in 1587.

==Adult life and legend==
Little is known about Marlowe&#x27;s adult life. All available evidence, other than what can be deduced from his literary works, is found in legal records and other official documents. Writers of fiction and non-fiction have speculated about his professional activities, private life, and character. Marlowe has been described as a spy, a brawler, and a heretic, as well as a &quot;magician&quot;, &quot;duellist&quot;, &quot;tobacco-user&quot;, &quot;counterfeiter&quot; and &quot;rakehell&quot;. While J. A. Downie and Constance Kuriyama have argued against the more lurid speculations, J. B. Steane remarked, &quot;it seems absurd to dismiss all of these Elizabethan rumours and accusations as &#x27;the Marlowe myth. Much has been written on his brief adult life, including speculation of: his involvement in royally sanctioned espionage; his vocal declaration of atheism; his (possibly same-sex) sexual interests; and the puzzling circumstances surrounding his death.

===Spying===

Marlowe is alleged to have been a government spy. Park Honan and Charles Nicholl speculate that this was the case and suggest that Marlowe&#x27;s recruitment took place when he was at Cambridge. In 1587, when the Privy Council ordered the University of Cambridge to award Marlowe his degree as Master of Arts, it denied rumours that he intended to go to the English Catholic college in Rheims, saying instead that he had been engaged in unspecified &quot;affaires&quot; on &quot;matters touching the benefit of his country&quot;. Surviving college records from the period also indicate that, in the academic year 1584–1585, Marlowe had had a series of unusually lengthy absences from the university which violated university regulations. Surviving college buttery accounts, which record student purchases for personal provisions, show that Marlowe began spending lavishly on food and drink during the periods he was in attendance; the amount was more than he could have afforded on his known scholarship income.
It has been speculated that Marlowe was the &quot;Morley&quot; who was tutor to Arbella Stuart in 1589. This possibility was first raised in a &quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot; letter by E. St John Brooks in 1937; in a letter to &quot;Notes and Queries&quot;, John Baker has added that only Marlowe could have been Arbella&#x27;s tutor owing to the absence of any other known &quot;Morley&quot; from the period with an MA and not otherwise occupied. If Marlowe was Arbella&#x27;s tutor, it might indicate that he was there as a spy, since Arbella, niece of Mary, Queen of Scots, and cousin of James VI of Scotland, later James I of England, was at the time a strong candidate for the succession to Elizabeth&#x27;s throne. Frederick S. Boas dismisses the possibility of this identification, based on surviving legal records which document Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;residence in London between September and December 1589&quot;. Marlowe had been party to a fatal quarrel involving his neighbours and the poet Thomas Watson in Norton Folgate and was held in Newgate Prison for a fortnight. In fact, the quarrel and his arrest occurred on 18 September, he was released on bail on 1 October and he had to attend court, where he was acquitted on 3 December, but there is no record of where he was for the intervening two months.

In 1592 Marlowe was arrested in the English garrison town of Flushing (Vlissingen) in the Netherlands, for alleged involvement in the counterfeiting of coins, presumably related to the activities of seditious Catholics. He was sent to the Lord Treasurer (Burghley), but no charge or imprisonment resulted. This arrest may have disrupted another of Marlowe&#x27;s spying missions, perhaps by giving the resulting coinage to the Catholic cause. He was to infiltrate the followers of the active Catholic plotter William Stanley and report back to Burghley.

===Philosophy===

Marlowe was reputed to be an atheist, which held the dangerous implication of being an enemy of God and, by association, the state. With the rise of public fears concerning The School of Night, or &quot;School of Atheism&quot; in the late 16th century, accusations of atheism were closely associated with disloyalty to the Protestant monarchy of England.

Some modern historians consider that Marlowe&#x27;s professed atheism, as with his supposed Catholicism, may have been no more than a sham to further his work as a government spy. Contemporary evidence comes from Marlowe&#x27;s accuser in Flushing, an informer called Richard Baines. The governor of Flushing had reported that each of the men had &quot;of malice&quot; accused the other of instigating the counterfeiting and of intending to go over to the Catholic &quot;enemy&quot;; such an action was considered atheistic by the Church of England. Following Marlowe&#x27;s arrest in 1593, Baines submitted to the authorities a &quot;note containing the opinion of one Christopher Marly concerning his damnable judgment of religion, and scorn of God&#x27;s word&quot;. Baines attributes to Marlowe a total of eighteen items which &quot;scoff at the pretensions of the Old and New Testament&quot; such as, &quot;Christ was a bastard and his mother dishonest [unchaste]&quot;, &quot;the woman of Samaria and her sister were whores and that Christ knew them dishonestly&quot;, &quot;St John the Evangelist was bedfellow to Christ and leaned always in his bosom&quot; (cf. John 13:23–25) and &quot;that he used him as the sinners of Sodom&quot;. He also implied that Marlowe had Catholic sympathies. Other passages are merely sceptical in tone: &quot;he persuades men to atheism, willing them not to be afraid of bugbears and hobgoblins&quot;. The final paragraph of Baines&#x27;s document reads:


Similar examples of Marlowe&#x27;s statements were given by Thomas Kyd after his imprisonment and possible torture (see above); Kyd and Baines connect Marlowe with mathematician Thomas Harriot&#x27;s and Sir Walter Raleigh&#x27;s circle. Another document claimed about that time that &quot;one Marlowe is able to show more sound reasons for Atheism than any divine in England is able to give to prove divinity, and that ... he hath read the Atheist lecture to Sir Walter Raleigh and others&quot;.

Some critics believe that Marlowe sought to disseminate these views in his work and that he identified with his rebellious and iconoclastic protagonists. Plays had to be approved by the Master of the Revels before they could be performed and the censorship of publications was under the control of the Archbishop of Canterbury. Presumably these authorities did not consider any of Marlowe&#x27;s works to be unacceptable other than the &quot;Amores&quot;.

===Sexuality===

It has been claimed that Marlowe was homosexual. Some scholars argue that the identification of an Elizabethan as gay or homosexual in the modern sense is &quot;anachronistic,&quot; saying that for the Elizabethans the terms were more likely to have been applied to homoerotic affections or sexual acts rather than to what we currently understand as a settled sexual orientation or personal role identity. Other scholars argue that the evidence is inconclusive and that the reports of Marlowe&#x27;s homosexuality may be rumours produced after his death. Richard Baines reported Marlowe as saying: &quot;all they that love not Tobacco &amp; Boies were fools&quot;. David Bevington and Eric C. Rasmussen describe Baines&#x27;s evidence as &quot;unreliable testimony&quot; and &quot;[t]hese and other testimonials need to be discounted for their exaggeration and for their having been produced under legal circumstances we would now regard as a witch-hunt&quot;.

Literary scholar J. B. Steane considered there to be &quot;no evidence for Marlowe&#x27;s homosexuality at all&quot;. Other scholars point to the frequency with which Marlowe explores homosexual themes in his writing: in &quot;Hero and Leander&quot;, Marlowe writes of the male youth Leander: &quot;in his looks were all that men desire...&quot; &quot;Edward the Second&quot; contains the following passage enumerating homosexual relationships:
Marlowe wrote the only play about the life of Edward II up to his time, taking the humanist literary discussion of male sexuality much further than his contemporaries. The play was extremely bold, dealing with a star-crossed love story between Edward II and Piers Gaveston. Though it was a common practice at the time to reveal characters as homosexual to give audiences reason to suspect them as culprits in a crime, Christopher Marlowe&#x27;s Edward II is portrayed as a sympathetic character. The decision to start the play &quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot; with a homoerotic scene between Jupiter and Ganymede that bears no connection to the subsequent plot has long puzzled scholars.

===Arrest and death===

In early May 1593, several bills were posted about London threatening the Protestant refugees from France and the Netherlands who had settled in the city. One of these, the &quot;Dutch church libel&quot;, written in rhymed iambic pentameter, contained allusions to several of Marlowe&#x27;s plays and was signed, &quot;Tamburlaine&quot;. On 11 May 1593 the Privy Council ordered the arrest of those responsible for the libels. The next day, Marlowe&#x27;s colleague Thomas Kyd was arrested and when his lodgings were searched, a three-page fragment of a heretical tract was found. On being charged with atheism and tortured, Kyd declared the document to be Marlowe&#x27;s, and to have been shuffled together with his own papers when they were writing together in the same chamber two years previously. In a second letter, Kyd said they had both been working for an aristocratic patron (probably Ferdinando Stanley), and he described Marlowe as blasphemous, disorderly, holding treasonous opinions, being an irreligious reprobate and &quot;intemperate &amp; of a cruel hart&quot;. 
A warrant for Marlowe&#x27;s arrest was issued on 18 May 1593, when the Privy Council apparently knew that he might be found staying with Thomas Walsingham, whose father was a first cousin of the late Sir Francis Walsingham, Elizabeth&#x27;s principal secretary in the 1580s and a man more deeply involved in state espionage than any other member of the Privy Council. Marlowe duly presented himself on 20 May 1593 but there apparently being no Privy Council meeting on that day, was instructed to &quot;give his daily attendance on their Lordships, until he shall be licensed to the contrary&quot;. On Wednesday, 30 May 1593, Marlowe was killed.
Various accounts of Marlowe&#x27;s death were current over the next few years. In his &quot;Palladis Tamia&quot;, published in 1598, Francis Meres says Marlowe was &quot;stabbed to death by a bawdy serving-man, a rival of his in his lewd love&quot; as punishment for his &quot;epicurism and atheism&quot;. In 1917, in the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, Sir Sidney Lee wrote, on slender evidence, that Marlowe was killed in a drunken fight. His claim was not much at variance with the official account, which came to light only in 1925, when the scholar Leslie Hotson discovered the coroner&#x27;s report of the inquest on Marlowe&#x27;s death, held two days later on Friday 1 June 1593, by the Coroner of the Queen&#x27;s Household, William Danby. Marlowe had spent all day in a house in Deptford, owned by the widow Eleanor Bull, with three men: Ingram Frizer, Nicholas Skeres and Robert Poley. All three had been employed by one or other of the Walsinghams. Skeres and Poley had helped snare the conspirators in the Babington plot, and Frizer was a servant to Thomas Walsingham, probably acting as a financial or business agent, as he was for Walsingham&#x27;s wife Audrey a few years later. These witnesses testified that Frizer and Marlowe had argued over payment of the bill (now famously known as the &quot;Reckoning&quot;), exchanging &quot;divers malicious words&quot;, while Frizer was sitting at a table between the other two and Marlowe was lying behind him on a couch. Marlowe snatched Frizer&#x27;s dagger and wounded him on the head. According to the coroner&#x27;s report, in the ensuing struggle Marlowe was stabbed above the right eye, killing him instantly. The jury concluded that Frizer acted in self-defence and within a month he was pardoned. Marlowe was buried in an unmarked grave in the churchyard of St. Nicholas, Deptford, immediately after the inquest, on 1 June 1593.

The complete text of the inquest report was published by Leslie Hotson in his book, &quot;The Death of Christopher Marlowe&quot;, in the introduction to which Professor George Lyman Kittredge wrote: &quot;The mystery of Marlowe&#x27;s death, heretofore involved in a cloud of contradictory gossip and irresponsible guess-work, is now cleared up for good and all on the authority of public records of complete authenticity and gratifying fullness&quot;. However, this confidence proved to be fairly short-lived. Hotson had considered the possibility that the witnesses had &quot;concocted a lying account of Marlowe&#x27;s behaviour, to which they swore at the inquest, and with which they deceived the jury&quot;, but decided against that scenario. Others began to suspect that this theory was indeed the case. Writing to the &quot;Times Literary Supplement&quot; shortly after the book&#x27;s publication, Eugénie de Kalb disputed that the struggle and outcome as described were even possible, and Samuel A. Tannenbaum insisted the following year that such a wound could not have possibly resulted in instant death, as had been claimed. Even Marlowe&#x27;s biographer John Bakeless acknowledged that &quot;some scholars have been inclined to question the truthfulness of the coroner&#x27;s report. There is something queer about the whole episode&quot;, and said that Hotson&#x27;s discovery &quot;raises almost as many questions as it answers&quot;. It has also been discovered more recently that the apparent absence of a local county coroner to accompany the Coroner of the Queen&#x27;s Household would, if noticed, have made the inquest null and void.

One of the main reasons for doubting the truth of the inquest concerns the reliability of Marlowe&#x27;s companions as witnesses. As an &quot;agent provocateur&quot; for the late Sir Francis Walsingham, Robert Poley was a consummate liar, the &quot;very genius of the Elizabethan underworld&quot;, and was on record as saying &quot;I will swear and forswear myself, rather than I will accuse myself to do me any harm&quot;. The other witness, Nicholas Skeres, had for many years acted as a confidence trickster, drawing young men into the clutches of people involved in the money-lending racket, including Marlowe&#x27;s apparent killer, Ingram Frizer, with whom he was engaged in such a swindle. Despite their being referred to as &quot;generosi&quot; (gentlemen) in the inquest report, the witnesses were professional liars. Some biographers, such as Kuriyama and Downie, take the inquest to be a true account of what occurred, but in trying to explain what really happened if the account was not true, others have come up with a variety of murder theories:
* Jealous of her husband Thomas&#x27;s relationship with Marlowe, Audrey Walsingham arranged for the playwright to be murdered.
* Sir Walter Raleigh arranged the murder, fearing that under torture Marlowe might incriminate him.
* With Skeres the main player, the murder resulted from attempts by the Earl of Essex to use Marlowe to incriminate Sir Walter Raleigh.
* He was killed on the orders of father and son Lord Burghley and Sir Robert Cecil, who thought that his plays contained Catholic propaganda.
* He was accidentally killed while Frizer and Skeres were pressuring him to pay back money he owed them.
* Marlowe was murdered at the behest of several members of the Privy Council, who feared that he might reveal them to be atheists.
* The Queen ordered his assassination because of his subversive atheistic behaviour.
* Frizer murdered him because he envied Marlowe&#x27;s close relationship with his master Thomas Walsingham and feared the effect that Marlowe&#x27;s behaviour might have on Walsingham&#x27;s reputation.
* Marlowe&#x27;s death was faked to save him from trial and execution for subversive atheism.

Since there are only written documents on which to base any conclusions, and since it is probable that the most crucial information about his death was never committed to paper, it is unlikely that the full circumstances of Marlowe&#x27;s death will ever be known.

==Reputation among contemporary writers==
For his contemporaries in the literary world, Marlowe was above all an admired and influential artist. Within weeks of his death, George Peele remembered him as &quot;Marley, the Muses&#x27; darling&quot;; Michael Drayton noted that he &quot;Had in him those brave translunary things / That the first poets had&quot; and Ben Jonson even wrote of &quot;Marlowe&#x27;s mighty line&quot;. Thomas Nashe wrote warmly of his friend, &quot;poor deceased Kit Marlowe,&quot; as did the publisher Edward Blount in his dedication of &quot;Hero and Leander&quot; to Sir Thomas Walsingham. Among the few contemporary dramatists to say anything negative about Marlowe was the anonymous author of the Cambridge University play &quot;The Return from Parnassus&quot; (1598) who wrote, &quot;Pity it is that wit so ill should dwell, / Wit lent from heaven, but vices sent from hell&quot;.

The most famous tribute to Marlowe was paid by Shakespeare in &quot;As You Like It&quot;, where he not only quotes a line from &quot;Hero and Leander&quot; (&quot;Dead Shepherd, now I find thy saw of might, &#x27;Who ever lov&#x27;d that lov&#x27;d not at first sight?) but also gives to the clown Touchstone the words &quot;When a man&#x27;s verses cannot be understood, nor a man&#x27;s good wit seconded with the forward child, understanding, it strikes a man more dead than a great reckoning in a little room.&quot; This appears to be a reference to Marlowe&#x27;s murder which involved a fight over the &quot;reckoning,&quot; the bill, as well as to a line in Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;Jew of Malta&quot;, &quot;Infinite riches in a little room.&quot;
Shakespeare was much influenced by Marlowe in his work, as can be seen in the use of Marlovian themes in &quot;Antony and Cleopatra&quot;, &quot;The Merchant of Venice&quot;, &quot;Richard II&quot; and &quot;Macbeth&quot; (&quot;Dido&quot;, &quot;Jew of Malta&quot;, &quot;Edward II&quot; and &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;, respectively). In &quot;Hamlet&quot;, after meeting with the travelling actors, Hamlet requests the Player perform a speech about the Trojan War, which at 2.2.429–432 has an echo of Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot;. In &quot;Love&#x27;s Labour&#x27;s Lost&quot; Shakespeare brings on a character &quot;Marcade&quot; (three syllables) in conscious acknowledgement of Marlowe&#x27;s character &quot;Mercury&quot;, also attending the King of Navarre, in &quot;Massacre at Paris&quot;. The significance, to those of Shakespeare&#x27;s audience who were familiar with &quot;Hero and Leander&quot;, was Marlowe&#x27;s identification of himself with the god Mercury.

==Shakespeare authorship theory==

An argument has arisen about the notion that Marlowe faked his death and then continued to write under the assumed name of William Shakespeare. Academic consensus rejects alternative candidates for authorship of Shakespeare&#x27;s plays and sonnets, including Marlowe.

==Literary career==


===Plays===
Six dramas have been attributed to the authorship of Christopher Marlowe either alone or in collaboration with other writers, with varying degrees of evidence. The writing sequence or chronology of these plays is mostly unknown and is offered here with any dates and evidence known. Among the little available information we have, &quot;Dido&quot; is believed to be the first Marlowe play performed, while it was &quot;Tamburlaine&quot; that was first to be performed on a regular commercial stage in London in 1587. Believed by many scholars to be Marlowe&#x27;s greatest success, &quot;Tamburlaine&quot; was the first English play written in blank verse and, with Thomas Kyd&#x27;s &quot;The Spanish Tragedy&quot;, is generally considered the beginning of the mature phase of the Elizabethan theatre.

The play &quot;Lust&#x27;s Dominion&quot; was attributed to Marlowe upon its initial publication in 1657, though scholars and critics have almost unanimously rejected the attribution. He may also have written or co-written &quot;Arden of Faversham&quot;.

===Poetry and translations===
Publication and responses to the poetry and translations credited to Marlowe primarily occurred posthumously, including:
* &quot;Amores&quot;, first book of Latin elegiac couplets by Ovid with translation by Marlowe (&quot;c&quot;. 1580s); copies publicly burned as offensive in 1599.
* &quot;The Passionate Shepherd to His Love&quot;, by Marlowe. (&quot;c.&quot; 1587–1588); a popular lyric of the time.
* &quot;Hero and Leander&quot;, by Marlowe (&quot;c.&quot; 1593, unfinished; completed by George Chapman, 1598; printed 1598).
* &quot;Pharsalia&quot;, Book One, by Lucan with translation by Marlowe. (&quot;c.&quot; 1593; printed 1600)

===Collaborations===
Modern scholars still look for evidence of collaborations between Marlowe and other writers. In 2016, one publisher was the first to endorse the scholarly claim of a collaboration between Marlowe and the playwright William Shakespeare:
* &quot;Henry VI&quot; by William Shakespeare is now credited as a collaboration with Marlowe in the New Oxford Shakespeare series, published in 2016. Marlowe appears as co-author of the three &quot;Henry VI&quot; plays, though some scholars doubt any actual collaboration.

===Contemporary reception===

Marlowe&#x27;s plays were enormously successful, possibly because of the imposing stage presence of his lead actor, Edward Alleyn. Alleyn was unusually tall for the time and the haughty roles of Tamburlaine, Faustus and Barabas were probably written for him. Marlowe&#x27;s plays were the foundation of the repertoire of Alleyn&#x27;s company, the Admiral&#x27;s Men, throughout the 1590s. One of Marlowe&#x27;s poetry translations did not fare as well. In 1599, Marlowe&#x27;s translation of Ovid was banned and copies were publicly burned as part of Archbishop Whitgift&#x27;s crackdown on offensive material.

==Chronology of dramatic works==

(Patrick Cheney&#x27;s 2004 &quot;Cambridge Companion to Christopher Marlowe&quot; presents an alternative timeline based upon printing dates.)

===&quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot; (–1587)===
First official record 1594

First published 1594; posthumously

First recorded performance between 1587 and 1593 by the Children of the Chapel, a company of boy actors in London.

Significance This play is believed by many scholars to be the first play by Christopher Marlowe to be performed.

Attribution The title page attributes the play to Marlowe and Thomas Nashe, yet some scholars question how much of a contribution Nashe made to the play.

Evidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play.

=== &quot;Tamburlaine, Part I&quot; (); &quot;Part II&quot; (–1588) ===

First official record 1587, Part I

First published 1590, Parts I and II in one octavo, London. No author named.

First recorded performance 1587, Part I, by the Admiral&#x27;s Men, London.

Significance &quot;Tamburlaine&quot; is the first example of blank verse used in the dramatic literature of the Early Modern English theatre.

Attribution Author name is missing from first printing in 1590. Attribution of this work by scholars to Marlowe is based upon comparison to his other verified works. Passages and character development in &quot;Tamburlane&quot; are similar to many other Marlowe works.

Evidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play. Parts I and II were entered into the Stationers&#x27; Register on 14 August 1590. The two parts were published together by the London printer, Richard Jones, in 1590; a second edition in 1592, and a third in 1597. The 1597 edition of the two parts were published separately in quarto by Edward White; part I in 1605, and part II in 1606.

=== &quot;The Jew of Malta&quot; (–1590) ===

First official record 1592

First published 1592; earliest extant edition, 1633

First recorded performance 26 February 1592, by Lord Strange&#x27;s acting company.

Significance The performances of the play were a success and it remained popular for the next fifty years. This play helps to establish the strong theme of &quot;anti-authoritarianism&quot; that is found throughout Marlowe&#x27;s works.

Evidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play. The play was entered in the Stationers&#x27; Register on 17 May 1594 but the earliest surviving printed edition is from 1633.

===&quot;Doctor Faustus&quot; (–1592)===

First official record 1594–1597

First published 1601, no extant copy; first extant copy, 1604 (A text) quarto; 1616 (B text) quarto.

First recorded performance 1594–1597; 24 revival performances occurred between these years by the Lord Admiral&#x27;s Company, Rose Theatre, London; earlier performances probably occurred around 1589 by the same company.

Significance This is the first dramatised version of the Faust legend of a scholar&#x27;s dealing with the devil. Marlowe deviates from earlier versions of &quot;The Devil&#x27;s Pact&quot; significantly: Marlowe&#x27;s protagonist is unable to &quot;burn his books&quot; or repent to a merciful God to have his contract annulled at the end of the play; he is carried off by demons; and, in the 1616 quarto, his mangled corpse is found by the scholar characters.

Attribution The &#x27;B text&#x27; was highly edited and censored, owing in part to the shifting theatre laws regarding religious words onstage during the seventeenth-century. Because it contains several additional scenes believed to be the additions of other playwrights, particularly Samuel Rowley and William Bird (&quot;alias&quot; Borne), a recent edition attributes the authorship of both versions to &quot;Christopher Marlowe and his collaborator and revisers.&quot; This recent edition has tried to establish that the &#x27;A text&#x27; was assembled from Marlowe&#x27;s work and another writer, with the &#x27;B text&#x27; as a later revision.

Evidence No manuscripts by Marlowe exist for this play. The two earliest-printed extant versions of the play, A and B, form a textual problem for scholars. Both were published after Marlowe&#x27;s death and scholars disagree which text is more representative of Marlowe&#x27;s original. Some editions are based on a combination of the two texts. Late-twentieth-century scholarly consensus identifies &#x27;A text&#x27; as more representative because it contains irregular character names and idiosyncratic spelling, which are believed to reflect the author&#x27;s handwritten manuscript or &quot;foul papers&quot;. In comparison, &#x27;B text&#x27; is highly edited with several additional scenes possibly written by other playwrights.

===&quot;Edward the Second&quot; ()===

First official record 1593

First published 1590; earliest extant edition 1594 octavo

First recorded performance 1592, performed by the Earl of Pembroke&#x27;s Men.

Significance Considered by recent scholars as Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;most modern play&quot; because of its probing treatment of the private life of a king and unflattering depiction of the power politics of the time. The 1594 editions of &quot;Edward II&quot; and of &quot;Dido&quot; are the first published plays with Marlowe&#x27;s name appearing as the author.

Attribution Earliest extant edition of 1594.

Evidence The play was entered into the Stationers&#x27; Register on 6 July 1593, five weeks after Marlowe&#x27;s death.

===&quot;The Massacre at Paris&quot; (–1593)===

First official record , alleged foul sheet by Marlowe of &quot;Scene 19&quot;; although authorship by Marlowe is contested by recent scholars, the manuscript is believed written while the play was first performed and with an unknown purpose.

First published undated, or later, octavo, London; while this is the most complete surviving text, it is near half the length of Marlowe&#x27;s other works and possibly a reconstruction. The printer and publisher credit, &quot;E.A. for Edward White,&quot; also appears on the 1605/06 printing of Marlowe&#x27;s &quot;Tamburlaine&quot;.

First recorded performance 26 January 1593, by Lord Strange&#x27;s Men, at Henslowe&#x27;s Rose Theatre, London, under the title &quot;The Tragedy of the Guise&quot;; 1594, in the repertory of the Admiral&#x27;s Men.

Significance &quot;The Massacre at Paris&quot; is considered Marlowe&#x27;s most dangerous play, as agitators in London seized on its theme to advocate the murders of refugees from the low countries of the Spanish Netherlands, and it warns Elizabeth I of this possibility in its last scene. It features the silent &quot;English Agent&quot;, whom tradition has identified with Marlowe and his connexions to the secret service. Highest grossing play for Lord Strange&#x27;s Men in 1593.

Attribution A 1593 loose manuscript sheet of the play, called a foul sheet, is alleged to be by Marlowe and has been claimed by some scholars as the only extant play manuscript by the author. It could also provide an approximate date of composition for the play. When compared with the extant printed text and his other work, other scholars reject the attribution to Marlowe. The only surviving printed text of this play is possibly a reconstruction from memory of Marlowe&#x27;s original performance text. Current scholarship notes that there are only 1147 lines in the play, half the amount of a typical play of the 1590s. Other evidence that the extant published text may not be Marlowe&#x27;s original is the uneven style throughout, with two-dimensional characterisations, deteriorating verbal quality and repetitions of content.

Evidence Never appeared in the Stationer&#x27;s Register.

==Memorials==

&quot;The Muse of Poetry&quot;, a bronze sculpture by Edward Onslow Ford references Marlowe and his work. It was erected on Buttermarket, Canterbury in 1891, and now stands outside the Marlowe Theatre in the city.

In July 2002, a memorial window to Marlowe was unveiled by the Marlowe Society at Poets&#x27; Corner in Westminster Abbey. Controversially, a question mark was added to his generally accepted date of death. On 25 October 2011 a letter from Paul Edmondson and Stanley Wells was published by &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper, in which they called on the Dean and Chapter to remove the question mark on the grounds that it &quot;flew in the face of a mass of unimpugnable evidence&quot;. In 2012, they renewed this call in their e-book &quot;Shakespeare Bites Back&quot;, adding that it &quot;denies history&quot; and again the following year in their book &quot;Shakespeare Beyond Doubt&quot;.

The Marlowe Theatre in Canterbury, Kent, UK, was named for Marlowe in 1949.

==Marlowe in fiction==
Marlowe has been used as a character in books, theatre, film, television, games and radio.

==Modern compendia==
Modern scholarly collected works of Marlowe include:
* &quot;The Complete Works of Christopher Marlowe&quot; (edited by Roma Gill in 1986; Clarendon Press published in partnership with Oxford University Press)
* &quot;The Complete Plays of Christopher Marlowe&quot; (edited by J. B. Steane in 1969; edited by Frank Romany and Robert Lindsey, Revised Edition, 2004, Penguin)

==Works of Marlowe in performance==
===Radio===
* BBC Radio broadcast adaptations of Marlowe&#x27;s six plays from May to October 1993.

===Royal Shakespeare Company===

Royal Shakespeare Company
* &quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot;, directed by Kimberly Sykes, with Chipo Chung as Dido. Swan Theatre, 2017.
* &quot;Tamburlaine the Great&quot;, directed by Terry Hands, with Anthony Sher as Tamburlaine. Swan Theatre, 1992; Barbican Theatre, 1993.
* &quot;Tamburlaine the Great&quot; directed by Michael Boyd, with Jude Owusu as Tamburlaine. Swan Theatre, 2018.
* &quot;The Jew of Malta&quot;, directed by Barry Kyle, with Jasper Britton as Barabas. Swan Theatre, 1987; People&#x27;s Theatre, and Barbican Theatre, 1988.
* &quot;The Jew of Malta&quot;, directed by Justin Audibert, with Jasper Britton as Barabas. Swan Theatre, 2015.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Gerard Murphy, with Simon Russell Beale as Edward. Swan Theatre, 1990.
* &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;, directed by John Barton, with Ian McKellen as Faustus. Nottingham Playhouse and Aldwych Theatre, 1974, and Royal Shakespeare Theatre, 1975.
* &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot; directed by Barry Kyle with Gerard Murphy as Faustus, Swan Theatre and Pit Theatre, 1989.
* &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot; directed by Maria Aberg, with Sandy Grierson and Oliver Ryan sharing the roles of Faustus and Mephistophilis. Swan Theatre and Barbican Theatre, 2016.

===Royal National Theatre===

Royal National Theatre
* &quot;Tamburlaine&quot;, directed by Peter Hall, with Albert Finney as Tamburlaine. Olivier Theatre, 1976.
* &quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot;, directed by James McDonald with Anastasia Hille as Dido. Cottesloe Theatre, 2009.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Joe Hill-Gibbins, with John Heffernan as Edward. Olivier Theatre, 2013.

===Shakespeare&#x27;s Globe===

Shakespeare&#x27;s Globe
* &quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot;, directed by Tim Carroll, with Rakie Ayola as Dido, 2003.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Timothy Walker, with Liam Brennan as Edward, 2003.

===Malthouse Theatre===
The Marlowe Sessions
* &quot;Dido, Queen of Carthage&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Stephen Unwin, with Thalissa Teixeira as Dido, 2022.
* &quot;Tamburlaine The Great, Part 1&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Phillip Breen, with Alan Cox as Tamburlaine, 2022.
* &quot;The Jew of Malta&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Stephen Unwin, with Adrian Schiller as Barrabus, 2022.
* &quot;Tamburlaine the Great, Part 2&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Phillip Breen, with Alan Cox as Tamburlaine, 2022.
* &quot;Edward the Second&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Abigail Rokison, with Jack Holden as Edward II, 2022.
* &quot;The Massacre at Paris&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Abigail Rokison, with Michael Maloney as Guise, 2022.
* &quot;Dr Faustus&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Phillip Breen, with Dominic West as Faustus and Talulah Riley as Mephistopheles, 2022.
* &quot;The Poetry of Christopher Marlowe&quot;, Directed/Produced by Ray Mia, Performance direction by Philip Bird, read by Jack Holden, Fisayo Akinade and Philip Bird, 2022.

===Other stage===
* &quot;Tamburlaine&quot;. Yale University, 1919.
* &quot;Tamburlaine&quot;, directed by Tyrone Guthrie, with Donald Wolfit as Tamburlaine. The Old Vic, 1951.
* &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;, co-directed by Orson Welles and John Houseman, with Welles as Faustus and Jack Carter as Mephistopheles. Maxine Elliott&#x27;s Theatre, 1937.
* &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;, directed by Adrian Noble. Royal Exchange, 1981.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Toby Robertson, with John Barton as Edward. Cambridge, 1951.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Toby Robertson, with Derek Jacobi as Edward. Cambridge, 1958.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Toby Robertson, with Ian McKellen as Edward. Assembly Rooms, 1969.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Jim Stone, Washington Stage Company, 1993;
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Jozsef Ruszt. Budapest, 1998;
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Michael Grandage, with Joseph Fiennes as Edward. Crucible Theatre, 2001.
* &quot;The Massacre in Paris&quot;, directed by Patrice Chéreau. France, 1972.

===Stage adaptations===
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, Phoenix Society, London, 1923.
* &quot;Leben Eduards des Zweiten von England&quot;, by Bertolt Brecht (the first play he directed). Munich Chamber Theatre, Germany, 1924.
* &quot;The Life of Edward II of England&quot;, by Marlowe and Bertold Brecht, directed by Frank Dunlop. National Theatre, 1968.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, adapted as a ballet, choreographed by David Bintley. Stuttgart Ballet, 1995.
* &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;, additional text by Colin Teevan, directed by Jamie Lloyd, with Kit Harington as Faustus. Duke of York&#x27;s Theatre, 2016.
* &quot;Faustus, That Damned Woman&quot; by Chris Bush, directed by Caroline Byrne. Lyric Theatre, 2020.

===Film===
* &quot;Doctor Faustus&quot;, based on Nevill Coghill&#x27;s 1965 production, adapted for Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor, 1967.
* &quot;Edward II&quot;, directed by Derek Jarman, 1991.
* &quot;Faust&quot;, with some Marlowe dialogue, directed by Jan Švankmajer, 1994.

==Notes==
==References==

Sources
* 
** 
** 
** 
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==

* Bevington, David, and Eric Rasmussen, eds. &quot;Doctor Faustus and Other Plays&quot;. Oxford English Drama. Oxford University Press, 1998. 
* Conrad, B. &quot;Der wahre Shakespeare: Christopher Marlowe&quot;. (German non-Fiction book) 5th Edition, 2016. 
* Cornelius R. M. &quot;Christopher Marlowe&#x27;s Use of the Bible&quot;u. New York: P. Lang, 1984.
* Marlowe, Christopher. &quot;Complete Works&quot;. Vol. 3: &quot;Edward II.&quot;, ed. R. Rowland. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994. (pp. xxii–xxiii)
* Oz, Avraham, ed. &quot;Marlowe&quot;. New Casebooks. Houndmills, Basingstoke and London: Palgrave/Macmillan, 2003. 
* Parker, John. &quot;The Aesthetics of Antichrist: From Christian Drama to Christopher Marlowe&quot;. Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2007. 
* Shepard, Alan. &quot;Marlowe&#x27;s Soldiers: Rhetorics of Masculinity in the Age of the Armada&quot;, Ashgate, 2002. 
* Sim, James H. &quot;Dramatic Uses of Biblical Allusions in Marlowe and Shakespeare&quot;, Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1966.
* Wraight A. D.; Stern, Virginia F. &quot;In Search of Christopher Marlowe: A Pictorial Biography&quot;, London: Macdonald, 1965.
==External links==
* 
* 
* The Marlowe Society
* The works of Marlowe at Perseus Project
* The complete works , with modernised spelling, on Peter Farey&#x27;s Marlowe page.
* BBC audio file. &quot;In Our Time&quot; Radio 4 discussion programme on Marlowe and his work
* The Marlowe Bibliography Online is an initiative of the Marlowe Society of America and the University of Melbourne. Its purpose is to facilitate scholarship on the works of Christopher Marlowe by providing a searchable annotated bibliography of relevant scholarship</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="0" end="19" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Christopher Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="24" end="32" title="Baptism" label="baptised"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="77" end="88" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Kit Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="145" end="160" title="Elizabethan era" label="Elizabethan era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134718" start="202" end="225" title="English Renaissance theatre" label="Elizabethan playwrights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214597" start="288" end="299" title="Tamburlaine" label="Tamburlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="489" end="508" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q739672" start="689" end="700" title="blank verse" label="blank verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q46158" start="874" end="884" title="humanistic" label="humanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575959" start="984" end="1004" title="anti-intellectualism" label="anti-intellectualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925325" start="1516" end="1533" title="blasphemous libel" label="blasphemous libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="1649" end="1662" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="1666" end="1677" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="2045" end="2055" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q179224" start="2133" end="2138" title="Dover" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922815" start="2229" end="2244" title="Old Style and New Style dates" label="old style dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2408" end="2427" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189288" start="2466" end="2485" title="Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Stratford-upon-Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360332" start="2522" end="2544" title="The King&amp;#x27;s School, Canterbury" label="The King&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q536282" start="2607" end="2640" title="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge" label="Corpus Christi College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2822" end="2827" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="2887" end="2891" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983716" start="3012" end="3028" title="English College, Douai" label="English seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="3032" end="3038" title="Rheims" label="Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3051" end="3057" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3101" end="3115" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409382" start="3116" end="3122" title="Seminary priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3220" end="3237" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q163891" start="3340" end="3360" title="St. Bartholomew&amp;#x27;s Day massacre" label="Large-scale violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3369" end="3380" title="Protestants" label="Protestants"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3385" end="3394" title="Catholics" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3471" end="3495" title="Elizabeth I" label="Protestant English Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521636" start="3513" end="3531" title="Elizabethan Religious Settlement" label="anti-Catholic laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246345" start="3661" end="3674" title="Privy Council of England" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="3785" end="3794" title="Elizabeth I" label="the Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q138409" start="4054" end="4072" title="Francis Walsingham" label="Francis Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="4218" end="4227" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7286558" start="5362" end="5370" title="Rake (character)" label="rakehell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104756" start="5469" end="5481" title="J. B. Steane" label="J. B. Steane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7066" start="5748" end="5755" title="atheism" label="atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137791" start="5918" end="5928" title="Park Honan" label="Park Honan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065637" start="5933" end="5948" title="Charles Nicholl (author)" label="Charles Nicholl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003047" start="6624" end="6631" title="Buttery (shop)" label="buttery"/>
<link wikidata="Q436074" start="6960" end="6974" title="Arbella Stuart" label="Arbella Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768060" start="7029" end="7054" title="Times Literary Supplement" label="Times Literary Supplement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129889" start="7119" end="7136" title="Notes and Queries" label="Notes and Queries"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="7441" end="7461" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="7505" end="7523" title="James I of England" label="James I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210638" start="7568" end="7605" title="succession to Elizabeth&amp;#x27;s throne" label="succession to Elizabeth&amp;#x27;s throne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498676" start="7607" end="7624" title="Frederick S. Boas" label="Frederick S. Boas"/>
<link wikidata="Q345716" start="7887" end="7900" title="Thomas Watson (poet)" label="Thomas Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060628" start="7904" end="7918" title="Norton Folgate" label="Norton Folgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822183" start="7935" end="7949" title="Newgate Prison" label="Newgate Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628312" start="8248" end="8261" title="Cautionary Towns" label="garrison town"/>
<link wikidata="Q10084" start="8265" end="8273" title="Flushing, Netherlands" label="Flushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q854851" start="8338" end="8352" title="Counterfeit money" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q354309" start="8459" end="8467" title="William Cecil, 1st Baron Burghley" label="Burghley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4008531" start="8713" end="8728" title="William Stanley (Elizabethan)" label="William Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347437" start="8950" end="8969" title="The School of Night" label="The School of Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q10084" start="9372" end="9380" title="Flushing, Netherlands" label="Flushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323912" start="9401" end="9415" title="Richard Baines" label="Richard Baines"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="9664" end="9681" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="10002" end="10005" title="Old Testament" label="Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="10010" end="10023" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="10217" end="10236" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="10363" end="10368" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402155" start="10543" end="10550" title="bugbear" label="bugbear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938640" start="10556" end="10566" title="hobgoblins" label="hobgoblins"/>
<link wikidata="Q337082" start="10689" end="10699" title="Thomas Kyd" label="Thomas Kyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q315402" start="10807" end="10821" title="Thomas Harriot" label="Thomas Harriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="10837" end="10851" title="Walter Raleigh" label="Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774511" start="11313" end="11333" title="Master of the Revels" label="Master of the Revels"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="11429" end="11453" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q189203" start="11762" end="11775" title="Anachronism" label="anachronistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231395" start="12266" end="12281" title="David Bevington" label="David Bevington"/>
<link wikidata="Q63657622" start="12286" end="12303" title="Eric C. Rasmussen" label="Eric C. Rasmussen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104756" start="12580" end="12592" title="J. B. Steane" label="J. B. Steane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742772" start="12790" end="12806" title="Hero and Leander (poem)" label="Hero and Leander"/>
<link wikidata="Q195219" start="12915" end="12932" title="Edward II (play)" label="Edward the Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q195219" start="13031" end="13035" title="Edward II (play)" label="play"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="13054" end="13063" title="Edward II" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q846933" start="13091" end="13099" title="Renaissance humanism" label="humanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q710482" start="13266" end="13280" title="Piers Gaveston, 1st Earl of Cornwall" label="Piers Gaveston"/>
<link wikidata="Q857989" start="13541" end="13564" title="Dido, Queen of Carthage (play)" label="Dido, Queen of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="13603" end="13610" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131588" start="13615" end="13623" title="Ganymede (mythology)" label="Ganymede"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481042" start="13947" end="13964" title="iambic pentameter" label="iambic pentameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214597" start="14043" end="14054" title="Tamburlaine" label="Tamburlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="14081" end="14094" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q337082" start="14190" end="14200" title="Thomas Kyd" label="Thomas Kyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="14278" end="14287" title="heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337095" start="14619" end="14637" title="Ferdinando Stanley, 5th Earl of Derby" label="Ferdinando Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794865" start="14943" end="14960" title="Thomas Walsingham (literary patron)" label="Thomas Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q138409" start="15010" end="15028" title="Francis Walsingham" label="Francis Walsingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q591522" start="15047" end="15066" title="Secretary of State (England)" label="principal secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127707" start="15544" end="15558" title="Palladis Tamia" label="Palladis Tamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q509706" start="15585" end="15598" title="Francis Meres" label="Francis Meres"/>
<link wikidata="Q179541" start="15729" end="15738" title="Epicureanism" label="epicurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="15780" end="15812" title="Dictionary of National Biography" label="Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q179854" start="15824" end="15834" title="Sidney Lee" label="Sidney Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820796" start="16020" end="16033" title="Leslie Hotson" label="Leslie Hotson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134614" start="16049" end="16056" title="coroner" label="coroner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172279" start="16161" end="16198" title="Coroner of the Queen&amp;#x27;s Household" label="Coroner of the Queen&amp;#x27;s Household"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007563" start="16200" end="16213" title="William Danby (coroner)" label="William Danby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308650" start="16255" end="16263" title="Deptford, London" label="Deptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354228" start="16284" end="16296" title="Eleanor Bull" label="Eleanor Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q1663270" start="16314" end="16327" title="Ingram Frizer" label="Ingram Frizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q225474" start="16329" end="16344" title="Nicholas Skeres" label="Nicholas Skeres"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158508" start="16349" end="16361" title="Robert Poley" label="Robert Poley"/>
<link wikidata="Q787963" start="16485" end="16499" title="Babington plot" label="Babington plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q30039396" start="16635" end="16641" title="Audrey Walsingham" label="Audrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541896" start="17534" end="17556" title="George Lyman Kittredge" label="George Lyman Kittredge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656234" start="18364" end="18384" title="Samuel A. Tannenbaum" label="Samuel A. Tannenbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="19513" end="19533" title="confidence trickster" label="confidence trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975715" start="19597" end="19610" title="loanshark" label="money-lending"/>
<link wikidata="Q437917" start="20383" end="20396" title="Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl of Essex" label="Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q704171" start="20513" end="20529" title="Robert Cecil, 1st Earl of Salisbury" label="Sir Robert Cecil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1902163" start="21131" end="21146" title="Marlovian theory of Shakespeare authorship" label="death was faked"/>
<link wikidata="Q704626" start="21647" end="21659" title="George Peele" label="George Peele"/>
<link wikidata="Q138540" start="21723" end="21738" title="Michael Drayton" label="Michael Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="21838" end="21848" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q443042" start="21903" end="21915" title="Thomas Nashe" label="Thomas Nashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053736" start="22235" end="22260" title="Parnassus plays" label="The Return from Parnassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="22436" end="22447" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q237572" start="22457" end="22471" title="As You Like It" label="As You Like It"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742772" start="22522" end="22538" title="Hero and Leander (poem)" label="Hero and Leander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828727" start="22687" end="22697" title="Touchstone (As You Like It)" label="Touchstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q649741" start="23075" end="23087" title="Jew of Malta" label="Jew of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q606830" start="23252" end="23272" title="Antony and Cleopatra" label="Antony and Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q206400" start="23286" end="23308" title="The Merchant of Venice" label="The Merchant of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q649562" start="23322" end="23332" title="Richard II (play)" label="Richard II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130283" start="23349" end="23356" title="Macbeth" label="Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="23486" end="23492" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q857989" start="23665" end="23688" title="Dido, Queen of Carthage (play)" label="Dido, Queen of Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q128610" start="23705" end="23735" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Labour&amp;#x27;s Lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150" start="24131" end="24138" title="Mercury (mythology)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q739672" start="25124" end="25135" title="blank verse" label="blank verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q337082" start="25146" end="25156" title="Thomas Kyd" label="Thomas Kyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115255" start="25170" end="25189" title="The Spanish Tragedy" label="The Spanish Tragedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134718" start="25262" end="25281" title="Elizabethan theatre" label="Elizabethan theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705248" start="25299" end="25319" title="Lust&amp;#x27;s Dominion" label="Lust&amp;#x27;s Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625343" start="25513" end="25531" title="Arden of Faversham" label="Arden of Faversham"/>
<link wikidata="Q474088" start="25699" end="25705" title="Amores (Ovid)" label="Amores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082412" start="25733" end="25748" title="elegiac couplet" label="elegiac couplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756286" start="25863" end="25898" title="The Passionate Shepherd to His Love" label="The Passionate Shepherd to His Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742772" start="25983" end="25999" title="Hero and Leander (poem)" label="Hero and Leander"/>
<link wikidata="Q342720" start="26065" end="26079" title="George Chapman" label="George Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q678375" start="26110" end="26119" title="Pharsalia" label="Pharsalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188646" start="26140" end="26145" title="Lucan" label="Lucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q643236" start="26477" end="26485" title="Henry VI, Part 1" label="Henry VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755811" start="26570" end="26592" title="The Oxford Shakespeare" label="New Oxford Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q560455" start="26890" end="26903" title="Edward Alleyn" label="Edward Alleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064081" start="27122" end="27140" title="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Men" label="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="27267" end="27271" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q473302" start="27326" end="27345" title="John Whitgift" label="Archbishop Whitgift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092252" start="27736" end="27758" title="Children of the Chapel" label="Children of the Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q443042" start="27972" end="27984" title="Thomas Nashe" label="Thomas Nashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307353" start="28275" end="28281" title="octavo" label="octavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="28283" end="28289" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064081" start="28357" end="28375" title="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Men" label="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214597" start="28405" end="28416" title="Tamburlaine" label="Tamburlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q739672" start="28447" end="28458" title="blank verse" label="blank verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q25372" start="28471" end="28490" title="drama" label="dramatic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134718" start="28498" end="28526" title="English renaissance theatre" label="Early Modern English theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133775" start="29727" end="29752" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q541923" start="29926" end="29937" title="extant literature" label="extant copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q541923" start="29945" end="29956" title="extant literature" label="extant copy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="29972" end="29978" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="29994" end="30000" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064081" start="30101" end="30128" title="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Men" label="Lord Admiral&amp;#x27;s Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120943" start="30130" end="30142" title="The Rose (theatre)" label="Rose Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="30144" end="30150" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q332885" start="30282" end="30287" title="Faust" label="Faust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506690" start="30381" end="30414" title="Deal with the Devil" label="&amp;quot;The Devil&amp;#x27;s Pact&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="30625" end="30631" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839880" start="30975" end="30988" title="Samuel Rowley" label="Samuel Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q541923" start="31424" end="31439" title="extant literature" label="extant versions"/>
<link wikidata="Q171841" start="31835" end="31848" title="idiosyncratic" label="idiosyncratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474168" start="31939" end="31950" title="foul papers" label="foul papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307353" start="32199" end="32205" title="octavo" label="octavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133775" start="32735" end="32760" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474168" start="32898" end="32908" title="Foul papers" label="foul sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307353" start="33144" end="33150" title="octavo" label="octavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214597" start="33426" end="33437" title="Tamburlaine" label="Tamburlaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277402" start="33493" end="33516" title="Lord Strange&amp;#x27;s Men" label="Lord Strange&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120943" start="33537" end="33549" title="The Rose (theatre)" label="Rose Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064081" start="33643" end="33661" title="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Men" label="Admiral&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="33849" end="33862" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="low countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q622783" start="33870" end="33889" title="Spanish Netherlands" label="Spanish Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="33904" end="33915" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277402" start="34116" end="34139" title="Lord Strange&amp;#x27;s Men" label="Lord Strange&amp;#x27;s Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474168" start="34214" end="34224" title="Foul papers" label="foul sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815563" start="34585" end="34611" title="Memorial reconstruction" label="reconstruction from memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q26370483" start="35066" end="35084" title="Marlowe Memorial" label="The Muse of Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q928357" start="35094" end="35110" title="bronze sculpture" label="bronze sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065439" start="35114" end="35132" title="Edward Onslow Ford" label="Edward Onslow Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772005" start="35245" end="35260" title="Marlowe Theatre" label="Marlowe Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275898" start="35357" end="35375" title="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner" label="Poets&amp;#x27; Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="35379" end="35396" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600035" start="35534" end="35547" title="Stanley Wells" label="Stanley Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="35571" end="35580" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772005" start="35971" end="35986" title="Marlowe Theatre" label="Marlowe Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="35990" end="36000" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="36002" end="36006" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q104413900" start="36300" end="36309" title="Roma Gill" label="Roma Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104756" start="36457" end="36469" title="J. B. Steane" label="J. B. Steane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="36605" end="36614" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146254" start="36725" end="36750" title="Royal Shakespeare Company" label="Royal Shakespeare Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101628" start="36823" end="36834" title="Chipo Chung" label="Chipo Chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q653334" start="36844" end="36856" title="Swan Theatre, Stratford-upon-Avon" label="Swan Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q975377" start="36913" end="36924" title="Terry Hands" label="Terry Hands"/>
<link wikidata="Q432362" start="36931" end="36943" title="Anthony Sher" label="Anthony Sher"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="36980" end="36996" title="Barbican Theatre" label="Barbican Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828770" start="37052" end="37064" title="Michael Boyd (theatre director)" label="Michael Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864394" start="37162" end="37172" title="Barry Kyle" label="Barry Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6163901" start="37179" end="37193" title="Jasper Britton" label="Jasper Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165791" start="37226" end="37247" title="People&amp;#x27;s Theatre, Newcastle upon Tyne" label="People&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132927" start="37427" end="37440" title="Gerard Murphy (Irish actor)" label="Gerard Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q971782" start="37447" end="37466" title="Simon Russell Beale" label="Simon Russell Beale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220963" start="37540" end="37551" title="John Barton (director)" label="John Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="37558" end="37570" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063678" start="37583" end="37603" title="Nottingham Playhouse" label="Nottingham Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783531" start="37608" end="37623" title="Aldwych Theatre" label="Aldwych Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375404" start="37635" end="37660" title="Royal Shakespeare Theatre" label="Royal Shakespeare Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864394" start="37709" end="37719" title="Barry Kyle" label="Barry Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="37768" end="37779" title="Barbican Centre" label="Pit Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="37998" end="38020" title="Royal National Theatre" label="Royal National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q769414" start="38060" end="38070" title="Peter Hall (director)" label="Peter Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q219546" start="38077" end="38090" title="Albert Finney" label="Albert Finney"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="38107" end="38122" title="Olivier Theatre" label="Olivier Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845494" start="38201" end="38216" title="Anastasia Hille" label="Anastasia Hille"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="38226" end="38243" title="Royal National Theatre" label="Cottesloe Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210325" start="38288" end="38304" title="Joe Hill-Gibbins" label="Joe Hill-Gibbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q20676942" start="38311" end="38325" title="John Heffernan (British actor)" label="John Heffernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7725501" start="38393" end="38417" title="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe" label="Shakespeare&amp;#x27;s Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28043361" start="38469" end="38480" title="Tim Carroll" label="Tim Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154488" start="38487" end="38498" title="Rakie Ayola" label="Rakie Ayola"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733280" start="38708" end="38715" title="Ray Mia" label="Ray Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610727" start="38742" end="38755" title="Stephen Unwin" label="Stephen Unwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q30504959" start="38762" end="38779" title="Thalissa Teixeira" label="Thalissa Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733280" start="38861" end="38868" title="Ray Mia" label="Ray Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706436" start="38915" end="38923" title="Alan Cox (actor)" label="Alan Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733280" start="38999" end="39006" title="Ray Mia" label="Ray Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610727" start="39033" end="39046" title="Stephen Unwin" label="Stephen Unwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685338" start="39053" end="39068" title="Adrian Schiller" label="Adrian Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706436" start="39208" end="39216" title="Alan Cox (actor)" label="Alan Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733280" start="39293" end="39300" title="Ray Mia" label="Ray Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667709" start="39327" end="39342" title="Abigail Rokison" label="Abigail Rokison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113141" start="39349" end="39360" title="Jack Holden (actor)" label="Jack Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733280" start="39439" end="39446" title="Ray Mia" label="Ray Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667709" start="39473" end="39488" title="Abigail Rokison" label="Abigail Rokison"/>
<link wikidata="Q861490" start="39495" end="39510" title="Michael Maloney" label="Michael Maloney"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733280" start="39574" end="39581" title="Ray Mia" label="Ray Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313020" start="39628" end="39640" title="Dominic West" label="Dominic West"/>
<link wikidata="Q269309" start="39656" end="39669" title="Talulah Riley" label="Talulah Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q115733280" start="39765" end="39772" title="Ray Mia" label="Ray Mia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183230" start="39799" end="39810" title="Philip Bird" label="Philip Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113141" start="39820" end="39831" title="Jack Holden (actor)" label="Jack Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22249990" start="39833" end="39847" title="Fisayo Akinade" label="Fisayo Akinade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183230" start="39852" end="39863" title="Philip Bird" label="Philip Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="39917" end="39932" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q330059" start="39979" end="39993" title="Tyrone Guthrie" label="Tyrone Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q530758" start="40000" end="40013" title="Donald Wolfit" label="Donald Wolfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q868806" start="40030" end="40041" title="The Old Vic" label="The Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="40094" end="40106" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q315734" start="40111" end="40124" title="John Houseman" label="John Houseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111596" start="40153" end="40164" title="Jack Carter (actor)" label="Jack Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q272805" start="40168" end="40182" title="Mephistopheles" label="Mephistopheles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795966" start="40184" end="40213" title="Maxine Elliott&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Maxine Elliott&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q373765" start="40263" end="40275" title="Adrian Noble" label="Adrian Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445926" start="40277" end="40291" title="Royal Exchange, Manchester" label="Royal Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q16019537" start="40336" end="40350" title="Toby Robertson" label="Toby Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220963" start="40357" end="40368" title="John Barton (director)" label="John Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q350" start="40380" end="40389" title="Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="40455" end="40467" title="Derek Jacobi" label="Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="40554" end="40566" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808669" start="40578" end="40592" title="Assembly Rooms (Edinburgh)" label="Assembly Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830724" start="40784" end="40800" title="Michael Grandage" label="Michael Grandage"/>
<link wikidata="Q223790" start="40807" end="40821" title="Joseph Fiennes" label="Joseph Fiennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141915" start="40833" end="40849" title="Crucible Theatre" label="Crucible Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q366057" start="40906" end="40921" title="Patrice Chéreau" label="Patrice Chéreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q38757" start="41074" end="41088" title="Bertolt Brecht" label="Bertolt Brecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="41119" end="41125" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486336" start="41249" end="41261" title="Frank Dunlop (director)" label="Frank Dunlop"/>
<link wikidata="Q511108" start="41263" end="41279" title="Royal National Theatre" label="National Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343583" start="41295" end="41304" title="Edward II (ballet)" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343583" start="41310" end="41331" title="Edward II (ballet)" label=", adapted as a ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231418" start="41350" end="41363" title="David Bintley" label="David Bintley"/>
<link wikidata="Q510220" start="41365" end="41381" title="Stuttgart Ballet" label="Stuttgart Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145614" start="41438" end="41450" title="Colin Teevan" label="Colin Teevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6147131" start="41464" end="41475" title="Jamie Lloyd (director)" label="Jamie Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q357607" start="41482" end="41495" title="Kit Harington" label="Kit Harington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275938" start="41508" end="41535" title="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Duke of York&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106050" start="41587" end="41597" title="Chris Bush (playwright)" label="Chris Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061418" start="41627" end="41640" title="Lyric Theatre (Hammersmith)" label="Lyric Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235065" start="41668" end="41682" title="Doctor Faustus (1967 film)" label="Doctor Faustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338877" start="41699" end="41713" title="Nevill Coghill" label="Nevill Coghill"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="41750" end="41764" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="41769" end="41785" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q618617" start="41801" end="41810" title="Edward II (film)" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q282787" start="41830" end="41842" title="Derek Jarman" label="Derek Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q316165" start="41911" end="41925" title="Jan Švankmajer" label="Jan Švankmajer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149655" start="43382" end="43393" title="In Our Time (BBC Radio 4)" label="In Our Time"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5772" wikidata="Q1229838" url="?curid=5772" title="Cricket (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Cricket]] is a bat-and-ball sport contested by two teams.

Cricket also commonly refers to:

* Cricket (insect)

Cricket(s) or The Cricket(s) may also refer to:
==Film and television==
* &quot;The Cricket&quot; (1917 film), a silent American drama film
* &quot;The Cricket&quot; (1980 film), an erotic drama film
* &quot;Crickets&quot; (film), a 2006 Japanese drama film
* &quot;Cricket&quot; (&quot;Bluey&quot;), a 2023 television episode
* &quot;Cricket&quot; (&quot;Knots Landing&quot;), a 1982 television episode
* &quot;Cricket&quot; (&quot;Servant&quot;), a 2019 television episode
* Christine Blair or Cricket, a character in &quot;The Young and the Restless&quot;
* Cricket, a character in &quot;To Have and Have Not&quot; (film)
* Matthew &quot;Rickety Cricket&quot; Mara, a character in &quot;It&#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia&quot;
* Cricket Green, a main character in &quot;Big City Greens&quot;

==Literature==
* &quot;Cricket&quot; (magazine), an American literary magazine for children
* &quot;The Cricket&quot; (magazine), a 1960s music magazine
* &quot;Chrząszcz&quot; or &quot;Cricket&quot;, a poem by Jan Brzechwa
* Cricket, a character in &quot;Fire on the Mountain&quot; (1988 novel)

==Military==
* &quot;Cricket&quot;-class destroyer, a 1906 class of Royal Navy coastal destroyers
** , lead ship of the class
* , a gunboat
* HMS &quot;Cricket&quot; (shore establishment), Hampshire, 1943–1946

==Music==
* The Crickets, a rock and roll band formed by Buddy Holly
* &quot;Cricket&quot; (musical), a musical by Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice
* &quot;Crickets&quot; (album), by Joe Nichols, 2013
* Cricket (producer), Kosovo-Albanian record producer
* &quot;Crickets&quot;, a video album by Dredg released alongside their 2002 album &quot;El Cielo&quot;
* &quot;Crickets&quot;, a song by Drop City Yacht Club
* &quot;Cricket&quot;, a song by the Kinks from &quot;Preservation Act 1&quot;

==Vehicles==
* Cricket (1914 automobile), an early American automobile
* Plymouth Cricket (disambiguation), two automobiles

== Other uses ==
* Cricket (darts), a game using the standard 20-number dartboard
* Cricket (roofing), a ridge structure designed to divert water on a roof
* &quot;Cricket&quot; (series), a series of cricket video games
* Cricket (warning sound), an audible warning in the cockpits of commercial aircraft
* Cricket dolls, a talking doll released by Playmates Toys in 1986
* Cricket, North Carolina, United States
* Cricket Wireless, wireless service provider, a subsidiary of AT&amp;T Inc.
* Programmable Cricket, robotic toys
* Clicker or cricket, a noisemaker
* Cricket, a variation of the float breakdancing technique
* Cricket, a data collection software on top of RRDtool
* Cricket (dog), a puppy killed by South Dakota Governor Kristi Noem

== See also ==
* Cricket warbler
* Crickett Smith (1881–1944), American ragtime, blues and jazz cornetist and trumpeter
* Crickette Sanz, American anthropologist
* Cricket House and Cricket Park, in Cricket St Thomas, England
* Colomban Cri-cri, a light plane
* Shturcite, a Bulgarian band, translated as The Crickets, or an album by them
* Tettigoniidae, known as katydids or bush-crickets
* Cricut, a cutting machine for home crafters</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1229838" start="0" end="11" title="Cricket (disambiguation)" label="[[Cricket]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229838" start="61" end="68" title="Cricket (disambiguation)" label="Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776776" start="97" end="113" title="Cricket (insect)" label="Cricket (insect)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229838" start="115" end="125" title="Cricket (disambiguation)" label="Cricket(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229838" start="129" end="143" title="Cricket (disambiguation)" label="The Cricket(s)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60854434" start="189" end="224" title="The Cricket (1917 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Cricket&amp;quot; (1917 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821751" start="257" end="292" title="The Cricket (1980 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Cricket&amp;quot; (1980 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185061" start="317" end="344" title="Crickets (film)" label="&amp;quot;Crickets&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85777222" start="375" end="414" title="Cricket (Bluey)" label="&amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Bluey&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q458091" start="444" end="491" title="Cricket (Knots Landing)" label="&amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Knots Landing&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636743" start="521" end="562" title="Cricket (Servant)" label="&amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Servant&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965888" start="592" end="607" title="Christine Blair" label="Christine Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q786996" start="700" end="739" title="To Have and Have Not (film)" label="&amp;quot;To Have and Have Not&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="786" end="849" title="List of It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia characters#Rickety Cricket" label="character in &amp;quot;It&amp;#x27;s Always Sunny in Philadelphia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q27645779" start="893" end="908" title="Big City Greens" label="Big City Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184940" start="933" end="963" title="Cricket (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728049" start="1010" end="1044" title="The Cricket (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;The Cricket&amp;quot; (magazine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2967458" start="1077" end="1086" title="Chrząszcz" label="Chrząszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451628" start="1166" end="1211" title="Fire on the Mountain (1988 novel)" label="&amp;quot;Fire on the Mountain&amp;quot; (1988 novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15424605" start="1228" end="1263" title="Cricket-class destroyer" label="&amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot;-class destroyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632009" start="1355" end="1400" title="HMS Cricket (shore establishment)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; (shore establishment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143703" start="1436" end="1448" title="The Crickets" label="The Crickets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139909" start="1495" end="1524" title="Cricket (musical)" label="&amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; (musical)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246943" start="1574" end="1602" title="Crickets (album)" label="&amp;quot;Crickets&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754551" start="1627" end="1645" title="Cricket (producer)" label="Cricket (producer)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1762" end="1782" title="El Cielo (album)#Crickets" label="&amp;quot;El Cielo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16241472" start="1817" end="1837" title="Drop City Yacht Club" label="Drop City Yacht Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047994" start="1892" end="1910" title="Preservation Act 1" label="Preservation Act 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184939" start="1933" end="1958" title="Cricket (1914 automobile)" label="Cricket (1914 automobile)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205793" start="1991" end="2024" title="Plymouth Cricket (disambiguation)" label="Plymouth Cricket (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184941" start="2062" end="2077" title="Cricket (darts)" label="Cricket (darts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184942" start="2127" end="2144" title="Cricket (roofing)" label="Cricket (roofing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85779444" start="2201" end="2229" title="Cricket (series)" label="&amp;quot;Cricket&amp;quot; (series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184944" start="2265" end="2288" title="Cricket (warning sound)" label="Cricket (warning sound)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185002" start="2350" end="2363" title="Cricket dolls" label="Cricket dolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023414" start="2417" end="2440" title="Cricket, North Carolina" label="Cricket, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184987" start="2458" end="2474" title="Cricket Wireless" label="Cricket Wireless"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248447" start="2535" end="2555" title="Programmable Cricket" label="Programmable Cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q835684" start="2572" end="2579" title="Clicker" label="Clicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459833" start="2635" end="2640" title="float (b-boy move)" label="float"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049812" start="2712" end="2719" title="RRDtool" label="RRDtool"/>
<link wikidata="Q465749" start="2722" end="2735" title="Cricket (dog)" label="Cricket (dog)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609351" start="2807" end="2822" title="Cricket warbler" label="Cricket warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q29880050" start="2825" end="2839" title="Crickett Smith" label="Crickett Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q28805300" start="2912" end="2926" title="Crickette Sanz" label="Crickette Sanz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255799" start="2989" end="3006" title="Cricket St Thomas" label="Cricket St Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q656375" start="3018" end="3034" title="Colomban Cri-cri" label="Colomban Cri-cri"/>
<link wikidata="Q278901" start="3052" end="3061" title="Shturcite" label="Shturcite"/>
<link wikidata="Q727919" start="3131" end="3144" title="Tettigoniidae" label="Tettigoniidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185100" start="3183" end="3189" title="Cricut" label="Cricut"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5776" wikidata="Q200341" url="?curid=5776" title="Caving">
<text>Caving, also known as spelunking (United States and Canada) and potholing (United Kingdom and Ireland), is the recreational pastime of exploring wild cave systems (as distinguished from show caves). In contrast, speleology is the scientific study of caves and the cave environment.

The challenges involved in caving vary according to the cave being visited; in addition to the total absence of light beyond the entrance, negotiating pitches, squeezes, and water hazards can be difficult. Cave diving is a distinct, and more hazardous, sub-speciality undertaken by a small minority of technically proficient cavers. In an area of overlap between recreational pursuit and scientific study, the most devoted and serious-minded cavers become accomplished at the surveying and mapping of caves and the formal publication of their efforts. These are usually published freely and publicly, especially in the UK and other European countries, although in the US they are generally more private. 

Although caving is sometimes categorized as an &quot;extreme sport,&quot; cavers do not commonly use this terminology and typically dislike the term being used in reference to caving, as it implies a disregard for safety. Though caving is a fairly safe sport compared to other activities that are sometimes classified as &quot;extreme sports&quot;, incidents do occur. These tend to be related to flooding, hypothermia, rock falls, caver falls, SRT accidents, or some combination of these.

Many caving skills overlap with those involved in canyoning and mine and urban exploration.

== Motivation ==
Caving is often undertaken for the enjoyment of the outdoor activity or for physical exercise, as well as original exploration, similar to mountaineering or diving. Physical or biological science is also an important goal for some cavers, while others are engaged in cave photography. Virgin cave systems comprise some of the last unexplored regions on Earth and much effort is put into trying to locate, enter and survey them. In well-explored regions (such as most developed nations), the most accessible caves have already been explored, and gaining access to new caves often requires cave digging or cave diving.

Caving, in certain areas, has also been utilized as a form of eco and adventure tourism, for example in New Zealand. Tour companies have established an industry leading and guiding tours into and through caves. Depending on the type of cave and the type of tour, the experience could be adventure-based or ecological-based. There are tours led through lava tubes by a guiding service (e.g. Lava River Cave, the oceanic islands of Tenerife, Iceland and Hawaii).

Caving has also been described as an &quot;individualist&#x27;s team sport&quot; by some, as cavers can often make a trip without direct physical assistance from others but will generally go in a group for companionship or to provide emergency help if needed. Some however consider the assistance cavers give each other as a typical team sport activity.

== Etymology ==
The term &quot;potholing&quot; refers to the act of exploring &quot;potholes&quot;, a word originating in the north of England for predominantly vertical caves.
Clay Perry, an American caver of the 1940s, wrote about a group of men and boys who explored and studied caves throughout New England. This group referred to themselves as &quot;spelunkers&quot;, a term derived from the Latin &quot;&quot; (&quot;cave, cavern, den&quot;). This is regarded as the first use of the word in the Americas. Throughout the 1950s, &quot;spelunking&quot; was the general term used for exploring caves in US English. It was used freely, without any positive or negative connotations, although only rarely outside the US.

In the 1960s, the terms &quot;spelunking&quot; and &quot;spelunker&quot; began to be considered among experienced enthusiasts. In 1985, Steve Knutson – editor of the National Speleological Society (NSS) publication &quot;American Caving Accidents&quot; – made the following distinction:

This sentiment is exemplified by bumper stickers and T-shirts displayed by some cavers: &quot;Cavers rescue spelunkers&quot;. Nevertheless, outside the caving community, &quot;spelunking&quot; and &quot;spelunkers&quot; predominately remain neutral terms referring to the practice and practitioners, without any respect to skill level.

== History ==
In the mid-19th century, John Birkbeck explored potholes in England, notably Gaping Gill in 1842 and Alum Pot in 1847–8, returning there in the 1870s. In the mid-1880s, Herbert E. Balch began exploring Wookey Hole Caves and in the 1890s, Balch was introduced to the caves of the Mendip Hills. One of the oldest established caving clubs, Yorkshire Ramblers&#x27; Club, was founded in 1892.

Caving as a specialized pursuit was pioneered by Édouard-Alfred Martel (1859–1938), who first achieved the descent and exploration of the Gouffre de Padirac, in France, as early as 1889 and the first complete descent of a 110-metre wet vertical shaft at Gaping Gill in 1895. He developed his own techniques based on ropes and metallic ladders. Martel visited Kentucky and notably Mammoth Cave National Park in October 1912. In the 1920s famous US caver Floyd Collins made important explorations in the area and in the 1930s, as caving became increasingly popular, small exploration teams both in the Alps and in the karstic high plateaus of southwest France (Causses and Pyrenees) transformed cave exploration into both a scientific and recreational activity. Robert de Joly, Guy de Lavaur and Norbert Casteret were prominent figures of that time, surveying mostly caves in Southwest France.

During World War II, an alpine team composed of Pierre Chevalier, Fernand Petzl, Charles Petit-Didier and others explored the Dent de Crolles cave system near Grenoble, which became the deepest explored system in the world (-658m) at that time. The lack of available equipment during the war forced Pierre Chevalier and the rest of the team to develop their own equipment, leading to technical innovation. The scaling-pole (1940), nylon ropes (1942), use of explosives in caves (1947) and mechanical rope-ascenders (Henri Brenot&#x27;s &quot;monkeys&quot;, first used by Chevalier and Brenot in a cave in 1934) can be directly associated to the exploration of the Dent de Crolles cave system.

In 1941, American cavers organized themselves into the National Speleological Society (NSS) to advance the exploration, conservation, study and understanding of caves in the United States. American caver Bill Cuddington, known as &quot;Vertical Bill&quot;, further developed the single-rope technique (SRT) in the late 1950s. In 1958, two Swiss alpinists, Juesi and Marti teamed together, creating the first rope ascender known as the Jumar. In 1968 Bruno Dressler asked Fernand Petzl, who worked as a metals machinist, to build a rope-ascending tool, today known as the Petzl Croll, that he had developed by adapting the Jumar to vertical caving. Pursuing these developments, Petzl started in the 1970s a caving equipment manufacturing company named Petzl. The development of the rappel rack and the evolution of mechanical ascension systems extended the practice and safety of vertical exploration to a wider range of cavers.

== Practice and equipment ==

Hard hats are worn to protect the head from bumps and falling rocks. The caver&#x27;s primary light source is usually mounted on the helmet in order to keep the hands free. Electric LED lights are most common. Many cavers carry two or more sources of light – one as primary and the others as backup in case the first fails. More often than not, a second light will be mounted to the helmet for quick transition if the primary fails. Carbide lamp systems are an older form of illumination, inspired by miner&#x27;s equipment, and are still used by some cavers, particularly on remote expeditions where electric charging facilities are not available.

The type of clothes worn underground varies according to the environment of the cave being explored, and the local culture. In cold caves, the caver may wear a warm base layer that retains its insulating properties when wet, such as a fleece (&quot;furry&quot;) suit or polypropylene underwear, and an oversuit of hard-wearing (e.g., cordura) or waterproof (e.g., PVC) material. Lighter clothing may be worn in warm caves, particularly if the cave is dry, and in tropical caves thin polypropylene clothing is used, to provide some abrasion protection while remaining as cool as possible. Wetsuits may be worn if the cave is particularly wet or involves stream passages. On the feet boots are worn – hiking-style boots in drier caves, or rubber boots (such as wellies) often with neoprene socks (&quot;wetsocks&quot;) in wetter caves. Knee-pads (and sometimes elbow-pads) are popular for protecting joints during crawls. Depending on the nature of the cave, gloves are sometimes worn to protect the hands against abrasion or cold. In pristine areas and for restoration, clean oversuits and powder-free, non-latex surgical gloves are used to protect the cave itself from contaminants.
Ropes are used for descending or ascending pitches (single rope technique or SRT) or for protection. Knots commonly used in caving are the figure-of-eight- (or figure-of-nine-) loop, bowline, alpine butterfly, and Italian hitch. Ropes are usually rigged using bolts, slings, and carabiners. In some cases cavers may choose to bring and use a flexible metal ladder.

In addition to the equipment already described, cavers frequently carry packs containing first-aid kits, emergency equipment, and food. Containers for securely transporting urine are also commonly carried. On longer trips, containers for securely transporting feces out of the cave are carried.

During very long trips, it may be necessary to camp in the cave – some cavers have stayed underground for many days, or in particularly extreme cases, for weeks at a time. This is particularly the case when exploring or mapping extensive cave systems, where it would be impractical to retrace the route back to the surface regularly. Such long trips necessitate the cavers carrying provisions, sleeping, and cooking equipment.

== Safety ==
Caves can be dangerous places; hypothermia, falling, flooding, falling rocks and physical exhaustion are the main risks. Rescuing people from underground is difficult and time-consuming, and requires special skills, training, and equipment. Full-scale cave rescues often involve the efforts of dozens of rescue workers (often other long-time cavers who have participated in specialized courses, as normal rescue staff are not sufficiently experienced in cave environments), who may themselves be put in jeopardy in effecting the rescue. This said, caving is not necessarily a high-risk sport (especially if it does not involve difficult climbs or diving). As in all physical sports, knowing one&#x27;s limitations is key.

Caving in warmer climates carries the risk of contracting histoplasmosis, a fungal infection that is contracted from bird or bat droppings. It can cause pneumonia and can disseminate in the body to cause continued infections.

In many parts of the world, leptospirosis, a type of bacterial infection spread by animals including rats, is a distinct threat. The presence of rat urine in rainwater or precipitation that enters the cave&#x27;s water system is the primary vector of infection. Complications are uncommon, but can be serious.
These safety risks while caving can be minimized by using a number of techniques:

*Checking that there is no danger of flooding during the expedition. Rainwater funneled underground can flood a cave very quickly, trapping people in cut-off passages and drowning them. In the UK, drowning accounts for almost half of all caving fatalities (see List of UK caving fatalities).
*Using teams of several cavers, preferably at least four. If an injury occurs, one caver stays with the injured person while the other two go out for help, providing assistance to each other on their way out.
*Notifying people outside the cave as to the intended return time. After an appropriate delay without a return, these will then organize a search party (usually made up by other cavers trained in cave rescues, as even professional emergency personnel are unlikely to have the skills to effect a rescue in difficult conditions).
*Use of helmet-mounted lights (hands-free) with extra batteries. American cavers recommend a minimum of three independent sources of light per person, but two lights is common practice among European cavers. 
*Sturdy clothing and footwear, as well as a helmet, are necessary to reduce the impact of abrasions, falls, and falling objects. Synthetic fibers and woolens, which dry quickly, shed water, and are warm when wet, are vastly preferred to cotton materials, which retain water and increase the risk of hypothermia. It is also helpful to have several layers of clothing, which can be shed (and stored in the pack) or added as needed. In watery cave passages, polypropylene thermal underwear or wetsuits may be required to avoid hypothermia.
*Cave passages look different from different directions. In long or complex caves, even experienced cavers can become lost. To reduce the risk of becoming lost, it is necessary to memorize the appearance of key navigational points in the cave as they are passed by the exploring party. Each member of a cave party shares responsibility for being able to remember the route out of the cave. In some caves it may be acceptable to mark a small number of key junctions with small stacks or &quot;cairns&quot; of rocks, or to leave a non-permanent mark such as high-visibility flagging tape tied to a projection.
*Vertical caving uses ladders or single rope technique (SRT) to avoid the need for climbing passages that are too difficult. SRT is a complex skill and requires proper training and well-maintained equipment. Some drops that are abseiled down may be as deep as several hundred meters (for example Harwoods Hole).

==Cave conservation==
Many cave environments are very fragile. Many speleothems can be damaged by even the slightest touch and some by impacts as slight as a breath. Research suggests that increased carbon dioxide levels can lead to &quot;a higher equilibrium concentration of calcium within the drip waters feeding the speleothems, and hence causes dissolution of existing features.&quot; In 2008, researchers found evidence that respiration from cave visitors may generate elevated carbon dioxide concentrations in caves, leading to increased temperatures of up to 3 °C and a dissolution of existing features.

Pollution is also of concern. Since water that flows through a cave eventually comes out in streams and rivers, any pollution may ultimately end up in someone&#x27;s drinking water, and can even seriously affect the surface environment, as well. Even minor pollution such as dropping organic material can have a dramatic effect on the cave biota.

Cave-dwelling species are also very fragile. Often, a particular species found in a cave may live within that cave alone, and be found nowhere else in the world; an example is the Alabama cave shrimp. Cave-dwelling species are accustomed to a near-constant climate of temperature and humidity, and any disturbance can be disruptive to the species&#x27; life cycles. Though cave wildlife may not always be immediately visible, it is typically nonetheless present in most caves.

Bats are one such fragile species of cave-dwelling animal. Bats which hibernate are most vulnerable during the winter season, when no food supply exists on the surface to replenish the bat&#x27;s store of energy should it be awakened from hibernation. Bats which migrate are most sensitive during the summer months when they are raising their young. For these reasons, visiting caves inhabited by hibernating bats is discouraged during cold months; and visiting caves inhabited by migratory bats is discouraged during the warmer months when they are most sensitive and vulnerable. Due to an affliction affecting bats in the northeastern US known as white nose syndrome (WNS), the US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service has called for a moratorium effective March 26, 2009, on caving activity in states known to have hibernacula (MD, NY, VT, NH, MA, CT, NJ, PA, VA, and WV) affected by WNS, as well as adjoining states.

Some cave passages may be marked with flagging tape or other indicators to show biologically, aesthetically, or archaeologically sensitive areas. Marked paths may show ways around notably fragile areas such as a pristine floor of sand or silt which may be thousands of years old, dating from the last time water flowed through the cave. Such deposits may easily be spoiled forever by a single misplaced step. Active formations such as flowstone can be similarly marred with a muddy footprint or handprint, and ancient human artifacts, such as fiber products, may even crumble to dust under all but the most gentle touch.

In 1988, concerned that cave resources were becoming increasingly damaged through unregulated use, Congress enacted the Federal Cave Resources Protection Act, giving land management agencies in the United States expanded authority to manage cave conservation on public land.

== Caving organizations ==

Cavers in many countries have created organizations for the administration and oversight of caving activities within their nations. The oldest of these is the French Federation of Speleology (originally Société de spéléologie) founded by Édouard-Alfred Martel in 1895, which produced the first periodical journal in speleology, &quot;Spelunca&quot;. The first University-based speleological institute in the world was founded in 1920 in Cluj-Napoca, Romania, by Emil Racovita, a Romanian biologist, zoologist, speleologist and explorer of Antarctica.

The British Speleological Association was established in 1935. In the United States, the National Speleological Society in the US was founded in 1941; however, it was originally formed as the Speleological Society of the District of Columbia on May 6, 1939.

An international speleological congress was proposed at a meeting in Valence-sur-Rhone, France in 1949 and first held in 1953 in Paris. The International Union of Speleology (UIS) was founded in 1965.

== See also ==
* 
* 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="0" end="6" title="Caving" label="Caving"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="22" end="32" title="Caving" label="spelunking"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="64" end="73" title="Caving" label="potholing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47728" start="124" end="131" title="pastime" label="pastime"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="150" end="154" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232001" start="186" end="195" title="show cave" label="show cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q179132" start="212" end="222" title="speleology" label="speleology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631696" start="434" end="441" title="Pitch (ascent/descent)" label="pitches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643884" start="489" end="500" title="Cave diving" label="Cave diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054971" start="759" end="789" title="Cave survey" label="surveying and mapping of caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q309162" start="1042" end="1055" title="extreme sport" label="extreme sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="1386" end="1394" title="Flood" label="flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="1396" end="1407" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309032" start="1434" end="1437" title="Single-rope technique" label="SRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q206091" start="1530" end="1539" title="canyoning" label="canyoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6864117" start="1544" end="1548" title="mine exploration" label="mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130439" start="1553" end="1570" title="urban exploration" label="urban exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q968907" start="1642" end="1658" title="outdoor activity" label="outdoor activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q36908" start="1729" end="1743" title="mountaineering" label="mountaineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q179643" start="1747" end="1753" title="Underwater diving" label="diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1943" end="1948" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054937" start="2178" end="2190" title="cave digging" label="cave digging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055150" start="2309" end="2323" title="Caving in New Zealand" label="in New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502212" start="2598" end="2613" title="Lava River Cave" label="Lava River Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143245" start="2638" end="2646" title="Cueva del Viento" label="Tenerife"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="3160" end="3167" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435994" start="3186" end="3200" title="vertical caving" label="vertical caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129961" start="3202" end="3212" title="Clay Perry" label="Clay Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3324" end="3335" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3422" end="3427" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="3527" end="3535" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="3631" end="3641" title="American English" label="US English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139380" start="3914" end="3944" title="National Speleological Society" label="National Speleological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296351" start="4069" end="4083" title="bumper sticker" label="bumper sticker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221968" start="4412" end="4425" title="John Birkbeck" label="John Birkbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493828" start="4464" end="4475" title="Gaping Gill" label="Gaping Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737334" start="4488" end="4496" title="Alum Pot" label="Alum Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733948" start="4556" end="4572" title="Herbert E. Balch" label="Herbert E. Balch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274972" start="4589" end="4606" title="Wookey Hole Caves" label="Wookey Hole Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055112" start="4653" end="4678" title="caves of the Mendip Hills" label="caves of the Mendip Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q17066733" start="4724" end="4753" title="Yorkshire Ramblers&amp;#x27; Club" label="Yorkshire Ramblers&amp;#x27; Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q274217" start="4826" end="4847" title="Édouard-Alfred Martel" label="Édouard-Alfred Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540116" start="4915" end="4933" title="Gouffre de Padirac" label="Gouffre de Padirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="5136" end="5144" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q242681" start="5157" end="5183" title="Mammoth Cave National Park" label="Mammoth Cave National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5462398" start="5230" end="5243" title="Floyd Collins" label="Floyd Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="5377" end="5381" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q254077" start="5436" end="5443" title="Causses" label="Causses"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="5448" end="5456" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436662" start="5537" end="5551" title="Robert de Joly" label="Robert de Joly"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5553" end="5566" title="Guy de Lavaur" label="Guy de Lavaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343492" start="5571" end="5587" title="Norbert Casteret" label="Norbert Casteret"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5677" end="5689" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3384418" start="5718" end="5734" title="Pierre Chevalier (caver)" label="Pierre Chevalier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3069303" start="5736" end="5749" title="Fernand Petzl" label="Fernand Petzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q729243" start="5796" end="5811" title="Dent de Crolles" label="Dent de Crolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="5829" end="5837" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139380" start="6419" end="6449" title="National Speleological Society" label="National Speleological Society"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6568" end="6583" title="Bill Cuddington" label="Bill Cuddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309032" start="6643" end="6664" title="single-rope technique" label="single-rope technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q942145" start="6799" end="6804" title="Jumar" label="Jumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179456" start="6935" end="6946" title="Petzl Croll" label="Petzl Croll"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081375" start="7115" end="7120" title="Petzl" label="Petzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q332231" start="7145" end="7156" title="Abseiling" label="rappel rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058262" start="7323" end="7331" title="Hard hat" label="Hard hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25504" start="7505" end="7508" title="LED" label="LED"/>
<link wikidata="Q606683" start="7756" end="7768" title="Carbide lamp" label="Carbide lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="7985" end="7992" title="clothes" label="clothes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42329" start="8208" end="8214" title="Wool" label="fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q772580" start="8307" end="8314" title="cordura" label="cordura"/>
<link wikidata="Q146368" start="8337" end="8340" title="Polyvinyl chloride" label="PVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q13450283" start="8561" end="8568" title="Wetsuit" label="Wetsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q190868" start="8655" end="8659" title="boot" label="boot"/>
<link wikidata="Q260142" start="8732" end="8739" title="wellies" label="wellies"/>
<link wikidata="Q143937" start="8752" end="8760" title="neoprene" label="neoprene"/>
<link wikidata="Q37425" start="8807" end="8811" title="Knee" label="Knee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42586" start="8832" end="8837" title="Elbow-joint" label="elbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q178541" start="9085" end="9100" title="Medical gloves" label="surgical gloves"/>
<link wikidata="Q527395" start="9257" end="9261" title="Knot" label="Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q340952" start="9295" end="9310" title="figure-of-eight loop" label="figure-of-eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516669" start="9316" end="9330" title="figure-of-nine loop" label="figure-of-nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q753705" start="9339" end="9346" title="bowline" label="bowline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503006" start="9348" end="9364" title="alpine butterfly knot" label="alpine butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q732975" start="9370" end="9383" title="Italian hitch" label="Italian hitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561963" start="9416" end="9421" title="bolt (climbing)" label="bolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q200636" start="9423" end="9428" title="sling (climbing equipment)" label="sling"/>
<link wikidata="Q588395" start="9435" end="9444" title="carabiner" label="carabiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q168639" start="9513" end="9519" title="ladder" label="ladder"/>
<link wikidata="Q133981" start="9611" end="9620" title="First aid" label="first-aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40924" start="9695" end="9700" title="urine" label="urine"/>
<link wikidata="Q496" start="9782" end="9787" title="feces" label="feces"/>
<link wikidata="Q333495" start="10303" end="10310" title="falling (accident)" label="falling"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068" start="10312" end="10320" title="flooding" label="flooding"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="10349" end="10359" title="Fatigue (medical)" label="exhaustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q627625" start="11040" end="11054" title="histoplasmosis" label="histoplasmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="11135" end="11144" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155098" start="11237" end="11250" title="leptospirosis" label="leptospirosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q506616" start="11773" end="11781" title="drowning" label="drowning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996611" start="11863" end="11891" title="List of UK caving fatalities" label="List of UK caving fatalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643871" start="12299" end="12310" title="cave rescue" label="cave rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060538" start="12439" end="12460" title="Headlamp (outdoor)" label="helmet-mounted lights"/>
<link wikidata="Q173603" start="12684" end="12690" title="helmet" label="helmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q146174" start="13095" end="13108" title="polypropylene" label="polypropylene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036696" start="13164" end="13175" title="hypothermia" label="hypothermia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456937" start="13749" end="13762" title="flagging (tape)" label="flagging tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435994" start="13786" end="13801" title="Pit cave" label="Vertical caving"/>
<link wikidata="Q332231" start="14013" end="14021" title="Abseiling" label="abseiled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587960" start="14081" end="14094" title="Harwoods Hole" label="Harwoods Hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="14166" end="14176" title="speleothem" label="speleothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783121" start="14995" end="15011" title="organic material" label="organic material"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935149" start="15239" end="15258" title="Alabama cave shrimp" label="Alabama cave shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="15537" end="15540" title="Bat" label="Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q159408" start="15607" end="15616" title="hibernation" label="hibernate"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="15800" end="15807" title="Bird migration" label="migrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362025" start="16186" end="16205" title="white nose syndrome" label="white nose syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="16679" end="16683" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q270699" start="16687" end="16691" title="silt" label="silt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391396" start="16884" end="16893" title="flowstone" label="flowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19880447" start="17191" end="17228" title="Federal Cave Resources Protection Act of 1988" label="Federal Cave Resources Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091845" start="17534" end="17565" title="French Federation of Speleology" label="French Federation of Speleology"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="17812" end="17823" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q957599" start="17837" end="17850" title="Emil Racovita" label="Emil Racovita"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971085" start="17931" end="17964" title="British Speleological Association" label="British Speleological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139380" start="18016" end="18046" title="National Speleological Society" label="National Speleological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="18144" end="18168" title="Washington, D.C." label="the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054132" start="18326" end="18359" title="International Union of Speleology" label="International Union of Speleology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5778" wikidata="Q35509" url="?curid=5778" title="Cave">
<text>Caves or caverns are natural voids under the Earth&#x27;s surface. Caves often form by the weathering of rock and often extend deep underground. Exogene caves are smaller openings that extend a relatively short distance underground (such as rock shelters). Caves which extend further underground than the opening is wide are called endogene caves.

Speleology is the science of exploration and study of all aspects of caves and the cave environment. Visiting or exploring caves for recreation may be called &quot;caving&quot;, &quot;potholing&quot;, or &quot;spelunking&quot;.

==Formation types==
The formation and development of caves is known as &quot;speleogenesis&quot;; it can occur over the course of millions of years. Caves can range widely in size, and are formed by various geological processes. These may involve a combination of chemical processes, erosion by water, tectonic forces, microorganisms, pressure, and atmospheric influences. Isotopic dating techniques can be applied to cave sediments, to determine the timescale of the geological events which formed and shaped present-day caves.

It is estimated that a cave cannot be more than vertically beneath the surface due to the pressure of overlying rocks. This does not, however, impose a maximum depth for a cave which is measured from its highest entrance to its lowest point, as the amount of rock above the lowest point is dependent on the topography of the landscape above it. For karst caves the maximum depth is determined on the basis of the lower limit of karst forming processes, coinciding with the base of the soluble carbonate rocks. Most caves are formed in limestone by dissolution.

Caves can be classified in various other ways as well, including a contrast between active and relict: active caves have water flowing through them; relict caves do not, though water may be retained in them. Types of active caves include inflow caves (&quot;into which a stream sinks&quot;), outflow caves (&quot;from which a stream emerges&quot;), and through caves (&quot;traversed by a stream&quot;).
===Solutional===

Solutional caves or karst caves are the most frequently occurring caves. Such caves form in rock that is soluble; most occur in limestone, but they can also form in other rocks including chalk, dolomite, marble, salt, and gypsum. Except for salt caves, solutional caves result when rock is dissolved by natural acid in groundwater that seeps through bedding planes, faults, joints, and comparable features. Over time cracks enlarge to become caves and cave systems.

The largest and most abundant solutional caves are located in limestone. Limestone dissolves under the action of rainwater and groundwater charged with H2CO3 (carbonic acid) and naturally occurring organic acids. The dissolution process produces a distinctive landform known as &quot;karst&quot;, characterized by sinkholes and underground drainage. Limestone caves are often adorned with calcium carbonate formations produced through slow precipitation. These include flowstones, stalactites, stalagmites, helictites, soda straws and columns. These secondary mineral deposits in caves are called &quot;speleothems&quot;.

The portions of a solutional cave that are below the water table or the local level of the groundwater will be flooded.

Lechuguilla Cave in New Mexico and nearby Carlsbad Cavern are now believed to be examples of another type of solutional cave. They were formed by H2S (hydrogen sulfide) gas rising from below, where reservoirs of oil give off sulfurous fumes. This gas mixes with groundwater and forms H2SO4 (sulfuric acid). The acid then dissolves the limestone from below, rather than from above, by acidic water percolating from the surface.

===Primary===
Caves formed at the same time as the surrounding rock are called primary caves.

Lava tubes are formed through volcanic activity and are the most common primary caves. As lava flows downhill, its surface cools and solidifies. Hot liquid lava continues to flow under that crust, and if most of it flows out, a hollow tube remains. Such caves can be found in the Canary Islands, Jeju-do, the basaltic plains of Eastern Idaho, and in other places. Kazumura Cave near Hilo, Hawaii is a remarkably long and deep lava tube; it is .

Lava caves include but are not limited to lava tubes. Other caves formed through volcanic activity include rifts, lava molds, open vertical conduits, inflationary, blisters, among others.

===Sea or littoral===
Sea caves are found along coasts around the world. A special case is littoral caves, which are formed by wave action in zones of weakness in sea cliffs. Often these weaknesses are faults, but they may also be dykes or bedding-plane contacts. Some wave-cut caves are now above sea level because of later uplift. Elsewhere, in places such as Thailand&#x27;s Phang Nga Bay, solutional caves have been flooded by the sea and are now subject to littoral erosion. Sea caves are generally around in length, but may exceed .

===Erosional===

Erosional caves are those that form entirely by erosion by flowing streams carrying rocks and other sediments. These can form in any type of rock, including hard rocks such as granite. Generally there must be some zone of weakness to guide the water, such as a fault or joint. A subtype of the erosional cave is the wind or aeolian cave, carved by wind-born sediments. Many caves formed initially by solutional processes often undergo a subsequent phase of erosional or vadose enlargement where active streams or rivers pass through them.

===Glacier===
Glacier caves are formed by melting ice and flowing water within and under glaciers. The cavities are influenced by the very slow flow of the ice, which tends to collapse the caves again. Glacier caves are sometimes misidentified as &quot;ice caves&quot;, though this latter term is properly reserved for bedrock caves that contain year-round ice formations.

===Fracture===
Fracture caves are formed when layers of more soluble minerals, such as gypsum, dissolve out from between layers of less soluble rock. These rocks fracture and collapse in blocks of stone.

===Talus===

Talus caves are formed by the openings among large boulders that have fallen down into a random heap, often at the bases of cliffs. These unstable deposits are called talus or scree, and may be subject to frequent rockfalls and landslides.

===Anchialine===

Anchialine caves are caves, usually coastal, containing a mixture of freshwater and saline water (usually sea water). They occur in many parts of the world, and often contain highly specialized and endemic fauna.

==Physical patterns==
*&quot;Branchwork caves&quot; resemble surface dendritic stream patterns; they are made up of passages that join downstream as tributaries. Branchwork caves are the most common of cave patterns and are formed near sinkholes where groundwater recharge occurs. Each passage or branch is fed by a separate recharge source and converges into other higher order branches downstream.
*&quot;Angular network caves&quot; form from intersecting fissures of carbonate rock that have had fractures widened by chemical erosion. These fractures form high, narrow, straight passages that persist in widespread closed loops.
*&quot;Anastomotic caves&quot; largely resemble surface braided streams with their passages separating and then meeting further down drainage. They usually form along one bed or structure, and only rarely cross into upper or lower beds.
*&quot;Spongework caves&quot; are formed when solution cavities are joined by mixing of chemically diverse water. The cavities form a pattern that is three-dimensional and random, resembling a sponge.
*&quot;Ramiform caves&quot; form as irregular large rooms, galleries, and passages. These randomized three-dimensional rooms form from a rising water table that erodes the carbonate rock with hydrogen-sulfide enriched water.
*&quot;Pit caves&quot; (vertical caves, potholes, or simply &quot;pits&quot;) consist of a vertical shaft rather than a horizontal cave passage. They may or may not be associated with one of the above structural patterns.

==Geographic distribution==


Caves are found throughout the world, although the distribution of documented cave system is heavily skewed towards those countries where caving has been popular for many years (such as France, Italy, Australia, the UK, the United States, etc.). As a result, explored caves are found widely in Europe, Asia, North America and Oceania, but are sparse in South America, Africa, and Antarctica.

This is a rough generalization, as large expanses of North America and Asia contain no documented caves, whereas areas such as the Madagascar dry deciduous forests and parts of Brazil contain many documented caves. As the world&#x27;s expanses of soluble bedrock are researched by cavers, the distribution of documented caves is likely to shift. For example, China, despite containing around half the world&#x27;s exposed limestone—more than —has relatively few documented caves.

==Records and superlatives==
*The cave system with the &quot;greatest total length&quot; of surveyed passage is Mammoth Cave in Kentucky, US, at .
*The longest surveyed &quot;underwater cave&quot;, and second longest overall, is Sistema Ox Bel Ha in Yucatán, Mexico at .
*The &quot;deepest known cave&quot;—measured from its highest entrance to its lowest point—is Veryovkina Cave in Abkhazia, Georgia, with a depth of . This was the first cave to be explored to a depth of more than . (The first cave to be descended below was Gouffre Berger in France.) The Sarma and Illyuzia-Mezhonnogo-Snezhnaya caves in Georgia, (, and respectively) are the current second- and third-deepest caves. The deepest outside Georgia is Lamprechtsofen Vogelschacht Weg Schacht in Austria, which is deep.
*The &quot;deepest vertical shaft&quot; in a cave is in Vrtoglavica Cave in Slovenia. The second deepest is Ghar-e-Ghala at in the Parau massif near Kermanshah in Iran.
* The deepest reached by a remotely operated underwater vehicle in an &quot;underwater cave&quot; is , in the Hranice Abyss in the Czech Republic.
*The Miao Room is the world&#x27;s &quot;largest known room by volume&quot;, with a measured volume of . The &quot;largest known room by surface&quot; is Sarawak Chamber, in the Gunung Mulu National Park (Miri, Sarawak, Borneo, Malaysia), a sloping, boulder strewn chamber with an area of . The largest room in a show cave is the Salle de la Verna in the French Pyrenees.
*The &quot;largest passage&quot; ever discovered is in the Son Doong Cave in Phong Nha-Kẻ Bàng National Park in Quảng Bình Province, Vietnam. It is in length, high and wide over most of its length, but over high and wide for part of its length.

===Five longest surveyed===

# Mammoth Cave, Kentucky, US
# Sistema Ox Bel Ha, Mexico
# Sistema Sac Actun/Sistema Dos Ojos, Mexico
# Jewel Cave, South Dakota, US
# Shuanghedong Cave Network, China

==Ecology==

Cave-inhabiting animals are often categorized as troglobites (cave-limited species), troglophiles (species that can live their entire lives in caves, but also occur in other environments), trogloxenes (species that use caves, but cannot complete their life cycle fully in caves) and accidentals (animals not in one of the previous categories). Some authors use separate terminology for aquatic forms (for example, stygobites, stygophiles, and stygoxenes).

Of these animals, the troglobites are perhaps the most unusual organisms. Troglobitic species often show a number of characteristics, termed troglomorphic, associated with their adaptation to subterranean life. These characteristics may include a loss of pigment (often resulting in a pale or white coloration), a loss of eyes (or at least of optical functionality), an elongation of appendages, and an enhancement of other senses (such as the ability to sense vibrations in water). Aquatic troglobites (or stygobites), such as the endangered Alabama cave shrimp, live in bodies of water found in caves and get nutrients from detritus washed into their caves and from the feces of bats and other cave inhabitants. Other aquatic troglobites include cave fish, and cave salamanders such as the olm and the Texas blind salamander.

Cave insects such as &quot;Oligaphorura&quot; (formerly &quot;Archaphorura&quot;) &quot;schoetti&quot; are troglophiles, reaching in length. They have extensive distribution and have been studied fairly widely. Most specimens are female, but a male specimen was collected from St Cuthberts Swallet in 1969.

Bats, such as the gray bat and Mexican free-tailed bat, are trogloxenes and are often found in caves; they forage outside of the caves. Some species of cave crickets are classified as trogloxenes, because they roost in caves by day and forage above ground at night.

Because of the fragility of cave ecosystems, and the fact that cave regions tend to be isolated from one another, caves harbor a number of endangered species, such as the Tooth cave spider, liphistius trapdoor spider, and the gray bat.

Caves are visited by many surface-living animals, including humans. These are usually relatively short-lived incursions, due to the lack of light and sustenance.

Cave entrances often have typical florae. For instance, in the eastern temperate United States, cave entrances are most frequently (and often densely) populated by the bulblet fern, &quot;Cystopteris bulbifera&quot;.

==Archaeological and cultural importance==

People have made use of caves throughout history. The earliest human fossils found in caves come from a series of caves near Krugersdorp and Mokopane in South Africa. The cave sites of Sterkfontein, Swartkrans, Kromdraai B, Drimolen, Malapa, Cooper&#x27;s D, Gladysvale, Gondolin and Makapansgat have yielded a range of early human species dating back to between three and one million years ago, including &quot;Australopithecus africanus&quot;, &quot;Australopithecus sediba&quot; and &quot;Paranthropus robustus&quot;. However, it is not generally thought that these early humans were living in the caves, but that they were brought into the caves by carnivores that had killed them.

The first early hominid ever found in Africa, the Taung Child in 1924, was also thought for many years to come from a cave, where it had been deposited after being predated on by an eagle. However, this is now debated (Hopley et al., 2013; Am. J. Phys. Anthrop.). Caves do form in the dolomite of the Ghaap Plateau, including the Early, Middle and Later Stone Age site of Wonderwerk Cave; however, the caves that form along the escarpment&#x27;s edge, like that hypothesised for the Taung Child, are formed within a secondary limestone deposit called tufa. There is numerous evidence for other early human species inhabiting caves from at least one million years ago in different parts of the world, including &quot;Homo erectus&quot; in China at Zhoukoudian, &quot;Homo rhodesiensis&quot; in South Africa at the Cave of Hearths (Makapansgat), &quot;Homo neanderthalensis&quot; and &quot;Homo heidelbergensis&quot; in Europe at Archaeological Site of Atapuerca, &quot;Homo floresiensis&quot; in Indonesia, and the Denisovans in southern Siberia.

In southern Africa, early modern humans regularly used sea caves as shelter starting about 180,000 years ago when they learned to exploit the sea for the first time. The oldest known site is PP13B at Pinnacle Point. This may have allowed rapid expansion of humans out of Africa and colonization of areas of the world such as Australia by 60–50,000 years ago. Throughout southern Africa, Australia, and Europe, early modern humans used caves and rock shelters as sites for rock art, such as those at Giant&#x27;s Castle. Among the known sacred caves are China&#x27;s Cave of a Thousand Buddhas and the sacred caves of Crete.

Paleolithic cave paintings have been found throughout the world dating from 64,800 years old for non-figurative art and 43,900 years old for figurative art.

==Caves and acoustics==
The importance of sound in caves predates a modern understanding of acoustics. Archaeologists have uncovered relationships between paintings of dots and lines, in specific areas of resonance, within the caves of Spain and France, as well as instruments depicting paleolithic motifs, indicators of musical events and rituals. Clusters of paintings were often found in areas with notable acoustics, sometimes even replicating the sounds of the animals depicted on the walls. The human voice was also theorized to be used as an echolocation device to navigate darker areas of the caves where torches were less useful. Dots of red ochre are often found in spaces with the highest resonance, where the production of paintings was too difficult.

Caves continue to provide usage for modern-day explorers of acoustics. Today Cumberland Caverns provides one of the best examples for modern musical usages of caves. Not only are the caves utilized for reverberation, but for the dampening qualities of their abnormal faces as well. The irregularities in the walls of the Cumberland Caverns diffuse sounds bouncing off the walls and give the space an almost recording studio-like quality. During the 20th century musicians began to explore the possibility of using caves as locations as clubs and concert halls, including the likes of Dinah Shore, Roy Acuff, and Benny Goodman. Unlike today, these early performances were typically held in the mouths of the caves, as the lack of technology made depths of the interior inaccessible with musical equipment. In Luray Caverns, Virginia, a functioning organ has been developed that generates sound by mallets striking stalactites, each with a different pitch.

==See also==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="0" end="5" title="Cave" label="Caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="9" end="16" title="Cave" label="caverns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="45" end="50" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201252" start="58" end="65" title="Planetary surface" label="surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q179177" start="91" end="101" title="weathering" label="weathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="145" end="158" title="Cave" label="Exogene caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149405" start="241" end="253" title="rock shelter" label="rock shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="332" end="346" title="Cave" label="endogene caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q179132" start="349" end="359" title="Speleology" label="Speleology"/>
<link wikidata="Q200341" start="507" end="575" title="Caving" label="&amp;quot;caving&amp;quot;, &amp;quot;potholing&amp;quot;, or &amp;quot;spelunking&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7575823" start="655" end="668" title="speleogenesis" label="speleogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="1457" end="1462" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1643" end="1652" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q739398" start="1656" end="1667" title="Solvation" label="dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="2220" end="2229" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="2279" end="2284" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134814" start="2286" end="2294" title="Dolomite (rock)" label="dolomite"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="2296" end="2302" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q82658" start="2314" end="2320" title="gypsum" label="gypsum"/>
<link wikidata="Q115472122" start="2333" end="2343" title="Salt_cave" label="salt caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q161598" start="2411" end="2422" title="groundwater" label="groundwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q806617" start="2442" end="2456" title="bedding planes" label="bedding planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="2458" end="2464" title="Fault (geology)" label="faults"/>
<link wikidata="Q104334" start="2718" end="2731" title="carbonic acid" label="carbonic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q421948" start="2757" end="2769" title="organic acid" label="organic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16817" start="2843" end="2848" title="karst" label="karst"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="2873" end="2881" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="2948" end="2965" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q113796" start="2999" end="3012" title="Precipitation (chemistry)" label="precipitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391396" start="3028" end="3037" title="flowstone" label="flowstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q177197" start="3040" end="3050" title="stalactite" label="stalactite"/>
<link wikidata="Q181312" start="3053" end="3063" title="stalagmite" label="stalagmite"/>
<link wikidata="Q59791" start="3066" end="3075" title="helictite" label="helictite"/>
<link wikidata="Q853592" start="3078" end="3088" title="soda straw" label="soda straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q154507" start="3162" end="3172" title="speleothem" label="speleothem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3342272" start="3235" end="3246" title="water table" label="water table"/>
<link wikidata="Q387771" start="3303" end="3319" title="Lechuguilla Cave" label="Lechuguilla Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="3323" end="3333" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q273195" start="3345" end="3360" title="Carlsbad Cavern" label="Carlsbad Cavern"/>
<link wikidata="Q170591" start="3454" end="3470" title="hydrogen sulfide" label="hydrogen sulfide"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="3594" end="3607" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27919" start="3826" end="3835" title="Lava tube" label="Lava tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="3856" end="3864" title="volcanic" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="3916" end="3920" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="4106" end="4120" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q41164" start="4122" end="4129" title="Jeju Province" label="Jeju-do"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330203" start="4154" end="4167" title="Eastern Idaho" label="Eastern Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q744686" start="4190" end="4203" title="Kazumura Cave" label="Kazumura Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q216258" start="4209" end="4213" title="Hilo" label="Hilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="4215" end="4221" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="4823" end="4831" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q717765" start="4839" end="4852" title="Phang Nga Bay" label="Phang Nga Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q462188" start="5692" end="5706" title="Creep (deformation)" label="very slow flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317637" start="5811" end="5819" title="ice cave" label="ice cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133195" start="6326" end="6331" title="scree" label="scree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654036" start="6364" end="6372" title="rockfall" label="rockfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="6378" end="6387" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q188734" start="6859" end="6867" title="sinkhole" label="sinkhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670986" start="6875" end="6895" title="groundwater recharge" label="groundwater recharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435994" start="7925" end="7933" title="Pit cave" label="Pit cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q285831" start="8695" end="8727" title="Madagascar dry deciduous forests" label="Madagascar dry deciduous forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="8741" end="8747" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q242681" start="9157" end="9169" title="Mammoth Cave" label="Mammoth Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="9173" end="9181" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419105" start="9274" end="9291" title="Sistema Ox Bel Ha" label="Sistema Ox Bel Ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q130978" start="9295" end="9302" title="Yucatán Peninsula" label="Yucatán"/>
<link wikidata="Q46605456" start="9410" end="9425" title="Veryovkina Cave" label="Veryovkina Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="9429" end="9437" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="9439" end="9446" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663452" start="9573" end="9587" title="Gouffre Berger" label="Gouffre Berger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9604" end="9609" title="Sarma, Georgia" label="Sarma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9614" end="9643" title="Illyuzia-Mezhonnogo-Snezhnaya" label="Illyuzia-Mezhonnogo-Snezhnaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q874850" start="9763" end="9802" title="Lamprechtsofen" label="Lamprechtsofen Vogelschacht Weg Schacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127219" start="9886" end="9902" title="Vrtoglavica Cave" label="Vrtoglavica Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="9906" end="9914" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q180078" start="9979" end="9989" title="Kermanshah" label="Kermanshah"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="9993" end="9997" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q618465" start="10026" end="10062" title="remotely operated underwater vehicle" label="remotely operated underwater vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379640" start="10109" end="10122" title="Hranice Abyss" label="Hranice Abyss"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="10130" end="10144" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492418" start="10151" end="10160" title="Miao Room" label="Miao Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q555991" start="10300" end="10315" title="Sarawak Chamber" label="Sarawak Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q61535" start="10324" end="10349" title="Gunung Mulu National Park" label="Gunung Mulu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q986803" start="10351" end="10355" title="Miri" label="Miri"/>
<link wikidata="Q170462" start="10357" end="10364" title="Sarawak" label="Sarawak"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="10366" end="10372" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="10374" end="10382" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2232001" start="10459" end="10468" title="show cave" label="show cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q21013094" start="10476" end="10493" title="La Verna cave" label="Salle de la Verna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="10508" end="10516" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q44889" start="10577" end="10591" title="Son Doong Cave" label="Son Doong Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q23513" start="10595" end="10626" title="Phong Nha-Kẻ Bàng National Park" label="Phong Nha-Kẻ Bàng National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q23533" start="10630" end="10649" title="Quảng Bình Province" label="Quảng Bình Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="10651" end="10658" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q242681" start="10795" end="10807" title="Mammoth Cave" label="Mammoth Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="10809" end="10817" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419105" start="10824" end="10841" title="Sistema Ox Bel Ha" label="Sistema Ox Bel Ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290344" start="10852" end="10869" title="Sistema Sac Actun" label="Sistema Sac Actun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273902" start="10870" end="10886" title="Sistema Dos Ojos" label="Sistema Dos Ojos"/>
<link wikidata="Q386178" start="10897" end="10907" title="Jewel Cave" label="Jewel Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="10909" end="10921" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q39045351" start="10928" end="10953" title="Shuanghedong Cave Network" label="Shuanghedong Cave Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10955" end="10960" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644014" start="11024" end="11034" title="troglobite" label="troglobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141786" start="11060" end="11071" title="troglophile" label="troglophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539865" start="11164" end="11174" title="trogloxene" label="trogloxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629362" start="11389" end="11398" title="stygobite" label="stygobite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629362" start="11401" end="11411" title="stygophile" label="stygophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7629362" start="11418" end="11427" title="stygoxene" label="stygoxene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935149" start="11975" end="11994" title="Alabama cave shrimp" label="Alabama cave shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054968" start="12195" end="12210" title="cave salamander" label="cave salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q15856" start="12224" end="12227" title="olm" label="olm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499777" start="12236" end="12258" title="Texas blind salamander" label="Texas blind salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054940" start="12261" end="12273" title="Cave insects" label="Cave insects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592917" start="12538" end="12558" title="St Cuthberts Swallet" label="St Cuthberts Swallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="12569" end="12572" title="Bat" label="Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834518" start="12587" end="12595" title="gray bat" label="gray bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q913930" start="12600" end="12623" title="Mexican free-tailed bat" label="Mexican free-tailed bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q790534" start="12721" end="12733" title="cave cricket" label="cave cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218374" start="13007" end="13024" title="Tooth cave spider" label="Tooth cave spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q10593" start="13026" end="13052" title="Liphistiidae" label="liphistius trapdoor spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201282" start="13424" end="13445" title="Cystopteris bulbifera" label="Cystopteris bulbifera"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="13567" end="13573" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476862" start="13683" end="13695" title="Sterkfontein" label="Sterkfontein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887011" start="13697" end="13707" title="Swartkrans" label="Swartkrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438847" start="13709" end="13718" title="Kromdraai" label="Kromdraai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259042" start="13722" end="13730" title="Drimolen" label="Drimolen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167179" start="13732" end="13738" title="Malapa" label="Malapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q239272" start="13910" end="13936" title="Australopithecus africanus" label="Australopithecus africanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310826" start="13950" end="13973" title="Australopithecus sediba" label="Australopithecus sediba"/>
<link wikidata="Q310529" start="13990" end="14011" title="Paranthropus robustus" label="Paranthropus robustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q762810" start="14235" end="14246" title="Taung Child" label="Taung Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543042" start="14557" end="14572" title="Wonderwerk Cave" label="Wonderwerk Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q193685" start="14736" end="14740" title="tufa" label="tufa"/>
<link wikidata="Q101362" start="14901" end="14913" title="Homo erectus" label="Homo erectus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13659137" start="14932" end="14943" title="Zhoukoudian" label="Zhoukoudian"/>
<link wikidata="Q131464" start="14951" end="14968" title="Homo rhodesiensis" label="Homo rhodesiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071706" start="15015" end="15026" title="Makapansgat" label="Makapansgat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="15035" end="15056" title="Homo neanderthalensis" label="Homo neanderthalensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q105784" start="15073" end="15093" title="Homo heidelbergensis" label="Homo heidelbergensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q923894" start="15113" end="15145" title="Archaeological Site of Atapuerca" label="Archaeological Site of Atapuerca"/>
<link wikidata="Q186266" start="15153" end="15170" title="Homo floresiensis" label="Homo floresiensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q151055" start="15199" end="15209" title="Denisovans" label="Denisovans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814354" start="15432" end="15446" title="Pinnacle Point" label="Pinnacle Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q3432135" start="15731" end="15750" title="Giant&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Giant&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777137" start="15833" end="15854" title="sacred caves of Crete" label="sacred caves of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="15869" end="15883" title="cave paintings" label="cave paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193847" start="16857" end="16875" title="Cumberland Caverns" label="Cumberland Caverns"/>
<link wikidata="Q466502" start="17364" end="17375" title="Dinah Shore" label="Dinah Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q455773" start="17377" end="17386" title="Roy Acuff" label="Roy Acuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q46755" start="17392" end="17405" title="Benny Goodman" label="Benny Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476610" start="17588" end="17601" title="Luray Caverns" label="Luray Caverns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="17627" end="17632" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5781" wikidata="Q683566" url="?curid=5781" title="Chinese numerals">
<text>Chinese numerals are words and characters used to denote numbers in written Chinese.

Today, speakers of Chinese languages use three written numeral systems: the system of Arabic numerals used worldwide, and two indigenous systems. The more familiar indigenous system is based on Chinese characters that correspond to numerals in the spoken language. These may be shared with other languages of the Chinese cultural sphere such as Korean, Japanese, and Vietnamese. Most people and institutions in China primarily use the Arabic or mixed Arabic-Chinese systems for convenience, with traditional Chinese numerals used in finance, mainly for writing amounts on cheques, banknotes, some ceremonial occasions, some boxes, and on commercials.
The other indigenous system consists of the Suzhou numerals, or &quot;huama&quot;, a positional system, the only surviving form of the rod numerals. These were once used by Chinese mathematicians, and later by merchants in Chinese markets, such as those in Hong Kong until the 1990s, but were gradually supplanted by Arabic numerals.

== Basic counting in Chinese ==

The Chinese character numeral system consists of the Chinese characters used by the Chinese written language to write spoken numerals. Similar to spelling-out numbers in English (e.g., &quot;one thousand nine hundred forty-five&quot;), it is not an independent system &quot;per se&quot;. Since it reflects spoken language, it does not use the positional system as in Arabic numerals, in the same way that spelling out numbers in English does not.

=== Ordinary numerals ===
There are characters representing the numbers zero through nine, and other characters representing larger numbers such as tens, hundreds, thousands, ten thousands and hundred millions. There are two sets of characters for Chinese numerals: one for everyday writing, known as (), and one for use in commercial, accounting or financial contexts, known as ( or &#x27;capital numbers&#x27;). The latter were developed by Wu Zetian () and were further refined by the Hongwu Emperor (). They arose because the characters used for writing numerals are geometrically simple, so simply using those numerals cannot prevent forgeries in the same way spelling numbers out in English would. A forger could easily change the everyday characters (30) to (5000) just by adding a few strokes. That would not be possible when writing using the financial characters (30) and (5000). They are also referred to as &quot;banker&#x27;s numerals&quot; of &quot;anti-fraud numerals&quot;. For the same reason, rod numerals were never used in commercial records.
1. Wugniu is a pan-Wu romanization scheme, but the exact romanization depends on the variety. The romanization listed here is specifically for Shanghainese.

=== Regional usage ===
== Powers of 10==
=== Large numbers===

For numbers larger than 10,000, similarly to the long and short scales in the West, there have been four systems in ancient and modern usage. The original one, with unique names for all powers of ten up to the 14th, is ascribed to the Yellow Emperor in the 6th century book by Zhen Luan, . In modern Chinese, only the second system is used, in which the same ancient names are used, but each represents a myriad, times the previous:

In practice, this situation does not lead to ambiguity, with the exception of , which means 1012 according to the system in common usage throughout the Chinese communities as well as in Japan and Korea, but has also been used for 106 in recent years (especially in mainland China for megabyte). To avoid problems arising from the ambiguity, the PRC government never uses this character in official documents, but uses ) or instead. Partly due to this, combinations of and are often used instead of the larger units of the traditional system as well, for example instead of . The ROC government in Taiwan uses to mean 1012 in official documents.

=== Large numbers from Buddhism ===

Numerals beyond zǎi come from Buddhist texts in Sanskrit, but are mostly found in ancient texts. Some of the following words are still being used today, but may have transferred meanings.

===Small numbers===
The following are characters used to denote small order of magnitude in Chinese historically. With the introduction of SI units, some of them have been incorporated as SI prefixes, while the rest have fallen into disuse.

===Small numbers from Buddhism===
===SI prefixes===

In the People&#x27;s Republic of China, the early translation for the SI prefixes in 1981 was different from those used today. The larger (, , , , ) and smaller Chinese numerals (, , , , ) were defined as translation for the SI prefixes as &quot;mega&quot;, &quot;giga&quot;, &quot;tera&quot;, &quot;peta&quot;, &quot;exa&quot;, &quot;micro&quot;, &quot;nano&quot;, &quot;pico&quot;, &quot;femto&quot;, &quot;atto&quot;, resulting in the creation of yet more values for each numeral.

The Republic of China (Taiwan) defined as the translation for &quot;mega&quot; and as the translation for &quot;tera&quot;. This translation is widely used in official documents, academic communities, informational industries, etc. However, the civil broadcasting industries sometimes use to represent &quot;megahertz&quot;.

Today, the governments of both China and Taiwan use phonetic transliterations for the SI prefixes. However, the governments have each chosen different Chinese characters for certain prefixes. The following table lists the two different standards together with the early translation.

== Reading and transcribing numbers ==

=== Whole numbers ===
Multiple-digit numbers are constructed using a multiplicative principle; first the digit itself (from 1 to 9), then the place (such as 10 or 100); then the next digit.

In Mandarin, the multiplier (&quot;liǎng&quot;) is often used rather than for all numbers 200 and greater with the &quot;2&quot; numeral (although as noted earlier this varies from dialect to dialect and person to person). Use of both or are acceptable for the number 200. When writing in the Cantonese dialect, is used to represent the &quot;2&quot; numeral for all numbers. In the southern Min dialect of Chaozhou (Teochew), (&quot;no6&quot;) is used to represent the &quot;2&quot; numeral in all numbers from 200 onwards. Thus:
For the numbers 11 through 19, the leading &#x27;one&#x27; () is usually omitted. In some dialects, like Shanghainese, when there are only two significant digits in the number, the leading &#x27;one&#x27; and the trailing zeroes are omitted. Sometimes, the one before &quot;ten&quot; in the middle of a number, such as 213, is omitted. Thus:

Notes:
# Nothing is ever omitted in large and more complicated numbers such as this.

In certain older texts like the Protestant Bible, or in poetic usage, numbers such as 114 may be &quot;written&quot; as [100] [10] [4] ().

Outside of Taiwan, digits are sometimes grouped by myriads instead of thousands. Hence it is more convenient to think of numbers here as in groups of four, thus 1,234,567,890 is regrouped here as 12,3456,7890. Larger than a myriad, each number is therefore four zeroes longer than the one before it, thus 10000 × = . If one of the numbers is between 10 and 19, the leading &#x27;one&#x27; is omitted as per the above point. Hence (numbers in parentheses indicate that the number has been written as one number rather than expanded):
In Taiwan, pure Arabic numerals are officially always and only grouped by thousands. Unofficially, they are often not grouped, particularly for numbers below 100,000. Mixed Arabic-Chinese numerals are often used in order to denote myriads. This is used both officially and unofficially, and come in a variety of styles:
Interior zeroes before the unit position (as in 1002) must be spelt explicitly. The reason for this is that trailing zeroes (as in 1200) are often omitted as shorthand, so ambiguity occurs. One zero is sufficient to resolve the ambiguity. Where the zero is before a digit other than the units digit, the explicit zero is not ambiguous and is therefore optional, but preferred. Thus:
===Fractional values===
To construct a fraction, the denominator is written first, followed by , then the literary possessive particle , and lastly the numerator. This is the opposite of how fractions are read in English, which is numerator first. Each half of the fraction is written the same as a whole number. For example, to express &quot;two thirds&quot;, the structure &quot;three parts of-this two&quot; is used. Mixed numbers are written with the whole-number part first, followed by , then the fractional part.

Percentages are constructed similarly, using as the denominator. (The number 100 is typically expressed as , like the English &#x27;one hundred&#x27;. However, for percentages, is used on its own.)

Because percentages and other fractions are formulated the same, Chinese are more likely than not to express 10%, 20% etc. as &#x27;parts of 10&#x27; (or 1/10, 2/10, etc. i.e. ; , ; , etc.) rather than &quot;parts of 100&quot; (or 10/100, 20/100, etc. i.e. ; , ; , etc.)

In Taiwan, the most common formation of percentages in the spoken language is the number per hundred followed by the word , a contraction of the Japanese ; , itself taken from &#x27;percent&#x27;. Thus 25% is ; .

Decimal numbers are constructed by first writing the whole number part, then inserting a point (), and finally the fractional part. The fractional part is expressed using only the numbers for 0 to 9, similarly to English.

 functions as a number and therefore requires a measure word. For example: .

===Ordinal numbers===
Ordinal numbers are formed by adding before the number.

The Heavenly Stems are a traditional Chinese ordinal system.

===Negative numbers===
Negative numbers are formed by adding before the number.
===Usage===

Chinese grammar requires the use of classifiers (measure words) when a numeral is used together with a noun to express a quantity. For example, &quot;three people&quot; is expressed as , &quot;three ( particle) person&quot;, where / &quot;&quot; is a classifier. There exist many different classifiers, for use with different sets of nouns, although / is the most common, and may be used informally in place of other classifiers.

Chinese uses cardinal numbers in certain situations in which English would use ordinals. For example, (literally &quot;three story/storey&quot;) means &quot;third floor&quot; (&quot;second floor&quot; in British ). Likewise, (literally &quot;twenty-one century&quot;) is used for &quot;21st century&quot;.

Numbers of years are commonly spoken as a sequence of digits, as in (&quot;two zero zero one&quot;) for the year 2001. Names of months and days (in the Western system) are also expressed using numbers: (&quot;one month&quot;) for January, etc.; and (&quot;week one&quot;) for Monday, etc. There is only one exception: Sunday is , or informally , both literally &quot;week day&quot;. When meaning &quot;week&quot;, &quot; and &quot; are interchangeable. &quot; or &quot; means &quot;day of worship&quot;. Chinese Catholics call Sunday &quot; &quot;, &quot;Lord&#x27;s day&quot;.

Full dates are usually written in the format 2001年1月20日 for January 20, 2001 (using &quot;year&quot;, &quot;month&quot;, and &quot;day&quot;) – all the numbers are read as cardinals, not ordinals, with no leading zeroes, and the year is read as a sequence of digits. For brevity the , and may be dropped to give a date composed of just numbers. For example &quot;6-4&quot; in Chinese is &quot;six-four&quot;, short for &quot;month six, day four&quot; i.e. June Fourth, a common Chinese shorthand for the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests (because of the violence that occurred on June 4). For another example 67, in Chinese is sixty seven, short for year nineteen sixty seven, a common Chinese shorthand for the Hong Kong 1967 leftist riots.

== Counting rod and Suzhou numerals ==

In the same way that Roman numerals were standard in ancient and medieval Europe for mathematics and commerce, the Chinese formerly used the rod numerals, which is a positional system. The Suzhou numerals () system is a variation of the Southern Song rod numerals. Nowadays, the &quot;huāmǎ&quot; system is only used for displaying prices in Chinese markets or on traditional handwritten invoices.

==Hand gestures==
There is a common method of using of one hand to signify the numbers one to ten. While the five digits on one hand can easily express the numbers one to five, six to ten have special signs that can be used in commerce or day-to-day communication.

==Historical use of numerals in China==

Most Chinese numerals of later periods were descendants of the Shang dynasty oracle numerals of the 14th century BC. The oracle bone script numerals were found on tortoise shell and animal bones. In early civilizations, the Shang were able to express any numbers, however large, with only nine symbols and a counting board though it was still not positional.

Some of the bronze script numerals such as 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, and 13 became part of the system of rod numerals.

In this system, horizontal rod numbers are used for the tens, thousands, hundred thousands etc. It is written in &quot;Sunzi Suanjing&quot; that &quot;one is vertical, ten is horizontal&quot;.

The counting rod numerals system has place value and decimal numerals for computation, and was used widely by Chinese merchants, mathematicians and astronomers from the Han dynasty to the 16th century.

In 690 AD, Wu Zetian promulgated Zetian characters, one of which was . The word is now used as a synonym for the number zero.

Alexander Wylie, Christian missionary to China, in 1853 already refuted the notion that &quot;the Chinese numbers were written in words at length&quot;, and stated that in ancient China, calculation was carried out by means of counting rods, and &quot;the written character is evidently a rude presentation of these&quot;. After being introduced to the rod numerals, he said &quot;Having thus obtained a simple but effective system of figures, we find the Chinese in actual use of a method of notation depending on the theory of local value [i.e. place-value], several centuries before such theory was understood in Europe, and while yet the science of numbers had scarcely dawned among the Arabs.&quot;

During the Ming and Qing dynasties (after Arabic numerals were introduced into China), some Chinese mathematicians used Chinese numeral characters as positional system digits. After the Qing period, both the Chinese numeral characters and the Suzhou numerals were replaced by Arabic numerals in mathematical writings.

== Cultural influences ==

Traditional Chinese numeric characters are also used in Japan and Korea and were used in Vietnam before the 20th century. In vertical text (that is, read top to bottom), using characters for numbers is the norm, while in horizontal text, Arabic numerals are most common. Chinese numeric characters are also used in much the same formal or decorative fashion that Roman numerals are in Western cultures. Chinese numerals may appear together with Arabic numbers on the same sign or document.

== See also ==

* Numbers in Chinese culture
* Celestial stem

==Notes==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q683566" start="0" end="16" title="Chinese numerals" label="Chinese numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="57" end="63" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="68" end="83" title="written Chinese" label="written Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q122653" start="141" end="155" title="numeral system" label="numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="172" end="187" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="280" end="298" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q63116" start="318" end="349" title="numeral (linguistics)" label="numerals in the spoken language"/>
<link wikidata="Q716566" start="399" end="422" title="Chinese cultural sphere" label="Chinese cultural sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q182017" start="431" end="437" title="Korean numerals" label="Korean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337084" start="439" end="447" title="Japanese numerals" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617714" start="453" end="463" title="Vietnamese numerals" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q752499" start="781" end="796" title="Suzhou numerals" label="Suzhou numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q583473" start="872" end="884" title="rod numerals" label="rod numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="994" end="1003" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="1158" end="1176" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="1189" end="1213" title="Chinese written language" label="Chinese written language"/>
<link wikidata="Q29961325" start="1472" end="1487" title="Arabic numerals" label="Arabic numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="1996" end="2005" title="Wu Zetian" label="Wu Zetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9957" start="2041" end="2055" title="Hongwu Emperor" label="Hongwu Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q725503" start="2886" end="2907" title="long and short scales" label="long and short scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q29201" start="3072" end="3086" title="Yellow Emperor" label="Yellow Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q8689" start="3242" end="3248" title="myriad" label="myriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337084" start="3457" end="3462" title="Japanese numerals" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q182017" start="3467" end="3472" title="Korean numerals" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="3555" end="3563" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3616" end="3619" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="PRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3850" end="3853" title="Republic of China" label="ROC"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="3868" end="3874" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001051" start="3984" end="3998" title="Buddhist texts" label="Buddhist texts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="4002" end="4010" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q518730" start="4213" end="4231" title="order of magnitude" label="order of magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="4508" end="4517" title="SI prefix" label="SI prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="5231" end="5240" title="megahertz" label="megahertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="6147" end="6159" title="Min Nan" label="southern Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="6181" end="6188" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q8689" start="6915" end="6921" title="myriad" label="myriad"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="8153" end="8164" title="denominator" label="denominator"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="8252" end="8261" title="numerator" label="numerator"/>
<link wikidata="Q66055" start="8520" end="8532" title="Mixed number" label="Mixed number"/>
<link wikidata="Q849760" start="9577" end="9589" title="Chinese measure word" label="measure word"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190985" start="9690" end="9704" title="Heavenly Stems" label="Heavenly Stems"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073914" start="9841" end="9856" title="Chinese grammar" label="Chinese grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="9877" end="9887" title="classifier (linguistics)" label="classifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q63153" start="10092" end="10102" title="Classifier (linguistics)" label="classifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q389839" start="10121" end="10142" title="List of Chinese classifiers" label="different classifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="10285" end="10300" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="10351" end="10359" title="Ordinal number" label="ordinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q831691" start="10397" end="10409" title="Storey" label="story/storey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191842" start="11083" end="11100" title="Chinese Catholics" label="Chinese Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="11662" end="11692" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests" label="1989 Tiananmen Square protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q836310" start="11867" end="11895" title="Hong Kong 1967 leftist riots" label="Hong Kong 1967 leftist riots"/>
<link wikidata="Q38918" start="11959" end="11973" title="Roman numerals" label="Roman numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q583473" start="12079" end="12091" title="counting rods" label="rod numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="12175" end="12188" title="Song dynasty" label="Southern Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q128938" start="12707" end="12720" title="Shang dynasty" label="Shang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7476695" start="12765" end="12783" title="oracle bone script" label="oracle bone script"/>
<link wikidata="Q583473" start="13107" end="13119" title="rod numerals" label="rod numerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q13891793" start="13241" end="13255" title="Sunzi Suanjing" label="Sunzi Suanjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="13485" end="13496" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q9738" start="13530" end="13539" title="Wu Zetian" label="Wu Zetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147813" start="13552" end="13569" title="Chinese characters of Empress Wu" label="Zetian characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603327" start="13646" end="13661" title="Alexander Wylie (missionary)" label="Alexander Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="14362" end="14366" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="14371" end="14375" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="14753" end="14758" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="14763" end="14768" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="14786" end="14793" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428468" start="15206" end="15232" title="Numbers in Chinese culture" label="Numbers in Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190985" start="15235" end="15249" title="Celestial stem" label="Celestial stem"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5783" wikidata="Q40056" url="?curid=5783" title="Computer program">
<text>A computer program is a sequence or set of instructions in a programming language for a computer to execute. It is one component of software, which also includes documentation and other intangible components.

A &quot;computer program&quot; in its human-readable form is called source code. Source code needs another computer program to execute because computers can only execute their native machine instructions. Therefore, source code may be translated to machine instructions using a compiler written for the language. (Assembly language programs are translated using an assembler.) The resulting file is called an executable. Alternatively, source code may execute within an interpreter written for the language.

If the executable is requested for execution, then the operating system loads it into memory and starts a process. The central processing unit will soon switch to this process so it can fetch, decode, and then execute each machine instruction.

If the source code is requested for execution, then the operating system loads the corresponding interpreter into memory and starts a process. The interpreter then loads the source code into memory to translate and execute each statement. Running the source code is slower than running an executable. Moreover, the interpreter must be installed on the computer.

==Example computer program==

The &quot;Hello, World!&quot; program is used to illustrate a language&#x27;s basic syntax. The syntax of the language BASIC (1964) was intentionally limited to make the language easy to learn. For example, variables are not declared before being used. Also, variables are automatically initialized to zero. Here is an example computer program, in Basic, to average a list of numbers:

10 INPUT &quot;How many numbers to average?&quot;, A
20 FOR I = 1 TO A
30 INPUT &quot;Enter number:&quot;, B
40 LET C = C + B
50 NEXT I
60 LET D = C/A
70 PRINT &quot;The average is&quot;, D
80 END
Once the mechanics of basic computer programming are learned, more sophisticated and powerful languages are available to build large computer systems.

==History==
Improvements in software development are the result of improvements in computer hardware. At each stage in hardware&#x27;s history, the task of computer programming changed dramatically.

===Analytical Engine===

In 1837, Jacquard&#x27;s loom inspired Charles Babbage to attempt to build the Analytical Engine.
The names of the components of the calculating device were borrowed from the textile industry. In the textile industry, yarn was brought from the store to be milled. The device had a &quot;store&quot; which consisted of memory to hold 1,000 numbers of 50 decimal digits each. Numbers from the &quot;store&quot; were transferred to the &quot;mill&quot; for processing. The engine was programmed using two sets of perforated cards. One set directed the operation and the other set inputted the variables. However, the thousands of cogged wheels and gears never fully worked together.

Ada Lovelace worked for Charles Babbage to create a description of the Analytical Engine (1843). The description contained Note G which completely detailed a method for calculating Bernoulli numbers using the Analytical Engine. This note is recognized by some historians as the world&#x27;s first &quot;computer program&quot;.

===Universal Turing machine===

In 1936, Alan Turing introduced the Universal Turing machine, a theoretical device that can model every computation.
It is a finite-state machine that has an infinitely long read/write tape. The machine can move the tape back and forth, changing its contents as it performs an algorithm. The machine starts in the initial state, goes through a sequence of steps, and halts when it encounters the halt state. All present-day computers are Turing complete.

===ENIAC===

The Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer (ENIAC) was built between July 1943 and Fall 1945. It was a Turing complete, general-purpose computer that used 17,468 vacuum tubes to create the circuits. At its core, it was a series of Pascalines wired together. Its 40 units weighed 30 tons, occupied , and consumed $650 per hour (in 1940s currency) in electricity when idle. It had 20 base-10 accumulators. Programming the ENIAC took up to two months. Three function tables were on wheels and needed to be rolled to fixed function panels. Function tables were connected to function panels by plugging heavy black cables into plugboards. Each function table had 728 rotating knobs. Programming the ENIAC also involved setting some of the 3,000 switches. Debugging a program took a week. It ran from 1947 until 1955 at Aberdeen Proving Ground, calculating hydrogen bomb parameters, predicting weather patterns, and producing firing tables to aim artillery guns.

===Stored-program computers===
Instead of plugging in cords and turning switches, a stored-program computer loads its instructions into memory just like it loads its data into memory. As a result, the computer could be programmed quickly and perform calculations at very fast speeds. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly built the ENIAC. The two engineers introduced the &quot;stored-program concept&quot; in a three-page memo dated February 1944. Later, in September 1944, John von Neumann began working on the ENIAC project. On June 30, 1945, von Neumann published the &quot;First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC&quot;, which equated the structures of the computer with the structures of the human brain. The design became known as the von Neumann architecture. The architecture was simultaneously deployed in the constructions of the EDVAC and EDSAC computers in 1949.

The IBM System/360 (1964) was a family of computers, each having the same instruction set architecture. The Model 20 was the smallest and least expensive. Customers could upgrade and retain the same application software. The Model 195 was the most premium. Each System/360 model featured multiprogramming—having multiple processes in memory at once. When one process was waiting for input/output, another could compute.

IBM planned for each model to be programmed using PL/1. A committee was formed that included COBOL, Fortran and ALGOL programmers. The purpose was to develop a language that was comprehensive, easy to use, extendible, and would replace Cobol and Fortran. The result was a large and complex language that took a long time to compile.
Computers manufactured until the 1970s had front-panel switches for manual programming. The computer program was written on paper for reference. An instruction was represented by a configuration of on/off settings. After setting the configuration, an execute button was pressed. This process was then repeated. Computer programs also were automatically inputted via paper tape, punched cards or magnetic-tape. After the medium was loaded, the starting address was set via switches, and the execute button was pressed.

===Very Large Scale Integration===

A major milestone in software development was the invention of the Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) circuit (1964). Following World War II, tube-based technology was replaced with point-contact transistors (1947) and bipolar junction transistors (late 1950s) mounted on a circuit board. During the 1960s, the aerospace industry replaced the circuit board with an integrated circuit chip.

Robert Noyce, co-founder of Fairchild Semiconductor (1957) and Intel (1968), achieved a technological improvement to refine the production of field-effect transistors (1963). The goal is to alter the electrical resistivity and conductivity of a semiconductor junction. First, naturally occurring silicate minerals are converted into polysilicon rods using the Siemens process. The Czochralski process then converts the rods into a monocrystalline silicon, boule crystal. The crystal is then thinly sliced to form a wafer substrate. The planar process of photolithography then &quot;integrates&quot; unipolar transistors, capacitors, diodes, and resistors onto the wafer to build a matrix of metal–oxide–semiconductor (MOS) transistors. The MOS transistor is the primary component in &quot;integrated circuit chips&quot;.

Originally, integrated circuit chips had their function set during manufacturing. During the 1960s, controlling the electrical flow migrated to programming a matrix of read-only memory (ROM). The matrix resembled a two-dimensional array of fuses. The process to embed instructions onto the matrix was to burn out the unneeded connections. There were so many connections, firmware programmers wrote a &quot;computer program&quot; on another chip to oversee the burning. The technology became known as Programmable ROM. In 1971, Intel installed the computer program onto the chip and named it the Intel 4004 microprocessor.
The terms &quot;microprocessor&quot; and central processing unit (CPU) are now used interchangeably. However, CPUs predate microprocessors. For example, the IBM System/360 (1964) had a CPU made from circuit boards containing discrete components on ceramic substrates.

===Sac State 8008===

The Intel 4004 (1971) was a 4-bit microprocessor designed to run the Busicom calculator. Five months after its release, Intel released the Intel 8008, an 8-bit microprocessor. Bill Pentz led a team at Sacramento State to build the first microcomputer using the Intel 8008: the &quot;Sac State 8008&quot; (1972). Its purpose was to store patient medical records. The computer supported a disk operating system to run a Memorex, 3-megabyte, hard disk drive. It had a color display and keyboard that was packaged in a single console. The disk operating system was programmed using IBM&#x27;s Basic Assembly Language (BAL). The medical records application was programmed using a BASIC interpreter. However, the computer was an evolutionary dead-end because it was extremely expensive. Also, it was built at a public university lab for a specific purpose. Nonetheless, the project contributed to the development of the Intel 8080 (1974) instruction set.

===x86 series===

In 1978, the modern software development environment began when Intel upgraded the Intel 8080 to the Intel 8086. Intel simplified the Intel 8086 to manufacture the cheaper Intel 8088. IBM embraced the Intel 8088 when they entered the personal computer market (1981). As consumer demand for personal computers increased, so did Intel&#x27;s microprocessor development. The succession of development is known as the x86 series. The x86 assembly language is a family of backward-compatible machine instructions. Machine instructions created in earlier microprocessors were retained throughout microprocessor upgrades. This enabled consumers to purchase new computers without having to purchase new application software. The major categories of instructions are:
* Memory instructions to set and access numbers and strings in random-access memory.
* Integer arithmetic logic unit (ALU) instructions to perform the primary arithmetic operations on integers.
* Floating point ALU instructions to perform the primary arithmetic operations on real numbers.
* Call stack instructions to push and pop words needed to allocate memory and interface with functions.
* Single instruction, multiple data (SIMD) instructions to increase speed when multiple processors are available to perform the same algorithm on an array of data.

===Changing programming environment===

VLSI circuits enabled the programming environment to advance from a computer terminal (until the 1990s) to a graphical user interface (GUI) computer. Computer terminals limited programmers to a single shell running in a command-line environment. During the 1970s, full-screen source code editing became possible through a text-based user interface. Regardless of the technology available, the goal is to program in a programming language.

==Programming paradigms and languages==

Programming language features exist to provide building blocks to be combined to express programming ideals. Ideally, a programming language should:
* express ideas directly in the code.
* express independent ideas independently.
* express relationships among ideas directly in the code.
* combine ideas freely.
* combine ideas only where combinations make sense.
* express simple ideas simply.

The programming style of a programming language to provide these building blocks may be categorized into programming paradigms. For example, different paradigms may differentiate:
* procedural languages, functional languages, and logical languages.
* different levels of data abstraction.
* different levels of class hierarchy.
* different levels of input datatypes, as in container types and generic programming.
Each of these programming styles has contributed to the synthesis of different &quot;programming languages&quot;.

A &quot;programming language&quot; is a set of keywords, symbols, identifiers, and rules by which programmers can communicate instructions to the computer. They follow a set of rules called a syntax.

* &quot;Keywords&quot; are reserved words to form declarations and statements.
* &quot;Symbols&quot; are characters to form operations, assignments, control flow, and delimiters.
* &quot;Identifiers&quot; are words created by programmers to form constants, variable names, structure names, and function names.
* &quot;Syntax Rules&quot; are defined in the Backus–Naur form.

&quot;Programming languages&quot; get their basis from formal languages. The purpose of defining a solution in terms of its &quot;formal language&quot; is to generate an algorithm to solve the underlining problem. An &quot;algorithm&quot; is a sequence of simple instructions that solve a problem.

===Generations of programming language===
The evolution of programming languages began when the EDSAC (1949) used the first stored computer program in its von Neumann architecture. Programming the EDSAC was in the first generation of programming language.

* The first generation of programming language is machine language. &quot;Machine language&quot; requires the programmer to enter instructions using &quot;instruction numbers&quot; called machine code. For example, the ADD operation on the PDP-11 has instruction number 24576.

* The second generation of programming language is assembly language. &quot;Assembly language&quot; allows the programmer to use mnemonic instructions instead of remembering instruction numbers. An assembler translates each assembly language mnemonic into its machine language number. For example, on the PDP-11, the operation 24576 can be referenced as ADD in the source code. The four basic arithmetic operations have assembly instructions like ADD, SUB, MUL, and DIV. Computers also have instructions like DW (Define Word) to reserve memory cells. Then the MOV instruction can copy integers between registers and memory.

:* The basic structure of an assembly language statement is a label, operation, operand, and comment.
::* &quot;Labels&quot; allow the programmer to work with variable names. The assembler will later translate labels into physical memory addresses.
::* &quot;Operations&quot; allow the programmer to work with mnemonics. The assembler will later translate mnemonics into instruction numbers.
::* &quot;Operands&quot; tell the assembler which data the operation will process.
::* &quot;Comments&quot; allow the programmer to articulate a narrative because the instructions alone are vague.
:: The key characteristic of an assembly language program is it forms a one-to-one mapping to its corresponding machine language target.

* The third generation of programming language uses compilers and interpreters to execute computer programs. The distinguishing feature of a &quot;third generation&quot; language is its independence from particular hardware. Early languages include Fortran (1958), COBOL (1959), ALGOL (1960), and BASIC (1964). In 1973, the C programming language emerged as a high-level language that produced efficient machine language instructions. Whereas &quot;third-generation&quot; languages historically generated many machine instructions for each statement, C has statements that may generate a single machine instruction. Moreover, an optimizing compiler might overrule the programmer and produce fewer machine instructions than statements. Today, an entire paradigm of languages fill the imperative, &quot;third generation&quot; spectrum.

* The fourth generation of programming language emphasizes what output results are desired, rather than how programming statements should be constructed. Declarative languages attempt to limit side effects and allow programmers to write code with relatively few errors. One popular &quot;fourth generation&quot; language is called Structured Query Language (SQL). Database developers no longer need to process each database record one at a time. Also, a simple select statement can generate output records without having to understand how they are retrieved.

===Imperative languages===

&quot;Imperative languages&quot; specify a sequential algorithm using declarations, expressions, and statements:
* A &quot;declaration&quot; introduces a variable name to the &quot;computer program&quot; and assigns it to a datatype – for example: codice_1
* An &quot;expression&quot; yields a value – for example: codice_2 yields 4
* A &quot;statement&quot; might assign an expression to a variable or use the value of a variable to alter the program&#x27;s control flow – for example: codice_3

====Fortran====
FORTRAN (1958) was unveiled as &quot;The IBM Mathematical FORmula TRANslating system&quot;. It was designed for scientific calculations, without string handling facilities. Along with declarations, expressions, and statements, it supported:
* arrays.
* subroutines.
* &quot;do&quot; loops.

It succeeded because:
* programming and debugging costs were below computer running costs.
* it was supported by IBM.
* applications at the time were scientific.

However, non-IBM vendors also wrote Fortran compilers, but with a syntax that would likely fail IBM&#x27;s compiler. The American National Standards Institute (ANSI) developed the first Fortran standard in 1966. In 1978, Fortran 77 became the standard until 1991. Fortran 90 supports:
* records.
* pointers to arrays.

====COBOL====
COBOL (1959) stands for &quot;COmmon Business Oriented Language&quot;. Fortran manipulated symbols. It was soon realized that symbols did not need to be numbers, so strings were introduced. The US Department of Defense influenced COBOL&#x27;s development, with Grace Hopper being a major contributor. The statements were English-like and verbose. The goal was to design a language so managers could read the programs. However, the lack of structured statements hindered this goal.

COBOL&#x27;s development was tightly controlled, so dialects did not emerge to require ANSI standards. As a consequence, it was not changed for 15 years until 1974. The 1990s version did make consequential changes, like object-oriented programming.

====Algol====
ALGOL (1960) stands for &quot;ALGOrithmic Language&quot;. It had a profound influence on programming language design. Emerging from a committee of European and American programming language experts, it used standard mathematical notation and had a readable, structured design. Algol was first to define its syntax using the Backus–Naur form. This led to syntax-directed compilers. It added features like:
* block structure, where variables were local to their block.
* arrays with variable bounds.
* &quot;for&quot; loops.
* functions.
* recursion.

Algol&#x27;s direct descendants include Pascal, Modula-2, Ada, Delphi and Oberon on one branch. On another branch the descendants include C, C++ and Java.

====Basic====
BASIC (1964) stands for &quot;Beginner&#x27;s All-Purpose Symbolic Instruction Code&quot;. It was developed at Dartmouth College for all of their students to learn. If a student did not go on to a more powerful language, the student would still remember Basic. A Basic interpreter was installed in the microcomputers manufactured in the late 1970s. As the microcomputer industry grew, so did the language.

Basic pioneered the interactive session. It offered operating system commands within its environment:
* The &#x27;new&#x27; command created an empty slate.
* Statements evaluated immediately.
* Statements could be programmed by preceding them with line numbers.
* The &#x27;list&#x27; command displayed the program.
* The &#x27;run&#x27; command executed the program.

However, the Basic syntax was too simple for large programs. Recent dialects added structure and object-oriented extensions. Microsoft&#x27;s Visual Basic is still widely used and produces a graphical user interface.

====C====
C programming language (1973) got its name because the language BCPL was replaced with B, and AT&amp;T Bell Labs called the next version &quot;C&quot;. Its purpose was to write the UNIX operating system. C is a relatively small language, making it easy to write compilers. Its growth mirrored the hardware growth in the 1980s. Its growth also was because it has the facilities of assembly language, but uses a high-level syntax. It added advanced features like:
* inline assembler.
* arithmetic on pointers.
* pointers to functions.
* bit operations.
* freely combining complex operators.
&quot;C&quot; allows the programmer to control which region of memory data is to be stored. Global variables and static variables require the fewest clock cycles to store. The stack is automatically used for the standard variable declarations. Heap memory is returned to a pointer variable from the codice_4 function.

* The &quot;global and static data&quot; region is located just above the &quot;program&quot; region. (The program region is technically called the &quot;text&quot; region. It is where machine instructions are stored.)
:* The global and static data region is technically two regions. One region is called the &quot;initialized data segment&quot;, where variables declared with default values are stored. The other region is called the &quot;block started by segment&quot;, where variables declared without default values are stored.
:* Variables stored in the &quot;global and static data&quot; region have their addresses set at compile-time. They retain their values throughout the life of the process.

:* The global and static region stores the &quot;global variables&quot; that are declared on top of (outside) the codice_5 function. Global variables are visible to codice_5 and every other function in the source code.

: On the other hand, variable declarations inside of codice_5, other functions, or within codice_8 codice_9 block delimiters are &quot;local variables&quot;. Local variables also include &quot;formal parameter variables&quot;. Parameter variables are enclosed within the parenthesis of a function definition. Parameters provide an interface to the function.

:* &quot;Local variables&quot; declared using the codice_10 prefix are also stored in the &quot;global and static data&quot; region. Unlike global variables, static variables are only visible within the function or block. Static variables always retain their value. An example usage would be the function codice_11

* The stack region is a contiguous block of memory located near the top memory address. Variables placed in the stack are populated from top to bottom. A stack pointer is a special-purpose register that keeps track of the last memory address populated. Variables are placed into the stack via the &quot;assembly language&quot; PUSH instruction. Therefore, the addresses of these variables are set during runtime. The method for stack variables to lose their scope is via the POP instruction.

:* &quot;Local variables&quot; declared without the codice_10 prefix, including formal parameter variables, are called &quot;automatic variables&quot; and are stored in the stack. They are visible inside the function or block and lose their scope upon exiting the function or block.

* The heap region is located below the stack. It is populated from the bottom to the top. The operating system manages the heap using a &quot;heap pointer&quot; and a list of allocated memory blocks. Like the stack, the addresses of heap variables are set during runtime. An out of memory error occurs when the heap pointer and the stack pointer meet.

:* &quot;C&quot; provides the codice_4 library function to allocate heap memory. Populating the heap with data is an additional copy function. Variables stored in the heap are economically passed to functions using pointers. Without pointers, the entire block of data would have to be passed to the function via the stack.

====C++====
In the 1970s, software engineers needed language support to break large projects down into modules. One obvious feature was to decompose large projects &quot;physically&quot; into separate files. A less obvious feature was to decompose large projects &quot;logically&quot; into abstract data types. At the time, languages supported concrete (scalar) datatypes like integer numbers, floating-point numbers, and strings of characters. Abstract datatypes are structures of concrete datatypes, with a new name assigned. For example, a list of integers could be called codice_14.

In object-oriented jargon, abstract datatypes are called classes. However, a &quot;class&quot; is only a definition; no memory is allocated. When memory is allocated to a class and bound to an identifier, it is called an object.

Object-oriented imperative languages developed by combining the need for classes and the need for safe functional programming. A function, in an object-oriented language, is assigned to a class. An assigned function is then referred to as a method, member function, or operation. &quot;Object-oriented programming&quot; is executing &quot;operations&quot; on &quot;objects&quot;.

&quot;Object-oriented languages&quot; support a syntax to model subset/superset relationships. In set theory, an element of a subset inherits all the attributes contained in the superset. For example, a student is a person. Therefore, the set of students is a subset of the set of persons. As a result, students inherit all the attributes common to all persons. Additionally, students have unique attributes that other people do not have. &quot;Object-oriented languages&quot; model &quot;subset/superset&quot; relationships using inheritance. &quot;Object-oriented programming&quot; became the dominant language paradigm by the late 1990s.

C++ (1985) was originally called &quot;C with Classes&quot;. It was designed to expand C&#x27;s capabilities by adding the object-oriented facilities of the language Simula.

An object-oriented module is composed of two files. The definitions file is called the header file. Here is a C++ &quot;header file&quot; for the &quot;GRADE class&quot; in a simple school application:
// grade.h

// Used to allow multiple source files to include
// this header file without duplication errors.
#ifndef GRADE_H
#define GRADE_H

class GRADE {
public:
 // This is the constructor operation.
 GRADE ( const char letter );

 // This is a class variable.
 char letter;

 // This is a member operation.
 int grade_numeric( const char letter );

 // This is a class variable.
 int numeric;
#endif
A constructor operation is a function with the same name as the class name. It is executed when the calling operation executes the codice_15 statement.

A module&#x27;s other file is the source file. Here is a C++ source file for the &quot;GRADE class&quot; in a simple school application:
// grade.cpp
#include &quot;grade.h&quot;

GRADE::GRADE( const char letter )
 // Reference the object using the keyword &#x27;this&#x27;.
 this-&gt;letter = letter;

 // This is Temporal Cohesion
 this-&gt;numeric = grade_numeric( letter );

int GRADE::grade_numeric( const char letter )
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;A&#x27; || letter == &#x27;a&#x27; ) )
 return 4;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;B&#x27; || letter == &#x27;b&#x27; ) )
 return 3;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;C&#x27; || letter == &#x27;c&#x27; ) )
 return 2;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;D&#x27; || letter == &#x27;d&#x27; ) )
 return 1;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;F&#x27; || letter == &#x27;f&#x27; ) )
 return 0;
 else
 return -1;


Here is a C++ &quot;header file&quot; for the &quot;PERSON class&quot; in a simple school application:
// person.h
#ifndef PERSON_H
#define PERSON_H

class PERSON {
public:
 PERSON ( const char *name );
 const char *name;
#endif
Here is a C++ &quot;source file&quot; for the &quot;PERSON class&quot; in a simple school application:
// person.cpp
#include &quot;person.h&quot;

PERSON::PERSON ( const char *name )
 this-&gt;name = name;


Here is a C++ &quot;header file&quot; for the &quot;STUDENT class&quot; in a simple school application:
// student.h
#ifndef STUDENT_H
#define STUDENT_H

#include &quot;person.h&quot;
#include &quot;grade.h&quot;

// A STUDENT is a subset of PERSON.
class STUDENT : public PERSON{
public:
 STUDENT ( const char *name );
 GRADE *grade;
#endif
Here is a C++ &quot;source file&quot; for the &quot;STUDENT class&quot; in a simple school application:
// student.cpp
#include &quot;student.h&quot;
#include &quot;person.h&quot;

STUDENT::STUDENT ( const char *name ):
 // Execute the constructor of the PERSON superclass.
 PERSON( name )
 // Nothing else to do.
}
Here is a driver program for demonstration:
// student_dvr.cpp
#include &lt;iostream&gt;
#include &quot;student.h&quot;

int main( void )
 STUDENT *student = new STUDENT( &quot;The Student&quot; );
 student-&gt;grade = new GRADE( &#x27;a&#x27; );

 std::cout
 // Notice student inherits PERSON&#x27;s name
 « student-&gt;name
 « &quot;: Numeric grade = &quot;
 « student-&gt;grade-&gt;numeric
 « &quot;\n&quot;;
 return 0;


Here is a makefile to compile everything:
# makefile
all: student_dvr

clean:
 rm student_dvr *.o

student_dvr: student_dvr.cpp grade.o student.o person.o
 c++ student_dvr.cpp grade.o student.o person.o -o student_dvr

grade.o: grade.cpp grade.h
 c++ -c grade.cpp

student.o: student.cpp student.h
 c++ -c student.cpp

person.o: person.cpp person.h
 c++ -c person.cpp
===Declarative languages===
&quot;Imperative languages&quot; have one major criticism: assigning an expression to a &quot;non-local&quot; variable may produce an unintended side effect. Declarative languages generally omit the assignment statement and the control flow. They describe &quot;what&quot; computation should be performed and not &quot;how&quot; to compute it. Two broad categories of declarative languages are functional languages and logical languages.

The principle behind a &quot;functional language&quot; is to use lambda calculus as a guide for a well defined semantic. In mathematics, a function is a rule that maps elements from an &quot;expression&quot; to a range of &quot;values&quot;. Consider the function:

codice_16

The &quot;expression&quot; codice_17 is mapped by the function codice_18 to a range of &quot;values&quot;. One &quot;value&quot; happens to be 20. This occurs when x is 2. So, the application of the function is mathematically written as:

codice_19

A &quot;functional language&quot; compiler will not store this value in a variable. Instead, it will &quot;push&quot; the value onto the computer&#x27;s stack before setting the program counter back to the calling function. The calling function will then &quot;pop&quot; the value from the stack.

&quot;Imperative languages&quot; do support functions. Therefore, &quot;functional programming&quot; can be achieved in an imperative language, if the programmer uses discipline. However, a &quot;functional language&quot; will force this discipline onto the programmer through its syntax. Functional languages have a syntax tailored to emphasize the &quot;what&quot;.

A functional program is developed with a set of primitive functions followed by a single driver function. Consider the snippet:

codice_20

codice_21

codice_22
:codice_23
codice_9

The primitives are codice_25 and codice_26. The driver function is codice_27. Executing:

codice_28 will output 6.

&quot;Functional languages&quot; are used in computer science research to explore new language features. Moreover, their lack of side-effects have made them popular in parallel programming and concurrent programming. However, application developers prefer the object-oriented features of &quot;imperative languages&quot;.

====Lisp====
Lisp (1958) stands for &quot;LISt Processor&quot;. It is tailored to process lists. A full structure of the data is formed by building lists of lists. In memory, a tree data structure is built. Internally, the tree structure lends nicely for recursive functions. The syntax to build a tree is to enclose the space-separated elements within parenthesis. The following is a list of three elements. The first two elements are themselves lists of two elements:

codice_29

Lisp has functions to extract and reconstruct elements. The function codice_30 returns a list containing the first element in the list. The function codice_31 returns a list containing everything but the first element. The function codice_32 returns a list that is the concatenation of other lists. Therefore, the following expression will return the list codice_33:

codice_34

One drawback of Lisp is when many functions are nested, the parentheses may look confusing. Modern Lisp environments help ensure parenthesis match. As an aside, Lisp does support the &quot;imperative language&quot; operations of the assignment statement and goto loops. Also, &quot;Lisp&quot; is not concerned with the datatype of the elements at compile time. Instead, it assigns (and may reassign) the datatypes at runtime. Assigning the datatype at runtime is called dynamic binding. Whereas dynamic binding increases the language&#x27;s flexibility, programming errors may linger until late in the software development process.

Writing large, reliable, and readable Lisp programs requires forethought. If properly planned, the program may be much shorter than an equivalent &quot;imperative language&quot; program. &quot;Lisp&quot; is widely used in artificial intelligence. However, its usage has been accepted only because it has &quot;imperative language&quot; operations, making unintended side-effects possible.

====ML====
ML (1973) stands for &quot;Meta Language&quot;. ML checks to make sure only data of the same type are compared with one another. For example, this function has one input parameter (an integer) and returns an integer:

&quot;ML&quot; is not parenthesis-eccentric like &quot;Lisp&quot;. The following is an application of codice_18:

 times_10 2

It returns &quot;20 : int&quot;. (Both the results and the datatype are returned.)

Like &quot;Lisp&quot;, &quot;ML&quot; is tailored to process lists. Unlike &quot;Lisp&quot;, each element is the same datatype. Moreover, &quot;ML&quot; assigns the datatype of an element at compile-time. Assigning the datatype at compile-time is called static binding. Static binding increases reliability because the compiler checks the context of variables before they are used.

====Prolog====
Prolog (1972) stands for &quot;PROgramming in LOGic&quot;. It is a logic programming language, based on formal logic. The language was developed by Alain Colmerauer and Philippe Roussel in Marseille, France. It is an implementation of Selective Linear Definite clause resolution, pioneered by Robert Kowalski and others at the University of Edinburgh.

The building blocks of a Prolog program are &quot;facts&quot; and &quot;rules&quot;. Here is a simple example:

cat(tom). % tom is a cat
mouse(jerry). % jerry is a mouse

animal(X) :- cat(X). % each cat is an animal
animal(X) :- mouse(X). % each mouse is an animal

big(X) :- cat(X). % each cat is big
small(X) :- mouse(X). % each mouse is small

eat(X,Y) :- mouse(X), cheese(Y). % each mouse eats each cheese
eat(X,Y) :- big(X), small(Y). % each big animal eats each small animal
After all the facts and rules are entered, then a question can be asked:
: Will Tom eat Jerry?

?- eat(tom,jerry).
true
The following example shows how Prolog will convert a letter grade to its numeric value:

numeric_grade(&#x27;A&#x27;, 4).
numeric_grade(&#x27;B&#x27;, 3).
numeric_grade(&#x27;C&#x27;, 2).
numeric_grade(&#x27;D&#x27;, 1).
numeric_grade(&#x27;F&#x27;, 0).
numeric_grade(X, -1) :- not X = &#x27;A&#x27;, not X = &#x27;B&#x27;, not X = &#x27;C&#x27;, not X = &#x27;D&#x27;, not X = &#x27;F&#x27;.
grade(&#x27;The Student&#x27;, &#x27;A&#x27;).
?- grade(&#x27;The Student&#x27;, X), numeric_grade(X, Y).
X = &#x27;A&#x27;,
Y = 4
Here is a comprehensive example:

1) All dragons billow fire, or equivalently, a thing billows fire if the thing is a dragon:

billows_fire(X) :-
 is_a_dragon(X).

2) A creature billows fire if one of its parents billows fire:

billows_fire(X) :-
 is_a_creature(X),
 is_a_parent_of(Y,X),
 billows_fire(Y).

3) A thing X is a parent of a thing Y if X is the mother of Y or X is the father of Y:

is_a_parent_of(X, Y):- is_the_mother_of(X, Y).
is_a_parent_of(X, Y):- is_the_father_of(X, Y).
4) A thing is a creature if the thing is a dragon:

is_a_creature(X) :-
 is_a_dragon(X).
5) Norberta is a dragon, and Puff is a creature. Norberta is the mother of Puff.
is_a_dragon(norberta).
is_a_creature(puff).
is_the_mother_of(norberta, puff).
Rule (2) is a recursive (inductive) definition. It can be understood declaratively, without the need to understand how it is executed.

Rule (3) shows how functions are represented by using relations. Here, the mother and father functions ensure that every individual has only one mother and only one father.

Prolog is an untyped language. Nonetheless, inheritance can be represented by using predicates. Rule (4) asserts that a creature is a superclass of a dragon.

Questions are answered using backward reasoning. Given the question:

 ?- billows_fire(X).
Prolog generates two answers :

X = norberta
X = puff

Practical applications for Prolog are knowledge representation and problem solving in artificial intelligence.

===Object-oriented programming===
Object-oriented programming is a programming method to execute operations (functions) on objects. The basic idea is to group the characteristics of a phenomenon into an object container and give the container a name. The &quot;operations&quot; on the phenomenon are also grouped into the container. &quot;Object-oriented programming&quot; developed by combining the need for containers and the need for safe functional programming. This programming method need not be confined to an &quot;object-oriented language&quot;. In an object-oriented language, an object container is called a class. In a non-object-oriented language, a data structure (which is also known as a record) may become an object container. To turn a data structure into an object container, operations need to be written specifically for the structure. The resulting structure is called an abstract datatype. However, inheritance will be missing. Nonetheless, this shortcoming can be overcome.

Here is a C programming language &quot;header file&quot; for the &quot;GRADE abstract datatype&quot; in a simple school application:
/* grade.h */

/* Used to allow multiple source files to include */
/* this header file without duplication errors. */
#ifndef GRADE_H
#define GRADE_H

typedef struct
 char letter;
} GRADE;

/* Constructor */
GRADE *grade_new( char letter );

int grade_numeric( char letter );
#endif
The codice_36 function performs the same algorithm as the C++ constructor operation.

Here is a C programming language &quot;source file&quot; for the &quot;GRADE abstract datatype&quot; in a simple school application:
/* grade.c */
#include &quot;grade.h&quot;

GRADE *grade_new( char letter )
 GRADE *grade;

 /* Allocate heap memory */
 if ( ! ( grade = calloc( 1, sizeof ( GRADE ) ) ) )
 fprintf(stderr,
 &quot;ERROR in %s/%s/%d: calloc() returned empty.\n&quot;,
 __FILE__,
 __FUNCTION__,
 __LINE__ );
 exit( 1 );

 grade-&gt;letter = letter;
 return grade;

int grade_numeric( char letter )
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;A&#x27; || letter == &#x27;a&#x27; ) )
 return 4;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;B&#x27; || letter == &#x27;b&#x27; ) )
 return 3;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;C&#x27; || letter == &#x27;c&#x27; ) )
 return 2;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;D&#x27; || letter == &#x27;d&#x27; ) )
 return 1;
 else
 if ( ( letter == &#x27;F&#x27; || letter == &#x27;f&#x27; ) )
 return 0;
 else
 return -1;


In the constructor, the function codice_37 is used instead of codice_4 because each memory cell will be set to zero.

Here is a C programming language &quot;header file&quot; for the &quot;PERSON abstract datatype&quot; in a simple school application:
/* person.h */
#ifndef PERSON_H
#define PERSON_H

typedef struct
 char *name;
} PERSON;

/* Constructor */
PERSON *person_new( char *name );
#endif
Here is a C programming language &quot;source file&quot; for the &quot;PERSON abstract datatype&quot; in a simple school application:
/* person.c */
#include &quot;person.h&quot;

PERSON *person_new( char *name )
 PERSON *person;

 if ( ! ( person = calloc( 1, sizeof ( PERSON ) ) ) )
 fprintf(stderr,
 &quot;ERROR in %s/%s/%d: calloc() returned empty.\n&quot;,
 __FILE__,
 __FUNCTION__,
 __LINE__ );
 exit( 1 );

 person-&gt;name = name;
 return person;


Here is a C programming language &quot;header file&quot; for the &quot;STUDENT abstract datatype&quot; in a simple school application:
/* student.h */
#ifndef STUDENT_H
#define STUDENT_H

#include &quot;person.h&quot;
#include &quot;grade.h&quot;

typedef struct
 /* A STUDENT is a subset of PERSON. */
 PERSON *person;

 GRADE *grade;
} STUDENT;

/* Constructor */
STUDENT *student_new( char *name );
#endif
Here is a C programming language &quot;source file&quot; for the &quot;STUDENT abstract datatype&quot; in a simple school application:
/* student.c */
#include &quot;student.h&quot;
#include &quot;person.h&quot;

STUDENT *student_new( char *name )
 STUDENT *student;

 if ( ! ( student = calloc( 1, sizeof ( STUDENT ) ) ) )
 fprintf(stderr,
 &quot;ERROR in %s/%s/%d: calloc() returned empty.\n&quot;,
 __FILE__,
 __FUNCTION__,
 __LINE__ );
 exit( 1 );

 /* Execute the constructor of the PERSON superclass. */
 student-&gt;person = person_new( name );
 return student;


Here is a driver program for demonstration:
/* student_dvr.c */
#include &lt;stdio.h&gt;
#include &quot;student.h&quot;

int main( void )
 STUDENT *student = student_new( &quot;The Student&quot; );
 student-&gt;grade = grade_new( &#x27;a&#x27; );

 printf( &quot;%s: Numeric grade = %d\n&quot;,
 /* Whereas a subset exists, inheritance does not. */
 student-&gt;person-&gt;name,
 /* Functional programming is executing functions just-in-time (JIT) */
 grade_numeric( student-&gt;grade-&gt;letter ) );

 return 0;


Here is a makefile to compile everything:
# makefile
all: student_dvr

clean:
 rm student_dvr *.o

student_dvr: student_dvr.c grade.o student.o person.o
 gcc student_dvr.c grade.o student.o person.o -o student_dvr

grade.o: grade.c grade.h
 gcc -c grade.c

student.o: student.c student.h
 gcc -c student.c

person.o: person.c person.h
 gcc -c person.c
The formal strategy to build object-oriented objects is to:
* Identify the objects. Most likely these will be nouns.
* Identify each object&#x27;s attributes. What helps to describe the object?
* Identify each object&#x27;s actions. Most likely these will be verbs.
* Identify the relationships from object to object. Most likely these will be verbs.

For example:
* A person is a human identified by a name.
* A grade is an achievement identified by a letter.
* A student is a person who earns a grade.

===Syntax and semantics===
The syntax of a &quot;computer program&quot; is a list of production rules which form its grammar. A programming language&#x27;s grammar correctly places its declarations, expressions, and statements. Complementing the &quot;syntax&quot; of a language are its semantics. The &quot;semantics&quot; describe the meanings attached to various syntactic constructs. A syntactic construct may need a semantic description because a production rule may have an invalid interpretation. Also, different languages might have the same syntax; however, their behaviors may be different.

The syntax of a language is formally described by listing the production rules. Whereas the syntax of a natural language is extremely complicated, a subset of the English language can have this production rule listing:
# a sentence is made up of a noun-phrase followed by a verb-phrase;
# a noun-phrase is made up of an article followed by an adjective followed by a noun;
# a verb-phrase is made up of a verb followed by a noun-phrase;
# an article is &#x27;the&#x27;;
# an adjective is &#x27;big&#x27; or
# an adjective is &#x27;small&#x27;;
# a noun is &#x27;cat&#x27; or
# a noun is &#x27;mouse&#x27;;
# a verb is &#x27;eats&#x27;;
The words in bold-face are known as &quot;non-terminals&quot;. The words in &#x27;single quotes&#x27; are known as &quot;terminals&quot;.

From this production rule listing, complete sentences may be formed using a series of replacements. The process is to replace &quot;non-terminals&quot; with either a valid &quot;non-terminal&quot; or a valid &quot;terminal&quot;. The replacement process repeats until only &quot;terminals&quot; remain. One valid sentence is:
* sentence
* noun-phrase verb-phrase
* article adjective noun verb-phrase
* &quot;the&quot; adjective noun verb-phrase
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; noun verb-phrase
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot; verb-phrase
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot; verb noun-phrase
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot; &quot;eats&quot; noun-phrase
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot; &quot;eats&quot; article adjective noun
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot; &quot;eats&quot; &quot;the&quot; adjective noun
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot; &quot;eats&quot; &quot;the&quot; &quot;small&quot; noun
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot; &quot;eats&quot; &quot;the&quot; &quot;small&quot; &quot;mouse&quot;

However, another combination results in an invalid sentence:
* &quot;the&quot; &quot;small&quot; &quot;mouse&quot; &quot;eats&quot; &quot;the&quot; &quot;big&quot; &quot;cat&quot;
Therefore, a &quot;semantic&quot; is necessary to correctly describe the meaning of an &quot;eat&quot; activity.

One &quot;production rule&quot; listing method is called the Backus–Naur form (BNF). BNF describes the syntax of a language and itself has a &quot;syntax&quot;. This recursive definition is an example of a meta-language. The &quot;syntax&quot; of BNF includes:
* codice_39 which translates to &quot;is made up of a[n]&quot; when a non-terminal is to its right. It translates to &quot;is&quot; when a terminal is to its right.
* codice_40 which translates to &quot;or&quot;.
* codice_41 and codice_42 which surround non-terminals.

Using BNF, a subset of the English language can have this &quot;production rule&quot; listing:

&lt;sentence&gt; ::= &lt;noun-phrase&gt;&lt;verb-phrase&gt;
&lt;noun-phrase&gt; ::= &lt;article&gt;&lt;adjective&gt;&lt;noun&gt;
&lt;verb-phrase&gt; ::= &lt;verb&gt;&lt;noun-phrase&gt;
&lt;article&gt; ::= the
&lt;adjective&gt; ::= big | small
&lt;noun&gt; ::= cat | mouse
&lt;verb&gt; ::= eats
Using BNF, a signed-integer has the &quot;production rule&quot; listing:

&lt;signed-integer&gt; ::= &lt;sign&gt;&lt;integer&gt;
&lt;sign&gt; ::= + | -
&lt;integer&gt; ::= &lt;digit&gt; | &lt;digit&gt;&lt;integer&gt;
&lt;digit&gt; ::= 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9
Notice the recursive production rule:

&lt;integer&gt; ::= &lt;digit&gt; | &lt;digit&gt;&lt;integer&gt;

This allows for an infinite number of possibilities. Therefore, a &quot;semantic&quot; is necessary to describe a limitation of the number of digits.

Notice the leading zero possibility in the production rules:

&lt;integer&gt; ::= &lt;digit&gt; | &lt;digit&gt;&lt;integer&gt;
&lt;digit&gt; ::= 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9

Therefore, a &quot;semantic&quot; is necessary to describe that leading zeros need to be ignored.

Two formal methods are available to describe &quot;semantics&quot;. They are denotational semantics and axiomatic semantics.

==Software engineering and computer programming==
Software engineering is a variety of techniques to produce quality &quot;computer programs&quot;. Computer programming is the process of writing or editing source code. In a formal environment, a systems analyst will gather information from managers about all the organization&#x27;s processes to automate. This professional then prepares a detailed plan for the new or modified system. The plan is analogous to an architect&#x27;s blueprint.

===Performance objectives===
The systems analyst has the objective to deliver the right information to the right person at the right time. The critical factors to achieve this objective are:
# The quality of the output. Is the output useful for decision-making?
# The accuracy of the output. Does it reflect the true situation?
# The format of the output. Is the output easily understood?
# The speed of the output. Time-sensitive information is important when communicating with the customer in real time.

===Cost objectives===
Achieving performance objectives should be balanced with all of the costs, including:
# Development costs.
# Uniqueness costs. A reusable system may be expensive. However, it might be preferred over a limited-use system.
# Hardware costs.
# Operating costs.

Applying a systems development process will mitigate the axiom: the later in the process an error is detected, the more expensive it is to correct.

===Waterfall model===
The waterfall model is an implementation of a &quot;systems development process&quot;. As the &quot;waterfall&quot; label implies, the basic phases overlap each other:
# The &quot;investigation phase&quot; is to understand the underlying problem.
# The &quot;analysis phase&quot; is to understand the possible solutions.
# The &quot;design phase&quot; is to plan the best solution.
# The &quot;implementation phase&quot; is to program the best solution.
# The &quot;maintenance phase&quot; lasts throughout the life of the system. Changes to the system after it is deployed may be necessary. Faults may exist, including specification faults, design faults, or coding faults. Improvements may be necessary. Adaption may be necessary to react to a changing environment.

===Computer programmer===
A computer programmer is a specialist responsible for writing or modifying the source code to implement the detailed plan. A programming team is likely to be needed because most systems are too large to be completed by a single programmer. However, adding programmers to a project may not shorten the completion time. Instead, it may lower the quality of the system. To be effective, program modules need to be defined and distributed to team members. Also, team members must interact with one another in a meaningful and effective way.

Computer programmers may be programming in the small: programming within a single module. Chances are a module will execute modules located in other source code files. Therefore, computer programmers may be programming in the large: programming modules so they will effectively couple with each other. Programming-in-the-large includes contributing to the application programming interface (API).

===Program modules===
Modular programming is a technique to refine &quot;imperative language&quot; programs. Refined programs may reduce the software size, separate responsibilities, and thereby mitigate software aging. A &quot;program module&quot; is a sequence of statements that are bounded within a block and together identified by a name. Modules have a &quot;function&quot;, &quot;context&quot;, and &quot;logic&quot;:

* The &quot;function&quot; of a module is what it does.
* The &quot;context&quot; of a module are the elements being performed upon.
* The &quot;logic&quot; of a module is how it performs the function.

The module&#x27;s name should be derived first by its &quot;function&quot;, then by its &quot;context&quot;. Its &quot;logic&quot; should not be part of the name. For example, codice_43 or codice_44 are appropriate module names. However, codice_45 is not.

The degree of interaction &quot;within&quot; a module is its level of cohesion. &quot;Cohesion&quot; is a judgment of the relationship between a module&#x27;s name and its &quot;function&quot;. The degree of interaction &quot;between&quot; modules is the level of coupling. &quot;Coupling&quot; is a judgement of the relationship between a module&#x27;s &quot;context&quot; and the elements being performed upon.

===Cohesion===
The levels of cohesion from worst to best are:

* &quot;Coincidental Cohesion&quot;: A module has coincidental cohesion if it performs multiple functions, and the functions are completely unrelated. For example, codice_46. Coincidental cohesion occurs in practice if management enforces silly rules. For example, &quot;Every module will have between 35 and 50 executable statements.&quot;
* Logical Cohesion: A module has logical cohesion if it has available a series of functions, but only one of them is executed. For example, codice_47.
* &quot;Temporal Cohesion&quot;: A module has temporal cohesion if it performs functions related to time. One example, codice_48. Another example, codice_49, codice_50, ...
* &quot;Procedural Cohesion&quot;: A module has procedural cohesion if it performs multiple loosely related functions. For example, codice_51.
* &quot;Communicational Cohesion&quot;: A module has communicational cohesion if it performs multiple closely related functions. For example, codice_52.
* &quot;Informational Cohesion&quot;: A module has informational cohesion if it performs multiple functions, but each function has its own entry and exit points. Moreover, the functions share the same data structure. Object-oriented classes work at this level.
* &quot;Functional Cohesion&quot;: a module has functional cohesion if it achieves a single goal working only on local variables. Moreover, it may be reusable in other contexts.

===Coupling===
The levels of coupling from worst to best are:

* &quot;Content Coupling&quot;: A module has content coupling if it modifies a local variable of another function. COBOL used to do this with the &quot;alter&quot; verb.
* &quot;Common Coupling&quot;: A module has common coupling if it modifies a global variable.
* &quot;Control Coupling&quot;: A module has control coupling if another module can modify its control flow. For example, codice_53. Instead, control should be on the makeup of the returned object.
* &quot;Stamp Coupling&quot;: A module has stamp coupling if an element of a data structure passed as a parameter is modified. Object-oriented classes work at this level.
* &quot; Data Coupling&quot;: A module has data coupling if all of its input parameters are needed and none of them are modified. Moreover, the result of the function is returned as a single object.

===Data flow analysis===

&quot;Data flow analysis&quot; is a design method used to achieve modules of &quot;functional cohesion&quot; and &quot;data coupling&quot;. The input to the method is a data-flow diagram. A data-flow diagram is a set of ovals representing modules. Each module&#x27;s name is displayed inside its oval. Modules may be at the executable level or the function level.

The diagram also has arrows connecting modules to each other. Arrows pointing into modules represent a set of inputs. Each module should have only one arrow pointing out from it to represent its single output object. (Optionally, an additional exception arrow points out.) A daisy chain of ovals will convey an entire algorithm. The input modules should start the diagram. The input modules should connect to the transform modules. The transform modules should connect to the output modules.

==Functional categories==
&quot;Computer programs&quot; may be categorized along functional lines. The main functional categories are application software and system software. System software includes the operating system, which couples computer hardware with application software. The purpose of the operating system is to provide an environment where application software executes in a convenient and efficient manner. Both application software and system software execute utility programs. At the hardware level, a microcode program controls the circuits throughout the central processing unit.

===Application software===

Application software is the key to unlocking the potential of the computer system. Enterprise application software bundles accounting, personnel, customer, and vendor applications. Examples include enterprise resource planning, customer relationship management, and supply chain management software.

Enterprise applications may be developed in-house as a one-of-a-kind proprietary software. Alternatively, they may be purchased as off-the-shelf software. Purchased software may be modified to provide custom software. If the application is customized, then either the company&#x27;s resources are used or the resources are outsourced. Outsourced software development may be from the original software vendor or a third-party developer.

The potential advantages of in-house software are features and reports may be developed exactly to specification. Management may also be involved in the development process and offer a level of control. Management may decide to counteract a competitor&#x27;s new initiative or implement a customer or vendor requirement. A merger or acquisition may necessitate enterprise software changes. The potential disadvantages of in-house software are time and resource costs may be extensive. Furthermore, risks concerning features and performance may be looming.

The potential advantages of off-the-shelf software are upfront costs are identifiable, the basic needs should be fulfilled, and its performance and reliability have a track record. The potential disadvantages of off-the-shelf software are it may have unnecessary features that confuse end users, it may lack features the enterprise needs, and the data flow may not match the enterprise&#x27;s work processes.

====Application service provider====
One approach to economically obtaining a customized enterprise application is through an application service provider. Specialty companies provide hardware, custom software, and end-user support. They may speed the development of new applications because they possess skilled information system staff. The biggest advantage is it frees in-house resources from staffing and managing complex computer projects. Many application service providers target small, fast-growing companies with limited information system resources. On the other hand, larger companies with major systems will likely have their technical infrastructure in place. One risk is having to trust an external organization with sensitive information. Another risk is having to trust the provider&#x27;s infrastructure reliability.

===Operating system===
An operating system is the low-level software that supports a computer&#x27;s basic functions, such as scheduling processes and controlling peripherals.

In the 1950s, the programmer, who was also the operator, would write a program and run it. After the program finished executing, the output may have been printed, or it may have been punched onto paper tape or cards for later processing. More often than not the program did not work. The programmer then looked at the console lights and fiddled with the console switches. If less fortunate, a memory printout was made for further study. In the 1960s, programmers reduced the amount of wasted time by automating the operator&#x27;s job. A program called an &quot;operating system&quot; was kept in the computer at all times.

The term &quot;operating system&quot; may refer to two levels of software. The operating system may refer to the kernel program that manages the processes, memory, and devices. More broadly, the operating system may refer to the entire package of the central software. The package includes a kernel program, command-line interpreter, graphical user interface, utility programs, and editor.

====Kernel Program====

The kernel&#x27;s main purpose is to manage the limited resources of a computer:
* The kernel program should perform process scheduling, which is also known as a context switch. The kernel creates a process control block when a &quot;computer program&quot; is selected for execution. However, an executing program gets exclusive access to the central processing unit only for a time slice. To provide each user with the appearance of continuous access, the kernel quickly preempts each process control block to execute another one. The goal for system developers is to minimize dispatch latency.

* The kernel program should perform memory management.
:* When the kernel initially loads an executable into memory, it divides the address space logically into regions. The kernel maintains a master-region table and many per-process-region (pregion) tables—one for each running process. These tables constitute the virtual address space. The master-region table is used to determine where its contents are located in physical memory. The pregion tables allow each process to have its own program (text) pregion, data pregion, and stack pregion.
:*The program pregion stores machine instructions. Since machine instructions do not change, the program pregion may be shared by many processes of the same executable.
:* To save time and memory, the kernel may load only blocks of execution instructions from the disk drive, not the entire execution file completely.
:*The kernel is responsible for translating virtual addresses into physical addresses. The kernel may request data from the memory controller and, instead, receive a page fault. If so, the kernel accesses the memory management unit to populate the physical data region and translate the address.
:* The kernel allocates memory from the &quot;heap&quot; upon request by a process. When the process is finished with the memory, the process may request for it to be freed. If the process exits without requesting all allocated memory to be freed, then the kernel performs garbage collection to free the memory.
:* The kernel also ensures that a process only accesses its own memory, and not that of the kernel or other processes.
* The kernel program should perform file system management. The kernel has instructions to create, retrieve, update, and delete files.
* The kernel program should perform device management. The kernel provides programs to standardize and simplify the interface to the mouse, keyboard, disk drives, printers, and other devices. Moreover, the kernel should arbitrate access to a device if two processes request it at the same time.
* The kernel program should perform network management. The kernel transmits and receives packets on behalf of processes. One key service is to find an efficient route to the target system.
* The kernel program should provide system level functions for programmers to use.
** Programmers access files through a relatively simple interface that in turn executes a relatively complicated low-level I/O interface. The low-level interface includes file creation, file descriptors, file seeking, physical reading, and physical writing.
** Programmers create processes through a relatively simple interface that in turn executes a relatively complicated low-level interface.
** Programmers perform date/time arithmetic through a relatively simple interface that in turn executes a relatively complicated low-level time interface.
* The kernel program should provide a communication channel between executing processes. For a large software system, it may be desirable to engineer the system into smaller processes. Processes may communicate with one another by sending and receiving signals.

Originally, operating systems were programmed in assembly; however, modern operating systems are typically written in higher-level languages like C, Objective-C, and Swift.

===Utility program===
A utility program is designed to aid system administration and software execution. Operating systems execute hardware utility programs to check the status of disk drives, memory, speakers, and printers. A utility program may optimize the placement of a file on a crowded disk. System utility programs monitor hardware and network performance. When a metric is outside an acceptable range, a trigger alert is generated.

Utility programs include compression programs so data files are stored on less disk space. Compressed programs also save time when data files are transmitted over the network. Utility programs can sort and merge data sets. Utility programs detect computer viruses.

===Microcode program===


A microcode program is the bottom-level interpreter that controls the data path of software-driven computers.
(Advances in hardware have migrated these operations to hardware execution circuits.) Microcode instructions allow the programmer to more easily implement the digital logic level—the computer&#x27;s real hardware. The digital logic level is the boundary between computer science and computer engineering.

A logic gate is a tiny transistor that can return one of two signals: on or off.

* Having one transistor forms the NOT gate.
* Connecting two transistors in series forms the NAND gate.
* Connecting two transistors in parallel forms the NOR gate.
* Connecting a NOT gate to a NAND gate forms the AND gate.
* Connecting a NOT gate to a NOR gate forms the OR gate.

These five gates form the building blocks of binary algebra—the digital logic functions of the computer.

Microcode instructions are mnemonics programmers may use to execute digital logic functions instead of forming them in binary algebra. They are stored in a central processing unit&#x27;s (CPU) control store.
These hardware-level instructions move data throughout the data path.

The micro-instruction cycle begins when the microsequencer uses its microprogram counter to &quot;fetch&quot; the next machine instruction from random-access memory. The next step is to &quot;decode&quot; the machine instruction by selecting the proper output line to the hardware module.
The final step is to &quot;execute&quot; the instruction using the hardware module&#x27;s set of gates.
Instructions to perform arithmetic are passed through an arithmetic logic unit (ALU). The ALU has circuits to perform elementary operations to add, shift, and compare integers. By combining and looping the elementary operations through the ALU, the CPU performs its complex arithmetic.

Microcode instructions move data between the CPU and the memory controller. Memory controller microcode instructions manipulate two registers. The memory address register is used to access each memory cell&#x27;s address. The memory data register is used to set and read each cell&#x27;s contents.

Microcode instructions move data between the CPU and the many computer buses. The disk controller bus writes to and reads from hard disk drives. Data is also moved between the CPU and other functional units via the peripheral component interconnect express bus.

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q40056" start="2" end="18" title="Computer program" label="computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="24" end="32" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="61" end="81" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q68" start="88" end="96" title="computer" label="computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="100" end="107" title="Execution (computing)" label="execute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="132" end="140" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q181702" start="162" end="175" title="software documentation" label="documentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q372222" start="248" end="262" title="Human-readable medium and data" label="human-readable"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="278" end="289" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="337" end="344" title="Execution (computing)" label="execute"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="393" end="413" title="machine code" label="machine instructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4462013" start="445" end="455" title="Translator (computing)" label="translated"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="488" end="496" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="524" end="541" title="Assembly language" label="Assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="575" end="584" title="Assembler (computing)" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q778586" start="619" end="629" title="executable" label="executable"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="680" end="691" title="interpreter (computing)" label="interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="774" end="790" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q650550" start="791" end="796" title="Loader (computing)" label="loads"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="805" end="811" title="Random-access memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="825" end="832" title="Process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="838" end="861" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="872" end="878" title="Context switch" label="switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q814190" start="905" end="936" title="Instruction cycle" label="fetch, decode, and then execute"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="1192" end="1201" title="Statement (computer science)" label="statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q778586" start="1253" end="1263" title="executable" label="executable"/>
<link wikidata="Q131303" start="1361" end="1394" title="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program" label="&amp;quot;Hello, World!&amp;quot; program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="1441" end="1447" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251017" start="1476" end="1481" title="Dartmouth BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="1564" end="1573" title="Variable (computer science)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183659" start="1582" end="1590" title="Declaration (computer programming)" label="declared"/>
<link wikidata="Q202785" start="1715" end="1722" title="average" label="average"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="2120" end="2140" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="2175" end="2192" title="computer hardware" label="computer hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="2248" end="2268" title="computer programming" label="computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369967" start="2326" end="2346" title="Jacquard machine" label="Jacquard&amp;#x27;s loom"/>
<link wikidata="Q46633" start="2356" end="2371" title="Charles Babbage" label="Charles Babbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q485257" start="2396" end="2413" title="Analytical Engine" label="Analytical Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259" start="2998" end="3010" title="Ada Lovelace" label="Ada Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q694114" start="3179" end="3195" title="Bernoulli number" label="Bernoulli number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251" start="3367" end="3378" title="Alan Turing" label="Alan Turing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703890" start="3394" end="3418" title="Universal Turing machine" label="Universal Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q176452" start="3483" end="3503" title="finite-state machine" label="finite-state machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="3635" end="3644" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="3796" end="3811" title="Turing completeness" label="Turing complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q169399" start="3831" end="3875" title="ENIAC" label="Electronic Numerical Integrator And Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q197970" start="3936" end="3951" title="Turing complete" label="Turing complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q3574371" start="3995" end="4006" title="vacuum tube" label="vacuum tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815901" start="4022" end="4030" title="Electronic circuit" label="circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q873501" start="4064" end="4073" title="Pascaline" label="Pascaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="4160" end="4177" title="Inflation" label="in 1940s currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q81365" start="4215" end="4222" title="base-10" label="base-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q420105" start="4223" end="4235" title="Accumulator (computing)" label="accumulators"/>
<link wikidata="Q844783" start="4455" end="4464" title="plugboard" label="plugboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q319506" start="4647" end="4670" title="Aberdeen Proving Ground" label="Aberdeen Proving Ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="4875" end="4898" title="stored-program computer" label="stored-program computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="4927" end="4933" title="Random-access memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q457906" start="5075" end="5089" title="J. Presper Eckert" label="Presper Eckert"/>
<link wikidata="Q522162" start="5094" end="5106" title="John Mauchly" label="John Mauchly"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="5260" end="5276" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452926" start="5363" end="5399" title="First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC" label="First Draft of a Report on the EDVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="5523" end="5547" title="von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q834849" start="5622" end="5627" title="EDVAC" label="EDVAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q863565" start="5632" end="5637" title="EDSAC" label="EDSAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="5662" end="5676" title="IBM System/360" label="IBM System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="5732" end="5760" title="instruction set" label="instruction set architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3734967" start="5766" end="5774" title="IBM System/360 Model 20" label="Model 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="5857" end="5877" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q39053317" start="5883" end="5892" title="IBM System/360 Model 195" label="Model 195"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5946" end="5962" title="Computer multitasking#Multiprogramming" label="multiprogramming"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="5979" end="5988" title="Process (computing)" label="processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="5992" end="5998" title="random-access memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q219320" start="6041" end="6053" title="input/output" label="input/output"/>
<link wikidata="Q223433" start="6129" end="6133" title="PL/1" label="PL/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="6172" end="6177" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="6179" end="6186" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="6191" end="6196" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="6403" end="6410" title="Compiler" label="compile"/>
<link wikidata="Q66241" start="6778" end="6788" title="paper tape" label="paper tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="6790" end="6803" title="punched cards" label="punched cards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4032660" start="6807" end="6820" title="9-track tape" label="magnetic-tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q876049" start="7034" end="7062" title="Very Large Scale Integration" label="Very Large Scale Integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7096" end="7108" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515631" start="7150" end="7174" title="point-contact transistor" label="point-contact transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188946" start="7187" end="7214" title="bipolar junction transistor" label="bipolar junction transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="7242" end="7255" title="circuit board" label="circuit board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198739" start="7257" end="7273" title="Invention of the integrated circuit" label="During the 1960s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="7279" end="7288" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q80831" start="7333" end="7356" title="integrated circuit" label="integrated circuit chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q241735" start="7359" end="7371" title="Robert Noyce" label="Robert Noyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096013" start="7387" end="7410" title="Fairchild Semiconductor" label="Fairchild Semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="7422" end="7427" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570432" start="7487" end="7497" title="Semiconductor device fabrication" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q176097" start="7501" end="7524" title="field-effect transistor" label="field-effect transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="7559" end="7598" title="electrical resistivity and conductivity" label="electrical resistivity and conductivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q176300" start="7604" end="7626" title="p–n junction" label="semiconductor junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q178977" start="7655" end="7672" title="silicate minerals" label="silicate minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q737038" start="7692" end="7703" title="Polycrystalline silicon" label="polysilicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q737038" start="7719" end="7734" title="Siemens process" label="Siemens process"/>
<link wikidata="Q594666" start="7740" end="7759" title="Czochralski method" label="Czochralski process"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960534" start="7790" end="7813" title="monocrystalline silicon" label="monocrystalline silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q495193" start="7815" end="7828" title="Boule (crystal)" label="boule crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q43533" start="7834" end="7841" title="crystal" label="crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q267131" start="7874" end="7879" title="Wafer (electronics)" label="wafer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362275" start="7880" end="7889" title="Substrate (materials science)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520588" start="7895" end="7909" title="planar process" label="planar process"/>
<link wikidata="Q622938" start="7913" end="7929" title="photolithography" label="photolithography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="7980" end="7989" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656" start="7992" end="7997" title="diode" label="diode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321" start="8004" end="8012" title="resistor" label="resistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210793" start="8050" end="8075" title="metal–oxide–semiconductor" label="metal–oxide–semiconductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q175831" start="8339" end="8345" title="Diode matrix" label="matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="8349" end="8365" title="read-only memory" label="read-only memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="8552" end="8560" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q381364" start="8681" end="8697" title="Programmable ROM" label="Programmable ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="8714" end="8758" title="stored-program computer" label="installed the computer program onto the chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q205509" start="8776" end="8786" title="Intel 4004" label="Intel 4004"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297" start="8787" end="8801" title="microprocessor" label="microprocessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="8844" end="8867" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q609843" start="8960" end="8974" title="IBM System/360" label="IBM System/360"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040980" start="9002" end="9069" title="IBM Solid Logic Technology" label="circuit boards containing discrete components on ceramic substrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="9124" end="9127" title="bit" label="bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017523" start="9163" end="9170" title="Busicom" label="Busicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q319509" start="9233" end="9243" title="Intel 8008" label="Intel 8008"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026941" start="9295" end="9311" title="California State University, Sacramento" label="Sacramento State"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="9331" end="9344" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q600659" start="9481" end="9502" title="disk operating system" label="disk operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q25907" start="9512" end="9519" title="Memorex" label="Memorex"/>
<link wikidata="Q79735" start="9523" end="9531" title="megabyte" label="megabyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="9533" end="9548" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968762" start="9672" end="9712" title="IBM Basic Assembly Language and successors" label="IBM&amp;#x27;s Basic Assembly Language (BAL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="9769" end="9774" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="10008" end="10018" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="10026" end="10041" title="Instruction set architecture" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="10082" end="10102" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q324610" start="10145" end="10155" title="Intel 8080" label="Intel 8080"/>
<link wikidata="Q207539" start="10163" end="10173" title="Intel 8086" label="Intel 8086"/>
<link wikidata="Q657808" start="10234" end="10244" title="Intel 8088" label="Intel 8088"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="10246" end="10249" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16338" start="10296" end="10313" title="personal computer" label="personal computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22855" start="10332" end="10340" title="consumer" label="consumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4402708" start="10341" end="10347" title="demand" label="demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q182933" start="10476" end="10486" title="x86" label="x86 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q297868" start="10492" end="10513" title="x86 assembly language" label="x86 assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q844605" start="10529" end="10548" title="backward-compatible" label="backward-compatible"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="10549" end="10568" title="machine instruction" label="machine instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="10757" end="10777" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="10873" end="10880" title="String (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="10884" end="10904" title="random-access memory" label="random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="10916" end="10937" title="arithmetic logic unit" label="arithmetic logic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="11005" end="11013" title="integers" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="11097" end="11108" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q759899" start="11113" end="11123" title="Call stack" label="Call stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="11153" end="11158" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="words"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="11204" end="11213" title="Function (computer programming)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q339387" start="11217" end="11250" title="Single instruction, multiple data" label="Single instruction, multiple data"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="11348" end="11357" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="11364" end="11377" title="Array data structure" label="array of data"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="11446" end="11469" title="integrated development environment" label="programming environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q216640" start="11488" end="11505" title="computer terminal" label="computer terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="11529" end="11553" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109" start="11621" end="11626" title="Shell (computing)" label="shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="11640" end="11664" title="command-line interface" label="command-line environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q184752" start="11742" end="11767" title="text-based user interface" label="text-based user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="11837" end="11857" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="11901" end="11921" title="Programming language" label="Programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q962139" start="12301" end="12318" title="programming style" label="programming style"/>
<link wikidata="Q188267" start="12402" end="12422" title="programming paradigm" label="programming paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418502" start="12479" end="12499" title="Procedural programming" label="procedural languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="12501" end="12521" title="Functional programming" label="functional languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="12527" end="12544" title="Logic programming" label="logical languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q224055" start="12568" end="12584" title="Abstraction (computer science)" label="data abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903989" start="12608" end="12623" title="class hierarchy" label="class hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="12653" end="12662" title="Data type" label="datatypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643805" start="12670" end="12685" title="Container (abstract data type)" label="container types"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051282" start="12690" end="12709" title="generic programming" label="generic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192029" start="12873" end="12881" title="Reserved word" label="keywords"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="12883" end="12890" title="Character (computing)" label="symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773882" start="12892" end="12903" title="Identifier (computer languages)" label="identifiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="13018" end="13024" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183659" start="13077" end="13089" title="Declaration (computer programming)" label="declarations"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="13094" end="13104" title="Statement (computer science)" label="statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="13151" end="13161" title="Operation (mathematics)" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q231158" start="13163" end="13174" title="Assignment (computer science)" label="assignments"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="13176" end="13188" title="control flow" label="control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641420" start="13194" end="13203" title="delimiter" label="delimiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284190" start="13273" end="13282" title="Constant (computer programming)" label="constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="13284" end="13298" title="Variable (computer science)" label="variable names"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470517" start="13300" end="13315" title="Record (computer science)" label="structure names"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="13321" end="13335" title="Function (computer programming)" label="function names"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="13383" end="13399" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q192161" start="13457" end="13472" title="formal language" label="formal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="13572" end="13581" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q863565" start="13797" end="13802" title="EDSAC" label="EDSAC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134867" start="13825" end="13848" title="Stored-program computer" label="stored computer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q189088" start="13856" end="13880" title="von Neumann architecture" label="von Neumann architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248505" start="13921" end="13955" title="Programming language generations" label="generation of programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289116" start="13964" end="14004" title="First-generation programming language" label="first generation of programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="14008" end="14024" title="machine language" label="machine language"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="14146" end="14158" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327833" start="14198" end="14204" title="PDP-11" label="PDP-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q18657800" start="14242" end="14283" title="Second-generation programming language" label="second generation of programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="14287" end="14304" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14365" end="14373" title="Assembly language#Mnemonics" label="mnemonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14374" end="14386" title="Instruction_set_architecture#Instructions" label="instructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="14434" end="14443" title="Assembler (computing)" label="assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q625642" start="14756" end="14760" title="Word (computer architecture)" label="Word"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="14773" end="14779" title="Random-access memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="14821" end="14828" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="14838" end="14847" title="Processor register" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="14930" end="14939" title="Operation (mathematics)" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q719375" start="14941" end="14948" title="operand" label="operand"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="15020" end="15034" title="Variable (computer science)" label="variable names"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="15092" end="15106" title="memory address" label="memory address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294375" start="15594" end="15634" title="Third-generation programming language" label="third generation of programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q47506" start="15640" end="15648" title="compiler" label="compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q183065" start="15654" end="15666" title="Interpreter (computing)" label="interpreters"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="15837" end="15844" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="15853" end="15858" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="15867" end="15872" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="15885" end="15890" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="15912" end="15934" title="C (programming language)" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="15948" end="15967" title="High-level programming language" label="high-level language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325106" start="16217" end="16236" title="optimizing compiler" label="optimizing compiler"/>
<link wikidata="Q188267" start="16340" end="16348" title="programming paradigm" label="paradigm"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="16371" end="16381" title="imperative programming" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q238137" start="16429" end="16470" title="Fourth-generation programming language" label="fourth generation of programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="16577" end="16598" title="Declarative programming" label="Declarative languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144241" start="16616" end="16628" title="Side effect (computer science)" label="side effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q47607" start="16754" end="16779" title="SQL" label="Structured Query Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="16787" end="16795" title="Database" label="Database"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164001" start="16884" end="16900" title="Select (SQL)" label="select statement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17065" end="17074" title="algorithm#Computer algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183659" start="17081" end="17093" title="Declaration (computer programming)" label="declarations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="17095" end="17106" title="Expression (computer science)" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="17112" end="17122" title="Statement (computer science)" label="statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="17165" end="17173" title="variable (programming)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="17235" end="17243" title="datatype" label="datatype"/>
<link wikidata="Q231158" start="17376" end="17382" title="Assignment (computer science)" label="assign"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="17470" end="17482" title="control flow" label="control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="17524" end="17531" title="FORTRAN" label="FORTRAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="17669" end="17675" title="String (computer science)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183659" start="17708" end="17720" title="Declaration (computer programming)" label="declarations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="17722" end="17733" title="Expression (computer science)" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="17739" end="17749" title="Statement (computer science)" label="statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q186152" start="17767" end="17773" title="Array data structure" label="arrays"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17777" end="17788" title="Function (computer programming)#Jump to subroutine" label="subroutines"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17792" end="17812" title="For loop#1957: FORTRAN" label="&amp;quot;do&amp;quot; loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q180003" start="18099" end="18136" title="American National Standards Institute" label="American National Standards Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470517" start="18265" end="18272" title="Record (computer science)" label="records"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="18276" end="18284" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131140" start="18311" end="18316" title="COBOL" label="COBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="18476" end="18483" title="String (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="18505" end="18529" title="US Department of Defense" label="US Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q11641" start="18572" end="18584" title="Grace Hopper" label="Grace Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="19013" end="19040" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q188436" start="19057" end="19062" title="ALGOL" label="ALGOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="19364" end="19370" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="19381" end="19397" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208009" start="19411" end="19426" title="Syntax-directed translation" label="syntax-directed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327579" start="19464" end="19479" title="Block (programming)" label="block structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q838119" start="19557" end="19578" title="For loop" label="&amp;quot;for&amp;quot; loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="19582" end="19591" title="Function (computer programming)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="19595" end="19604" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="recursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="19647" end="19653" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q777358" start="19655" end="19663" title="Modula-2" label="Modula-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="19665" end="19668" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q487378" start="19670" end="19676" title="Delphi (software)" label="Delphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323362" start="19681" end="19687" title="Oberon (programming language)" label="Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="19745" end="19746" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="19748" end="19751" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="19756" end="19760" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="19777" end="19782" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="19888" end="19905" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="20079" end="20093" title="microcomputers" label="microcomputers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032810" start="20204" end="20223" title="Read–eval–print loop" label="interactive session"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="20236" end="20252" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="20678" end="20694" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q15853013" start="20695" end="20707" title="Visual Basic" label="Visual Basic"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="20744" end="20768" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="20781" end="20803" title="C (programming language)" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q810009" start="20845" end="20849" title="BCPL" label="BCPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q797302" start="20868" end="20869" title="B (programming language)" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="20875" end="20893" title="Bell Labs" label="AT&amp;amp;T Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11368" start="20962" end="20966" title="UNIX" label="UNIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="20967" end="20983" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="21161" end="21178" title="assembly language" label="assembly language"/>
<link wikidata="Q211496" start="21191" end="21208" title="High-level programming language" label="high-level syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348366" start="21245" end="21261" title="inline assembler" label="inline assembler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078424" start="21359" end="21368" title="Operators in C and C++" label="operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143344" start="21462" end="21477" title="Global variable" label="Global variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896011" start="21483" end="21498" title="static variable" label="static variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q426882" start="21519" end="21531" title="Clock signal" label="clock cycles"/>
<link wikidata="Q759899" start="21546" end="21551" title="call stack" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183659" start="21600" end="21612" title="Declaration (computer programming)" label="declarations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752316" start="21614" end="21618" title="Manual memory management" label="Heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="21643" end="21659" title="Pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050390" start="21669" end="21677" title="C dynamic memory allocation" label="codice_4"/>
<link wikidata="Q491179" start="22016" end="22028" title="data segment" label="data segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q835876" start="22130" end="22154" title=".bss" label="block started by segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q835713" start="22302" end="22311" title="Memory address" label="addresses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327579" start="22723" end="22739" title="Block (programming)" label="block delimiters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22808" end="22824" title="Parameter (computer programming)#Parameters and arguments" label="formal parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="22946" end="22955" title="Interface (computing)" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q759899" start="23296" end="23301" title="call stack" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23444" end="23457" title="Call stack#STACK-POINTER" label="stack pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="23479" end="23487" title="processor register" label="register"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="23694" end="23701" title="Runtime (program lifecycle phase)" label="runtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034415" start="23748" end="23753" title="Scope (computer science)" label="scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752316" start="24073" end="24077" title="Manual memory management" label="heap"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="24161" end="24177" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496640" start="24342" end="24355" title="out of memory" label="out of memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050390" start="24479" end="24487" title="C dynamic memory allocation" label="allocate"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="24770" end="24788" title="software engineering" label="software engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="24847" end="24854" title="Modular programming" label="modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q82753" start="24945" end="24950" title="computer file" label="files"/>
<link wikidata="Q827335" start="25034" end="25052" title="abstract data type" label="abstract data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="25088" end="25105" title="Type system" label="concrete (scalar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="25121" end="25128" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q117879" start="25138" end="25152" title="Floating-point arithmetic" label="floating-point"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="25166" end="25173" title="String (computer science)" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q32483" start="25177" end="25187" title="Character (computing)" label="characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470517" start="25212" end="25222" title="Record (computer science)" label="structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948" start="25287" end="25291" title="List (abstract data type)" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="25389" end="25396" title="Class (computer programming)" label="classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16928028" start="25513" end="25518" title="Name binding" label="bound"/>
<link wikidata="Q853614" start="25525" end="25535" title="identifier" label="identifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="25553" end="25559" title="Object (computer science)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="25562" end="25598" title="Object-oriented programming" label="Object-oriented imperative languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="25665" end="25687" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="25803" end="25809" title="Method (computer programming)" label="method"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25811" end="25826" title="Method (computer programming)#Member functions in C++" label="member function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="25831" end="25840" title="Operation (mathematics)" label="operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="26007" end="26022" title="subset" label="subset/superset"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="26041" end="26051" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="26056" end="26063" title="Element (mathematics)" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="26474" end="26485" title="Inheritance (object-oriented programming)" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="26585" end="26588" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="26672" end="26680" title="C (programming language)" label="C&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q212569" start="26751" end="26757" title="Simula" label="Simula"/>
<link wikidata="Q98448101" start="26847" end="26858" title="Include directive" label="header file"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049476" start="27369" end="27380" title="Constructor (object-oriented programming)" label="constructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="27554" end="27565" title="source code" label="source file"/>
<link wikidata="Q300867" start="29890" end="29898" title="makefile" label="makefile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144241" start="30421" end="30432" title="Side effect (computer science)" label="side effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="30434" end="30455" title="Declarative programming" label="Declarative languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="30670" end="30689" title="functional language" label="functional language"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="30695" end="30712" title="Logic programming" label="logical languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q242028" start="30780" end="30795" title="lambda calculus" label="lambda calculus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437428" start="30826" end="30834" title="Semantics (computer science)" label="semantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q759899" start="31395" end="31400" title="Call stack" label="stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q814194" start="31420" end="31435" title="program counter" label="program counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1120538" start="32028" end="32035" title="Snippet (programming)" label="snippet"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="32252" end="32268" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="32375" end="32395" title="Parallel computing" label="parallel programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q128392" start="32400" end="32422" title="Concurrent computing" label="concurrent programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="32467" end="32491" title="object-oriented programming" label="object-oriented features"/>
<link wikidata="Q132874" start="32543" end="32547" title="Lisp (programming language)" label="Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q27948" start="32620" end="32625" title="List (abstract data type)" label="lists"/>
<link wikidata="Q223655" start="32707" end="32726" title="Tree (data structure)" label="tree data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="32785" end="32794" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="32867" end="32875" title="Element (mathematics)" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139612" start="32915" end="32919" title="list" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q13741" start="33495" end="33507" title="Integrated development environment" label="environments"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="33710" end="33718" title="data type" label="datatype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="33808" end="33815" title="Runtime (program lifecycle phase)" label="runtime"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33861" end="33876" title="Name binding#Binding time" label="dynamic binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904257" start="33993" end="34021" title="software development process" label="software development process"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="34246" end="34269" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q860654" start="34425" end="34427" title="ML (programming language)" label="ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q333707" start="35045" end="35057" title="compile time" label="compile-time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35108" end="35122" title="Name binding#Binding time" label="static binding"/>
<link wikidata="Q163468" start="35252" end="35258" title="Prolog" label="Prolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q275603" start="35319" end="35336" title="logic programming" label="logic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="35363" end="35368" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q93072" start="35400" end="35416" title="Alain Colmerauer" label="Alain Colmerauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3459697" start="35487" end="35530" title="SLD resolution" label="Selective Linear Definite clause resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490465" start="35545" end="35560" title="Robert Kowalski" label="Robert Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q160302" start="35579" end="35602" title="University of Edinburgh" label="University of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q264164" start="37482" end="37491" title="Recursion (computer science)" label="recursive"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="37623" end="37632" title="Function (computer programming)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="37822" end="37833" title="Inheritance (object-oriented programming)" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141183" start="37966" end="37984" title="backward chaining" label="backward reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478658" start="38121" end="38145" title="knowledge representation" label="knowledge representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="38150" end="38165" title="problem solving" label="problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="38169" end="38192" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="38229" end="38256" title="Object-oriented programming" label="Object-oriented programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q815844" start="38292" end="38302" title="Method (computer programming)" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q190686" start="38304" end="38313" title="Function (computer programming)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="38318" end="38325" title="Object (computer science)" label="objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q483247" start="38379" end="38389" title="phenomenon" label="phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470517" start="38405" end="38414" title="Record (computer science)" label="container"/>
<link wikidata="Q193076" start="38637" end="38659" title="functional programming" label="functional programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="38814" end="38819" title="Class (computer programming)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q175263" start="38858" end="38872" title="data structure" label="data structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470517" start="38899" end="38905" title="Record (computer science)" label="record"/>
<link wikidata="Q827335" start="39089" end="39106" title="Abstract data type" label="abstract datatype"/>
<link wikidata="Q212542" start="39117" end="39128" title="Inheritance (object-oriented programming)" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="39204" end="39226" title="C programming language" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049476" start="39673" end="39684" title="Constructor (object-oriented programming)" label="constructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="39736" end="39747" title="source code" label="source file"/>
<link wikidata="Q300867" start="42984" end="42992" title="makefile" label="makefile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152399" start="43862" end="43868" title="Syntax (programming languages)" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q12139612" start="43908" end="43912" title="list" label="list"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111781" start="43916" end="43932" title="Production (computer science)" label="production rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q373045" start="43948" end="43955" title="formal grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183659" start="44016" end="44028" title="Declaration (computer programming)" label="declarations"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="44030" end="44041" title="Expression (computer science)" label="expressions"/>
<link wikidata="Q613299" start="44047" end="44057" title="Statement (computer science)" label="statements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437428" start="44118" end="44127" title="Semantics (computer science)" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33742" start="44537" end="44553" title="natural language" label="natural language"/>
<link wikidata="Q211577" start="46681" end="46697" title="Backus–Naur form" label="Backus–Naur form"/>
<link wikidata="Q193983" start="46826" end="46839" title="metalanguage" label="meta-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="47561" end="47568" title="Integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189746" start="48430" end="48452" title="denotational semantics" label="denotational semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q792533" start="48457" end="48476" title="axiomatic semantics" label="axiomatic semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="48529" end="48549" title="Software engineering" label="Software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412670" start="48588" end="48595" title="software quality" label="quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q80006" start="48627" end="48647" title="Computer programming" label="Computer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q128751" start="48685" end="48696" title="source code" label="source code"/>
<link wikidata="Q942569" start="48725" end="48740" title="systems analyst" label="systems analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3264234" start="48870" end="48883" title="Functional requirement" label="detailed plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q559486" start="49773" end="49800" title="Systems development life cycle" label="systems development process"/>
<link wikidata="Q478175" start="49937" end="49952" title="waterfall model" label="waterfall model"/>
<link wikidata="Q857102" start="50291" end="50295" title="Software design" label="plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="50730" end="50749" title="computer programmer" label="computer programmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51294" end="51318" title="Programming in the large and programming in the small#Programming in the small" label="programming in the small"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51473" end="51497" title="Programming in the large and programming in the small#Programming in the large" label="programming in the large"/>
<link wikidata="Q165194" start="51622" end="51655" title="API" label="application programming interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q6453666" start="51686" end="51705" title="Modular programming" label="Modular programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7554236" start="51868" end="51882" title="software aging" label="software aging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327579" start="51967" end="51972" title="Block (programming)" label="block"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353987" start="52620" end="52628" title="Cohesion (computer science)" label="cohesion"/>
<link wikidata="Q253448" start="52814" end="52822" title="Coupling (computer science)" label="coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="54850" end="54862" title="control flow" label="control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q747385" start="55519" end="55536" title="data-flow diagram" label="data-flow diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157702" start="55990" end="56001" title="Daisy chain (electrical engineering)" label="daisy chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8366" start="56033" end="56042" title="algorithm" label="algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="56342" end="56362" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q676202" start="56367" end="56382" title="system software" label="system software"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="56413" end="56429" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="56445" end="56462" title="computer hardware" label="computer hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q312466" start="56683" end="56699" title="Utility software" label="utility programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="56726" end="56743" title="Microcode" label="microcode program"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="56781" end="56804" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318054" start="56918" end="56949" title="Enterprise software" label="Enterprise application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q131508" start="57033" end="57061" title="enterprise resource planning" label="enterprise resource planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q485643" start="57063" end="57095" title="customer relationship management" label="customer relationship management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644530" start="57101" end="57133" title="supply chain management software" label="supply chain management software"/>
<link wikidata="Q218616" start="57205" end="57225" title="proprietary software" label="proprietary software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115443" start="57267" end="57289" title="Commercial off-the-shelf" label="off-the-shelf software"/>
<link wikidata="Q339628" start="57337" end="57352" title="custom software" label="custom software"/>
<link wikidata="Q621601" start="58666" end="58694" title="application service provider" label="application service provider"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="59402" end="59418" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123036" start="59502" end="59512" title="Scheduling (computing)" label="scheduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="59513" end="59522" title="Process (computing)" label="processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="59539" end="59549" title="peripheral" label="peripheral"/>
<link wikidata="Q9662" start="60291" end="60305" title="Kernel (operating system)" label="kernel program"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="60323" end="60332" title="Process (computing)" label="processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5830907" start="60334" end="60340" title="Computer memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="60346" end="60353" title="Peripheral" label="devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q189053" start="60486" end="60510" title="Command-line interface" label="command-line interpreter"/>
<link wikidata="Q782543" start="60512" end="60536" title="graphical user interface" label="graphical user interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q312466" start="60538" end="60554" title="Utility software" label="utility programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q522972" start="60560" end="60566" title="Source-code editor" label="editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123036" start="60710" end="60728" title="Scheduling (computing)" label="process scheduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061424" start="60755" end="60769" title="context switch" label="context switch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142922" start="60792" end="60813" title="process control block" label="process control block"/>
<link wikidata="Q650550" start="60853" end="60875" title="Loader (computing)" label="selected for execution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="60936" end="60959" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60971" end="60981" title="Preemption (computing)#time slice" label="time slice"/>
<link wikidata="Q913876" start="61013" end="61044" title="Time-sharing" label="appearance of continuous access"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193100" start="61065" end="61073" title="Preemption (computing)" label="preempts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936256" start="61138" end="61155" title="Systems programming" label="system developers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123036" start="61171" end="61187" title="dispatch latency" label="dispatch latency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="61226" end="61243" title="memory management" label="memory management"/>
<link wikidata="Q650550" start="61274" end="61279" title="Loader (computing)" label="loads"/>
<link wikidata="Q3104532" start="61351" end="61358" title="Region-based memory management" label="regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q205663" start="61469" end="61476" title="Process (computing)" label="process"/>
<link wikidata="Q6451721" start="61506" end="61527" title="virtual address space" label="virtual address space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61608" end="61623" title="Computer data storage#Primary storage" label="physical memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q844824" start="62121" end="62137" title="physical address" label="physical address"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175867" start="62178" end="62195" title="memory controller" label="memory controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928607" start="62220" end="62230" title="page fault" label="page fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q518020" start="62263" end="62285" title="memory management unit" label="memory management unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752316" start="62517" end="62522" title="Manual memory management" label="freed"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="62623" end="62641" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q174989" start="62817" end="62839" title="File system" label="file system management"/>
<link wikidata="Q178648" start="62952" end="62969" title="Peripheral" label="device management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454667" start="63247" end="63265" title="network management" label="network management"/>
<link wikidata="Q214111" start="63301" end="63308" title="Network packet" label="packets"/>
<link wikidata="Q290066" start="63373" end="63378" title="Routing table" label="route"/>
<link wikidata="Q722192" start="63437" end="63459" title="system calls" label="system level functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060813" start="63670" end="63685" title="file descriptor" label="file descriptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q751436" start="64073" end="64094" title="Inter-process communication" label="communication channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="64176" end="64184" title="Software engineering" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412443" start="64288" end="64295" title="Signal (IPC)" label="signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q165436" start="64347" end="64355" title="assembly language" label="assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="64444" end="64445" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q188531" start="64447" end="64458" title="Objective-C" label="Objective-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118377" start="64464" end="64469" title="Swift (programming language)" label="Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q312466" start="64496" end="64511" title="Utility software" label="utility program"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="65161" end="65175" title="computer virus" label="computer virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q175869" start="65208" end="65225" title="Microcode" label="microcode program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633673" start="65276" end="65285" title="Datapath" label="data path"/>
<link wikidata="Q4380240" start="65329" end="65337" title="Random logic" label="hardware"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65372" end="65399" title="Control unit#Hardwired control unit" label="hardware execution circuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q173378" start="65475" end="65494" title="Logic level" label="digital logic level"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="65578" end="65594" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q428691" start="65599" end="65619" title="computer engineering" label="computer engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q170451" start="65624" end="65634" title="logic gate" label="logic gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176097" start="65645" end="65655" title="Field-effect transistor" label="transistor"/>
<link wikidata="Q664575" start="65738" end="65746" title="Inverter (logic gate)" label="NOT gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q575178" start="65797" end="65806" title="NAND gate" label="NAND gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8065380" start="65859" end="65867" title="NOR gate" label="NOR gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q560370" start="65918" end="65926" title="AND gate" label="AND gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q560398" start="65976" end="65983" title="OR gate" label="OR gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q173183" start="66031" end="66045" title="Boolean algebra" label="binary algebra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="66119" end="66128" title="Assembly language#Mnemonics" label="mnemonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="66248" end="66278" title="central processing unit" label="central processing unit&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q669106" start="66285" end="66298" title="control store" label="control store"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633673" start="66359" end="66368" title="Datapath" label="data path"/>
<link wikidata="Q175848" start="66415" end="66429" title="microsequencer" label="microsequencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="66490" end="66509" title="Machine code" label="machine instruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="66515" end="66535" title="random-access memory" label="random-access memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192903" start="66821" end="66842" title="arithmetic logic unit" label="arithmetic logic unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175867" start="67108" end="67125" title="memory controller" label="memory controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q187466" start="67183" end="67192" title="Processor register" label="registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q583538" start="67198" end="67221" title="memory address register" label="memory address register"/>
<link wikidata="Q183380" start="67277" end="67297" title="Memory buffer register" label="memory data register"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="67412" end="67426" title="Bus (computing)" label="computer buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q891128" start="67432" end="67451" title="Disk controller" label="disk controller bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="67477" end="67492" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disk drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q206924" start="67565" end="67611" title="PCI Express" label="peripheral component interconnect express bus."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="5785" wikidata="Q83267" url="?curid=5785" title="Crime">
<text>In ordinary language, a crime is an unlawful act punishable by a state or other authority. The term &quot;crime&quot; does not, in modern criminal law, have any simple and universally accepted definition, though statutory definitions have been provided for certain purposes. The most popular view is that crime is a category created by law; in other words, something is a crime if declared as such by the relevant and applicable law. One proposed definition is that a crime or offence (or criminal offence) is an act harmful not only to some individual but also to a community, society, or the state (&quot;a public wrong&quot;). Such acts are forbidden and punishable by law.

The notion that acts such as murder, rape, and theft are to be prohibited exists worldwide. What precisely is a criminal offence is defined by the criminal law of each relevant jurisdiction. While many have a catalogue of crimes called the criminal code, in some common law nations no such comprehensive statute exists.

The state (government) has the power to severely restrict one&#x27;s liberty for committing a crime. In modern societies, there are procedures to which investigations and trials must adhere. If found guilty, an offender may be sentenced to a form of reparation such as a community sentence, or, depending on the nature of their offence, to undergo imprisonment, life imprisonment or, in some jurisdictions, death. 

Usually, to be classified as a crime, the &quot;act of doing something criminal&quot; (&quot;actus reus&quot;) mustwith certain exceptionsbe accompanied by the &quot;intention to do something criminal&quot; (&quot;mens rea&quot;).

While every crime violates the law, not every violation of the law counts as a crime. Breaches of private law (torts and breaches of contract) are not automatically punished by the state, but can be enforced through civil procedure.

== Definition ==
The exact definition of crime is a philosophical issue without an agreed upon answer. Fields such as law, politics, sociology, and psychology define crime in different ways. Crimes may be variously considered as wrongs against individuals, against the community, or against the state. The criminality of an action is dependent on its context; acts of violence will be seen as crimes in many circumstances but as permissible or desirable in others. Crime was historically seen as a manifestation of evil, but this has been superseded by modern criminal theories.

=== Legalism ===

Legal and political definitions of crime consider actions that are banned by authorities or punishable by law. Crime is defined by the criminal law of a given jurisdiction, including all actions that are subject to criminal procedure. There is no limit to what can be considered a crime in a legal system, so there may not be a unifying principle used to determine whether an action should be designated as a crime. From a legal perspective, crimes are generally wrong actions that are severe enough to warrant punishment that infringes on the perpetrator&#x27;s liberties. 

English criminal law and the related common law of Commonwealth countries can define offences that the courts alone have developed over the years, without any actual legislation: common law offences. The courts used the concept of &quot;malum in se&quot; to develop various common law offences.

=== Sociology ===
As a sociological concept, crime is associated with actions that cause harm and violate social norms. Under this definition, crime is a type of social construct, and societal attitudes determine what is considered criminal. 

In legal systems based on legal moralism, the predominant moral beliefs of society determine the legal definition as well as the social definition of crime. This system is less prominent in liberal democratic societies that prioritize individualism and multiculturalism over other moral beliefs.

Paternalism defines crime not only as harm to others or to society, but also as harm to the self.

=== Psychology ===
Psychological definitions consider the state of mind of perpetrators and their relationship with their environment. 

== Study ==
The study of crime is called &quot;criminology&quot;. Criminology is a subfield of sociology that addresses issues of social norms, social order, deviance, and violence. It includes the motivations and consequences of crime and its perpetrators, as well as preventative measures, either studying criminal acts on an individual level or the relationship of crime and the community. Due to the wide range of concepts associated with crime and the disagreement on a precise definition, the focus of criminology can vary considerably. Various theories within criminology provide different descriptions and explanations for crime, including social control theory, subcultural theory, strain theory, differential association, and labeling theory.

Subfields of criminology and related fields of study include crime prevention, criminal law, crime statistics, anthropological criminology, criminal psychology, criminal sociology, criminal psychiatry, victimology, penology, and forensic science. Besides sociology, criminology is often associated with law and psychology.

==Crime statistics==
Information and statistics about crime in a given jurisdiction are collected as crime estimates, typically produced by national or international agencies. Methods to collect crime statistics may vary, even between jurisdictions within the same nation. Under-reporting of crime is common, particularly in developing nations, resulting in the dark figure of crime. Victim studies may be used to determine the frequency of crime in a given population. The gap to official statistics is generally smaller with higher severity of the crime. Clearance rate measures the fraction of crimes where a criminal charge has been laid or the responsible person convicted. Fear of crime can be distinct from crime probability.

== Public perception ==
Crime is often a high priority political issue in developed countries, regardless of the country&#x27;s crime rates. People that are not regularly exposed to crime most often experience it through media, including news reporting and crime fiction. Exposure of crime through news stories is associated with alarmism and inaccurate perceptions of crime trends. Selection bias in new stories about criminals significantly over-represent the prevalence of violent crime, and news reporting will often overemphasize a specific type of crime for a period of time, creating a &quot;crime wave&quot; effect. 

As public opinion of morality changes over time, actions that were once condemned as crimes may be considered justifiable. 

== Natural-law theory ==
Justifying the state&#x27;s use of force to coerce compliance with its laws has proven a consistent theoretical problem. One of the earliest justifications involved the theory of natural law. This posits that the nature of the world or of human beings underlies the standards of morality or constructs them. Thomas Aquinas wrote in the 13th century: &quot;the rule and measure of human acts is the reason, which is the first principle of human acts&quot;. He regarded people as by nature rational beings, concluding that it becomes morally appropriate that they should behave in a way that conforms to their rational nature. Thus, to be valid, any law must conform to natural law and coercing people to conform to that law is morally acceptable. In the 1760s, William Blackstone described the thesis:

: &quot;This law of nature, being co-eval with mankind and dictated by God himself, is of course superior in obligation to any other. It is binding over all the globe, in all countries, and at all times: no human laws are of any validity, if contrary to this; and such of them as are valid derive all their force, and all their authority, mediately or immediately, from this original.&quot;

But John Austin (1790–1859), an early positivist, applied utilitarianism in accepting the calculating nature of human beings and the existence of an objective morality. He denied that the legal validity of a norm depends on whether its content conforms to morality. Thus, in Austinian terms, a moral code can objectively determine what people ought to do, the law can embody whatever norms the legislature decrees to achieve social utility, but every individual remains free to choose what to do. Similarly, H.L.A. Hart saw the law as an aspect of sovereignty, with lawmakers able to adopt any law as a means to a moral end.

Thus the necessary and sufficient conditions for the truth of a proposition of law involved internal logic and consistency, and that the state&#x27;s agents used state power with responsibility. Ronald Dworkin rejects Hart&#x27;s theory and proposes that all individuals should expect the equal respect and concern of those who govern them as a fundamental political right. He offers a theory of compliance overlaid by a theory of deference (the citizen&#x27;s duty to obey the law) and a theory of enforcement, which identifies the legitimate goals of enforcement and punishment. Legislation must conform to a theory of legitimacy, which describes the circumstances under which a particular person or group is entitled to make law, and a theory of legislative justice, which describes the law they are entitled or obliged to make.

There are natural-law theorists who have accepted the idea of enforcing the prevailing morality as a primary function of the law. This view entails the problem that it makes any moral criticism of the law impossible: if conformity with natural law forms a necessary condition for legal validity, all valid law must, by definition, count as morally just. Thus, on this line of reasoning, the legal validity of a norm necessarily entails its moral justice.

== History ==

=== Early history ===
Restrictions on behavior existed in all prehistoric societies. Crime in early human society was seen as a personal transgression and was addressed by the community as a whole rather than through a formal legal system, often through the use of custom, religion, or the rule of a tribal leader. Some of the oldest extant writings are ancient criminal codes. The earliest known criminal code was the Code of Ur-Nammu (), and the first known criminal code that incorporated retaliatory justice was the Code of Hammurabi. The latter influenced the conception of crime across several civilizations over the following millennia.

The Romans systematized law and applied their system across the Roman Empire. The initial rules of Roman law regarded assaults as a matter of private compensation. The most significant Roman law concept involved &quot;dominion&quot;. Most acts recognized as crimes in ancient societies, such as violence and theft, have persisted to the modern era. The criminal justice system of Imperial China existed unbroken for over 2,000 years.

Many of the earliest conceptions of crime are associated with sin and corresponded to acts that were believed to invoke the anger of a deity. This idea was further popularized with the development of the Abrahamic religions. The understanding of crime and sin were closely associated with one another for much of history, and conceptions of crime took on many of the ideas associated with sin. Islamic law developed its own system of criminal justice as Islam spread in the seventh and eighth centuries.

=== Post-classical era ===
In post-classical Europe and East Asia, central government was limited and crime was defined locally. Towns established their own criminal justice systems, while crime in the countryside was defined by the social hierarchies of feudalism. In some places, such as the Russian Empire and the Kingdom of Italy, feudal justice survived into the 19th century.

Common law first developed in England under the rule of Henry II in the 12th century. He established a system of traveling judges that tried accused criminals in each region of England by applying precedent from previous rulings. Legal developments in 12th century England also resulted in the earliest known recording of official crime data.

=== Modern era ===
In the modern era, crime came to be seen as an issue affecting society rather than conflicts between individuals. Writers such as Thomas Hobbes saw crime as a societal issue as early as the 17th century. Imprisonment developed as a long-term penalty for crime in the 18th century. Increasing urbanization and industrialization in the 19th century caused crime to become an immediate issue that affected society, prompting government intervention in crime and the establishment of criminology as its own field.

Anthropological criminology was popularized by Cesare Lombroso in the late-19th century. This was a biological determinist school of thought based in social darwinism, arguing that certain people are naturally born as criminals. The eugenics movement of the early-20th century similarly held that crime was caused primarily by genetic factors.

The concept of crime underwent a period of change as modernism was widely accepted in the years following World War II. Crime increasingly came to be seen as a societal issue, and criminal law was seen as a means to protect the public from antisocial behavior. This idea was associated with a larger trend in the western world toward social democracy and centre-left politics.

Through most of history, reporting of crime was generally local. The advent of mass media through radio and television in the mid-20th century allowed for the sensationalism of crime. This created well-known stories of criminals such as Jeffrey Dahmer, and it allowed for dramatization that perpetuates misconceptions about crime. Forensic science was popularized in the 1980s, establishing DNA profiling as a new method to prevent and analyze crime.

== Types ==

=== White-collar crime ===

White-collar crime refers to financially motivated, nonviolent or non-directly violent crime committed by individuals, businesses and government professionals. The crimes are believed to be committed by middle- or upper-class individuals for financial gains. Typical white-collar crimes could include wage theft, fraud, bribery, Ponzi schemes, insider trading, labor racketeering, embezzlement, cybercrime, copyright infringement, money laundering, identity theft, and forgery.

=== Blue-collar crime ===

Blue-collar crime is any crime committed by an individual from a lower social class as opposed to white-collar crime which is associated with crime committed by someone of a higher-level social class. These crimes are primarily small scale, for immediate beneficial gain to the individual or group involved in them. Examples of blue-collar crime include Narcotic production or distribution, sexual assault, theft, burglary, assault or murder.

=== Violent crime ===

Violent crime is crime that involves an act of violent aggression against another person. Common examples of violent crime include homicide, assault, sexual assault, and robbery. Some violent crimes, such as assault, may be committed with the intention of causing harm. Other violent crimes, such as robbery, may use violence to further another goal. Violent crime is distinct from noncriminal types of violence, such as self-defense, use of force, and acts of war. Acts of violence are most often perceived as deviant when they are committed as an overreaction or a disproportionate response to provocation.

=== Property crime ===

Common examples of property crime include burglary, theft, and vandalism.

Examples of financial crimes include counterfeiting, smuggling, tax evasion, and bribery. The scope of financial crimes has expanded significantly since the beginning of modern economics in the 17th century. In occupational crime, the complexity and anonymity of computer systems may help criminal employees camouflage their operations. The victims of the most costly scams include banks, brokerage houses, insurance companies, and other large financial institutions.

=== Public order crime ===

Public order crime is crime that violates a society&#x27;s norms about what constitutes socially acceptable behavior. Examples of public order crimes include gambling, drug-related crime, public intoxication, prostitution, loitering, breach of the peace, panhandling, vagrancy, street harassment, excessive noise, and littering. Public order crime is associated with the broken windows theory, which posits that public order crimes increase the likelihood of other types of crime. Some public order crimes are considered victimless crimes in which no specific victim can be identified. Most nations in the Western world have moved toward decriminalization of victimless crimes in the modern era.

Adultery, fornication, blasphemy, apostasy, and invoking the name of God are commonly recognized as crimes in theocratic societies or those heavily influenced by religion.

=== Political crime ===

Political crime is crime that directly challenges or threatens the state. Examples of political crimes include subversion, rebellion, treason, mutiny, espionage, sedition, terrorism, riot, and unlawful assembly. Political crimes are associated with the political agenda of a given state, and they are necessarily applied against political dissidents. Due to their unique relation to the state, political crimes are often encouraged by one nation against another, and it is political alignment rather than the act itself that determines criminality. State crime that is carried out by the state to repress law-abiding citizens may also be considered political crime.

=== Inchoate crime ===

Inchoate crime is crime that is carried out in anticipation of other illegal actions but does not cause direct harm. Examples of inchoate crimes include attempt and conspiracy. Inchoate crimes are defined by substantial action to facilitate a crime with the intention of the crime&#x27;s occurrence. This is distinct from simple preparation for or consideration of criminal activity. They are unique in that renunciation of criminal intention is generally enough to absolve the perpetrator of criminal liability, as their actions are no longer facilitating a potential future crime.

== Participants ==

=== Criminal ===
A criminal is an individual who commits a crime. What constitutes a criminal can vary depending on the context and the law, and it often carries a pejorative connotation. Criminals are often seen as embodying certain stereotypes or traits and are seen as a distinct type of person from law-abiding citizens. Despite this, no mental or physical trend is identifiable that differentiates criminals from non-criminals. Public response to criminals may be indignant or sympathetic. Indignant responses involve resentment and a desire for vengeance, wishing to see criminals removed from society or made to suffer for harm that they cause. Sympathetic responses involve compassion and understanding, seeking to rehabilitate or forgive criminals and absolve them of blame.

=== Victim ===
A victim is an individual who has been treated unjustly or made to suffer. In the context of crime, the victim is the individual that is harmed by a violation of criminal law. Victimization is associated with post-traumatic stress and a long-term decrease in quality of life. Victimology is the study of victims, including their role in crime and how they are affected.

Several factors affect an individual&#x27;s likelihood of becoming a victim. Some factors may cause victims of crime to experience short-term or long-term &quot;repeat victimization&quot;. Common long-term victims are those that have close relationships with the criminal, manifesting in crimes such as domestic violence, embezzlement, child abuse, and bullying. Repeat victimization may also occur when a potential victim appears to be a viable target, such as when indicating wealth in a less affluent region. Many of the traits that indicate criminality also indicate victimality; victims of crime are more likely to engage in unlawful behavior and respond to provocation. Overall demographic trends of victims and criminals are often similar, and victims are more likely to have engaged in criminal activities themselves.

The victims may only want compensation for the injuries suffered, while remaining indifferent to a possible desire for deterrence. Victims, on their own, may lack the economies of scale that could allow them to administer a penal system, let alone to collect any fines levied by a court. Historically, from ancient times until the 19th century, many societies believed that non-human animals were capable of committing crimes, and prosecuted and punished them accordingly. Prosecutions of animals gradually dwindled during the 19th century, although a few were recorded as late as the 1910s and 1920s.

== Criminal law ==

Virtually all countries in the 21st century have criminal law grounded in civil law, common law, Islamic law, or socialist law. Historically, criminal codes have often divided criminals by class or caste, prescribing different penalties depending on status. In some tribal societies, an entire clan is recognized as liable for a crime. In many cases, disputes over a crime in this system lead to a feud that lasts over several generations.

=== Criminalization ===

The state determines what actions are considered criminal in the scope of the law. Criminalization has significant human rights considerations, as it can infringe on rights of autonomy and subject individuals to unjust punishment.

=== Criminal justice ===
==== Law enforcement ====

The enforcement of criminal law seeks to prevent crime and sanction crimes that do occur. This enforcement is carried out by the state through law enforcement agencies, such as police, which are empowered to arrest suspected perpetrators of crimes. Law enforcement may focus on policing individual crimes, or it may focus on bringing down overall crime rates. One common variant, community policing, seeks to prevent crime by integrating police into the community and public life.

==== Criminal procedure ====

When the perpetrator of a crime is found guilty of the crime, the state delivers a sentence to determine the penalty for the crime.

==== Corrections and punishment ====

Authorities may respond to crime through corrections, carrying out punishment as a means to censure the criminal act. Punishment is generally reserved for serious offenses. Individuals regularly engage in activity that could be scrutinized under criminal law but are deemed inconsequential. Retributive justice seeks to create a system of accountability and punish criminals in a way that knowingly causes suffering. This may arise out of a feeling that criminals deserve to suffer and that punishment should exist for its own sake. The existence of punishment also creates an effect of deterrence that discourages criminal action for fear of punishment. 

Rehabilitation seeks to understand and mitigate the causes of a criminal&#x27;s unlawful action to prevent recidivism. Different criminological theories propose different methods of rehabilitation, including strengthening social networks, reducing poverty, influencing values, and providing therapy for physical and mental ailments. Rehabilitative programs may include counseling or vocational education.

Developed nations are less likely to use physical punishments. Instead, they will impose financial penalties or imprisonment. In places with widespread corruption or limited rule of law, crime may be punished extralegally through mob rule and lynching.

Whether a crime can be resolved through financial compensation varies depending on the culture and the specific context of the crime. Historically, many societies have absolved acts of homicide through compensation to the victim&#x27;s relatives.

=== Liability ===

If a crime is committed, the individual responsible is considered to be liable for the crime. For liability to exist, the individual must be capable of understanding the criminal process and the relevant authority must have legitimate power to establish what constitutes a crime.

=== International criminal law ===

International criminal law typically addresses serious offenses, such as genocide, crimes against humanity, and war crimes. As with all international law, these laws are created through treaties and international custom, and they are defined through the consensus of the involved states. International crimes are not prosecuted through a standard legal system, though international organizations may establish tribunals to investigate and rule on egregious offenses such as genocide.

== Causes and correlates ==
Criminal behavior determinants include cost–benefit analysis, opportunity or crime of passion. A person that commits a criminal act typically believes that its benefits will outweigh the risk of being caught and punished. Negative economic factors, such as unemployment and income inequality, can increase the incentive to commit crime, while severe punishments can deter crime in some cases.

Social factors similarly affect the likelihood of criminal activity. Crime corresponds heavily with social integration; groups that are less integrated with society or that are forcibly integrated with society are more likely to engage in crime. Involvement in the community, such as through a church, decreases the likelihood of crime, while associating with criminals increases the likelihood of becoming a criminal as well.

There is no known genetic cause of crime. Some genes have been found to affect traits that may incline individuals toward criminal activity, but no biological or physiological trait has been found to directly cause or compel criminal actions. One biological factor is the disparity between men and women, as men are significantly more likely to commit crimes than women in virtually all cultures. Crimes committed by men also tend to be more severe than those committed by women.

Crime distribution shows a long tail with a small fraction of individuals re-offending many times due to high recidivism, while onset of crime at younger age predicts a longer criminal career.

== See also ==

* Crime displacement
* Law and order (politics)
* Rule of law
* Organized crime

== Notes ==
== References==
* 
* 
* Polinsky, A. Mitchell. (1980). &quot;Private versus Public Enforcement of Fines&quot;. &quot;The Journal of Legal Studies&quot;, Vol. IX, No. 1, (January), pp. 105–127.
* Polinsky, A. Mitchell &amp; Shavell, Steven. (1997). &quot;On the Disutility and Discounting of Imprisonment and the Theory of Deterrence&quot;, NBER Working Papers 6259, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.
* 
** 
** 
* 
** 
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="24" end="29" title="Crime" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="65" end="70" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="138" end="150" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="212" end="221" title="statutory" label="statutory"/>
<link wikidata="Q714737" start="316" end="324" title="Category of being" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="336" end="339" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="477" end="484" title="Crime" label="offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="489" end="505" title="Crime" label="criminal offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q896677" start="616" end="621" title="wrong" label="wrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="707" end="713" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="715" end="719" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="725" end="730" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="825" end="837" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="855" end="867" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19705" start="918" end="931" title="criminal code" label="criminal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="941" end="951" title="Common law (legal system)" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="982" end="989" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1010" end="1020" title="Forms of government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="1068" end="1075" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="1131" end="1141" title="Criminal procedure" label="procedures"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="1170" end="1175" title="trial" label="trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q705178" start="1199" end="1205" title="Guilt (law)" label="guilty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="1226" end="1235" title="Sentence (law)" label="sentenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538366" start="1270" end="1288" title="community sentence" label="community sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="1347" end="1359" title="imprisonment" label="imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="1361" end="1378" title="life imprisonment" label="life imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="1391" end="1403" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="1406" end="1411" title="Capital punishment" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057850" start="1508" end="1518" title="actus reus" label="actus reus"/>
<link wikidata="Q705497" start="1535" end="1553" title="Strict liability" label="certain exceptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048403" start="1629" end="1637" title="mens rea" label="mens rea"/>
<link wikidata="Q896677" start="1693" end="1713" title="violation of the law" label="violation of the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122235" start="1745" end="1756" title="private law" label="private law"/>
<link wikidata="Q158970" start="1758" end="1762" title="tort" label="tort"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="1768" end="1788" title="breach of contract" label="breaches of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="1863" end="1878" title="civil procedure" label="civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q15292" start="2396" end="2400" title="evil" label="evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q146071" start="2694" end="2712" title="criminal procedure" label="criminal procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352893" start="3055" end="3075" title="English criminal law" label="English criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="3092" end="3102" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="3106" end="3118" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153559" start="3234" end="3252" title="common law offence" label="common law offence"/>
<link wikidata="Q843634" start="3292" end="3303" title="malum in se" label="malum in se"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098235" start="3440" end="3444" title="harm" label="harm"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="3457" end="3468" title="social norm" label="social norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642673" start="3513" end="3529" title="Social constructionism" label="social construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q13577290" start="3621" end="3635" title="legal moralism" label="legal moralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="3785" end="3803" title="liberal democratic" label="liberal democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="3830" end="3843" title="individualism" label="individualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190656" start="3848" end="3864" title="multiculturalism" label="multiculturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q58434" start="3892" end="3903" title="Paternalism" label="Paternalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="4223" end="4232" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="4258" end="4270" title="Social norm" label="social norms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518716" start="4272" end="4284" title="social order" label="social order"/>
<link wikidata="Q623184" start="4286" end="4294" title="Deviance (sociology)" label="deviance"/>
<link wikidata="Q124490" start="4300" end="4308" title="violence" label="violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q459409" start="4326" end="4337" title="Motivations for hate crime" label="motivations"/>
<link wikidata="Q117488" start="4342" end="4354" title="Criminal justice" label="consequences"/>
<link wikidata="Q224952" start="4372" end="4384" title="Suspect" label="perpetrators"/>
<link wikidata="Q855848" start="4397" end="4418" title="Crime prevention" label="preventative measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419281" start="4776" end="4797" title="social control theory" label="social control theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293449" start="4799" end="4817" title="subcultural theory" label="subcultural theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703123" start="4819" end="4832" title="Strain theory (sociology)" label="strain theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q845745" start="4834" end="4858" title="differential association" label="differential association"/>
<link wikidata="Q40613" start="4864" end="4879" title="labeling theory" label="labeling theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q855848" start="4943" end="4959" title="crime prevention" label="crime prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q146491" start="4961" end="4973" title="criminal law" label="criminal law"/>
<link wikidata="Q330344" start="4975" end="4991" title="crime statistics" label="crime statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624786" start="4993" end="5020" title="anthropological criminology" label="anthropological criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139238" start="5022" end="5041" title="criminal psychology" label="criminal psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="5072" end="5082" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q645938" start="5084" end="5095" title="victimology" label="victimology"/>
<link wikidata="Q818670" start="5097" end="5105" title="penology" label="penology"/>
<link wikidata="Q495304" start="5111" end="5127" title="forensic science" label="forensic science"/>
<link wikidata="Q330344" start="5401" end="5417" title="crime statistics" label="crime statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17146321" start="5479" end="5494" title="Under-reporting" label="Under-reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265976" start="5568" end="5588" title="dark figure of crime" label="dark figure of crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925599" start="5590" end="5604" title="Victim study" label="Victim studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797784" start="5740" end="5761" title="Crime harm index" label="severity of the crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q378749" start="5763" end="5777" title="Clearance rate" label="Clearance rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329525" start="5818" end="5833" title="criminal charge" label="criminal charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916183" start="5874" end="5883" title="Conviction" label="convicted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788984" start="5885" end="5898" title="Fear of crime" label="Fear of crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="5926" end="5937" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="6197" end="6210" title="crime fiction" label="crime fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637018" start="6270" end="6278" title="alarmism" label="alarmism"/>
<link wikidata="Q284172" start="6323" end="6337" title="Selection bias" label="Selection bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q325980" start="6751" end="6756" title="coercion" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="6895" end="6906" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q48324" start="6995" end="7003" title="morality" label="morality"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="7024" end="7038" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="7114" end="7120" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q938185" start="7204" end="7212" title="rationality" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q332449" start="7476" end="7494" title="William Blackstone" label="William Blackstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q60837" start="7914" end="7925" title="John Austin (legal philosophy)" label="John Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q644971" start="7948" end="7958" title="Legal positivism" label="positivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q160590" start="7968" end="7982" title="utilitarianism" label="utilitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q374834" start="8418" end="8429" title="H. L. A. Hart" label="H.L.A. Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="8458" end="8469" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="8637" end="8642" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319773" start="8647" end="8658" title="consistency" label="consistency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427818" start="8715" end="8729" title="Social responsibility" label="responsibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q319803" start="8731" end="8745" title="Ronald Dworkin" label="Ronald Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q396568" start="8967" end="8976" title="deference" label="deference"/>
<link wikidata="Q19705" start="10202" end="10216" title="Criminal code" label="criminal codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q705693" start="10259" end="10275" title="Code of Ur-Nammu" label="Code of Ur-Nammu"/>
<link wikidata="Q93304" start="10360" end="10377" title="Code of Hammurabi" label="Code of Hammurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="10489" end="10495" title="Ancient Rome" label="Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="10549" end="10561" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="10584" end="10593" title="Roman law" label="Roman law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="10982" end="10985" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47280" start="11124" end="11143" title="Abrahamic religion" label="Abrahamic religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="11314" end="11325" title="Islamic law" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="11374" end="11379" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="11455" end="11469" title="post-classical" label="post-classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q37739" start="11680" end="11689" title="feudalism" label="feudalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="11719" end="11733" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="11742" end="11758" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="11808" end="11818" title="Common law" label="Common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q102140" start="11864" end="11872" title="Henry II of England" label="Henry II"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="12301" end="12314" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="12375" end="12387" title="Imprisonment" label="Imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="12463" end="12475" title="urbanization" label="urbanization"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="12480" end="12497" title="industrialization" label="industrialization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624786" start="12682" end="12709" title="Anthropological criminology" label="Anthropological criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q202420" start="12729" end="12744" title="Cesare Lombroso" label="Cesare Lombroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q252962" start="12782" end="12804" title="biological determinist" label="biological determinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q202261" start="12832" end="12848" title="social darwinism" label="social darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="12915" end="12923" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="13080" end="13089" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13133" end="13145" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q734611" start="13267" end="13277" title="Anti-social behaviour" label="antisocial"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="13361" end="13377" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q737014" start="13382" end="13402" title="centre-left politics" label="centre-left politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="13484" end="13494" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q298364" start="13642" end="13656" title="Jeffrey Dahmer" label="Jeffrey Dahmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="13796" end="13809" title="DNA profiling" label="DNA profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7959502" start="14199" end="14209" title="wage theft" label="wage theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="14211" end="14216" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="14218" end="14225" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q219407" start="14227" end="14240" title="Ponzi scheme" label="Ponzi schemes"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="14242" end="14257" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283181" start="14259" end="14277" title="Racketeering" label="labor racketeering"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="14279" end="14291" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q29137" start="14293" end="14303" title="cybercrime" label="cybercrime"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="14305" end="14327" title="copyright infringement" label="copyright infringement"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="14329" end="14345" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q471880" start="14347" end="14361" title="identity theft" label="identity theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332286" start="14367" end="14374" title="forgery" label="forgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q187588" start="14475" end="14487" title="social class" label="social class"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="14795" end="14809" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="14811" end="14816" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q329425" start="14818" end="14826" title="burglary" label="burglary"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="14828" end="14835" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="14839" end="14845" title="murder" label="murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q191797" start="14926" end="14936" title="aggression" label="aggression"/>
<link wikidata="Q149086" start="15002" end="15010" title="homicide" label="homicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="15012" end="15019" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q673281" start="15021" end="15035" title="sexual assault" label="sexual assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q53706" start="15041" end="15048" title="robbery" label="robbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40283" start="15292" end="15304" title="self-defense" label="self-defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q971119" start="15306" end="15318" title="use of force" label="use of force"/>
<link wikidata="Q45635" start="15324" end="15335" title="acts of war" label="acts of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q329425" start="15547" end="15555" title="burglary" label="burglary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727213" start="15557" end="15562" title="theft" label="theft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="15568" end="15577" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q502918" start="15617" end="15631" title="counterfeiting" label="counterfeiting"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="15633" end="15642" title="smuggling" label="smuggling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="15644" end="15655" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q187436" start="15661" end="15668" title="bribery" label="bribery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075799" start="15791" end="15809" title="occupational crime" label="occupational crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7023752" start="15948" end="15953" title="confidence trick" label="scams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11416" start="16235" end="16243" title="gambling" label="gambling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259975" start="16245" end="16263" title="drug-related crime" label="drug-related crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7887424" start="16265" end="16284" title="public intoxication" label="public intoxication"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="16286" end="16298" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380751" start="16300" end="16309" title="loitering" label="loitering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722536" start="16311" end="16330" title="breach of the peace" label="breach of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692284" start="16332" end="16343" title="Aggressive panhandling" label="panhandling"/>
<link wikidata="Q23906234" start="16345" end="16353" title="vagrancy" label="vagrancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16034269" start="16355" end="16372" title="street harassment" label="street harassment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538155" start="16374" end="16389" title="Noise regulation" label="excessive noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780867" start="16395" end="16404" title="littering" label="littering"/>
<link wikidata="Q44028" start="16448" end="16469" title="broken windows theory" label="broken windows theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026760" start="16598" end="16615" title="Victimless crime" label="victimless crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="16683" end="16696" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="16774" end="16782" title="Adultery" label="Adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q927079" start="16784" end="16795" title="fornication" label="fornication"/>
<link wikidata="Q200481" start="16797" end="16806" title="blasphemy" label="blasphemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223681" start="16808" end="16816" title="apostasy" label="apostasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796969" start="16822" end="16846" title="Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain" label="invoking the name of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="16884" end="16894" title="theocratic" label="theocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="17083" end="17093" title="subversion" label="subversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q124734" start="17095" end="17104" title="rebellion" label="rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="17106" end="17113" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="17115" end="17121" title="mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="17123" end="17132" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="17134" end="17142" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="17144" end="17153" title="terrorism" label="terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="17155" end="17159" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897005" start="17165" end="17182" title="unlawful assembly" label="unlawful assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920329" start="17225" end="17241" title="political agenda" label="political agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q181043" start="17311" end="17321" title="Dissident" label="dissidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q857833" start="17521" end="17532" title="State crime" label="State crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="17569" end="17576" title="Political repression" label="repress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29142" start="17816" end="17823" title="attempt" label="attempt"/>
<link wikidata="Q930164" start="17828" end="17838" title="conspiracy" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313594" start="18071" end="18083" title="renunciation" label="renunciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q202387" start="19276" end="19297" title="post-traumatic stress" label="post-traumatic stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="19326" end="19341" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="19741" end="19758" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="19760" end="19772" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q167191" start="19774" end="19785" title="child abuse" label="child abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q240126" start="19791" end="19799" title="bullying" label="bullying"/>
<link wikidata="Q332142" start="20384" end="20394" title="deterrence (psychology)" label="deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q729" start="20649" end="20655" title="animal" label="animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q222249" start="20962" end="20971" title="Civil law (common law)" label="civil law"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="20973" end="20983" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="20985" end="20996" title="Islamic law" label="Islamic law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982322" start="21001" end="21014" title="socialist law" label="socialist law"/>
<link wikidata="Q467033" start="21286" end="21290" title="feud" label="feud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="21469" end="21481" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q732717" start="21781" end="21805" title="Law enforcement agency" label="law enforcement agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="21815" end="21821" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403016" start="21846" end="21852" title="arrest" label="arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256171" start="22018" end="22036" title="community policing" label="community policing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="22233" end="22241" title="Sentence (law)" label="sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058947" start="22413" end="22420" title="censure" label="censure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519270" start="22612" end="22631" title="Retributive justice" label="Retributive justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="22660" end="22674" title="accountability" label="accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q332142" start="22908" end="22918" title="Deterrence (penology)" label="deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142602" start="22978" end="22992" title="Rehabilitation (penology)" label="Rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420643" start="23085" end="23095" title="recidivism" label="recidivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715623" start="23200" end="23215" title="Social network" label="social networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294" start="23226" end="23233" title="poverty" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q194112" start="23247" end="23253" title="Value (ethics and social sciences)" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q179661" start="23269" end="23276" title="therapy" label="therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26830865" start="23347" end="23357" title="counseling" label="counseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869278" start="23361" end="23381" title="vocational education" label="vocational education"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="23558" end="23569" title="rule of law" label="rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="23614" end="23622" title="mob rule" label="mob rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q486775" start="23627" end="23635" title="lynching" label="lynching"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="24295" end="24303" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="24305" end="24328" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="24334" end="24344" title="War crime" label="war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="24408" end="24416" title="treaties" label="treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194894" start="24421" end="24441" title="Customary international law" label="international custom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412224" start="24632" end="24641" title="Tribunal" label="tribunals"/>
<link wikidata="Q942582" start="24774" end="24795" title="cost–benefit analysis" label="cost–benefit analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185428" start="24797" end="24808" title="Crime of opportunity" label="opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q382265" start="24812" end="24828" title="crime of passion" label="crime of passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="24992" end="25004" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915542" start="25009" end="25026" title="income inequality" label="income inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="25101" end="25106" title="deterrence theory" label="deter"/>
<link wikidata="Q370735" start="25229" end="25247" title="social integration" label="social integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532956" start="25575" end="25597" title="Genetics and crime" label="genetic cause of crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q5530957" start="25829" end="25860" title="Sex differences in crime" label="disparity between men and women"/>
<link wikidata="Q534685" start="26065" end="26074" title="long tail" label="long tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420643" start="26148" end="26158" title="recidivism" label="recidivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185183" start="26250" end="26268" title="Crime displacement" label="Crime displacement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="26271" end="26295" title="Law and order (politics)" label="Law and order (politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q44918" start="26298" end="26309" title="Rule of law" label="Rule of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="26312" end="26327" title="Organized crime" label="Organized crime"/>
</links>
</doc>
