<doc id="6125" wikidata="Q6722" url="?curid=6125" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss">
<text>Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss (; ; ; 30 April 177723 February 1855) was a German mathematician, astronomer, geodesist, and physicist who contributed to many fields in mathematics and science. He was director of the Göttingen Observatory and professor of astronomy from 1807 until his death in 1855. He is widely considered one of the greatest mathematicians of all time.

While studying at the University of Göttingen, he propounded several mathematical theorems. Gauss completed his masterpieces &quot;Disquisitiones Arithmeticae&quot; and &quot;Theoria motus corporum coelestium&quot; as a private scholar. He gave the second and third complete proofs of the fundamental theorem of algebra, made contributions to number theory, and developed the theories of binary and ternary quadratic forms.

Gauss was instrumental in the identification of Ceres as a dwarf planet. His work on the motion of planetoids disturbed by large planets led to the introduction of the Gaussian gravitational constant and the method of least squares, which he had discovered before Adrien-Marie Legendre published it. Gauss was in charge of the extensive geodetic survey of the Kingdom of Hanover together with an arc measurement project from 1820 to 1844; he was one of the founders of geophysics and formulated the fundamental principles of magnetism. Fruits of his practical work were the inventions of the heliotrope in 1821, a magnetometer in 1833 and – alongside Wilhelm Eduard Weber – the first electromagnetic telegraph in 1833.

Gauss was the first to discover and study non-Euclidean geometry, coining the term as well. He further developed a fast Fourier transform some 160 years before John Tukey and James Cooley.

Gauss refused to publish incomplete work and left several works to be edited posthumously. He believed that the act of learning, not possession of knowledge, provided the greatest enjoyment. Gauss confessed to disliking teaching, but some of his students became influential mathematicians, such as Richard Dedekind and Bernhard Riemann.

== Biography ==
=== Youth and education ===
Gauss was born on 30 April 1777 in Brunswick in the Duchy of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel (now in the German state of Lower Saxony). His family was of relatively low social status. His father Gebhard Dietrich Gauss (1744–1808) worked variously as a butcher, bricklayer, gardener, and treasurer of a death-benefit fund. Gauss characterized his father as honourable and respected, but rough and dominating at home. He was experienced in writing and calculating, whereas his second wife Dorothea, Carl Friedrich&#x27;s mother, was nearly illiterate. He had one elder brother from his father&#x27;s first marriage.

Gauss was a child prodigy in mathematics. When the elementary teachers noticed his intellectual abilities, they brought him to the attention of the Duke of Brunswick who sent him to the local &quot;Collegium Carolinum&quot;, which he attended from 1792 to 1795 with Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann as one of his teachers. Thereafter the Duke granted him the resources for studies of mathematics, sciences, and classical languages at the University of Göttingen until 1798. His professor in mathematics was Abraham Gotthelf Kästner, whom Gauss called &quot;the leading mathematician among poets, and the leading poet among mathematicians&quot; because of his epigrams. Astronomy was taught by Karl Felix Seyffer, with whom Gauss stayed in correspondence after graduation; Olbers and Gauss mocked him in their correspondence. On the other hand, he thought highly of Georg Christoph Lichtenberg, his teacher of physics, and of Christian Gottlob Heyne, whose lectures in classics Gauss attended with pleasure. Fellow students of this time were Johann Friedrich Benzenberg, Farkas Bolyai, and Heinrich Wilhelm Brandes.

He was likely a self-taught student in mathematics since he independently rediscovered several theorems. He solved a geometrical problem that had occupied mathematicians since the Ancient Greeks when he determined in 1796 which regular polygons can be constructed by compass and straightedge. This discovery ultimately led Gauss to choose mathematics instead of philology as a career. Gauss&#x27;s mathematical diary, a collection of short remarks about his results from the years 1796 until 1814, shows that many ideas for his mathematical magnum opus Disquisitiones Arithmeticae (1801) date from this time.

=== Private scholar ===
Gauss graduated as a Doctor of Philosophy in 1799, not in Göttingen, as is sometimes stated, but at the Duke of Brunswick&#x27;s special request from the University of Helmstedt, the only state university of the duchy. Johann Friedrich Pfaff assessed his doctoral thesis, and Gauss got the degree &quot;in absentia&quot; without further oral examination. The Duke then granted him the cost of living as a private scholar in Brunswick. Gauss subsequently refused calls from the Russian Academy of Sciences in St. Peterburg and Landshut University. Later, the Duke promised him the foundation of an observatory in Brunswick in 1804. Architect Peter Joseph Krahe made preliminary designs, but one of Napoleon&#x27;s wars cancelled those plans: the Duke was killed in the battle of Jena in 1806. The duchy was abolished in the following year, and Gauss&#x27;s financial support stopped.

When Gauss was calculating asteroid orbits in the first years of the century, he established contact with the astronomical community of Bremen and Lilienthal, especially Wilhelm Olbers, Karl Ludwig Harding, and Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel, as part of the informal group of astronomers known as the Celestial police. One of their aims was the discovery of further planets. They assembled data on asteroids and comets as a basis for Gauss&#x27;s research on their orbits, which he later published in his astronomical magnum opus &quot;Theoria motus corporum coelestium&quot; (1809).

=== Professor in Göttingen ===

In November 1807, Gauss followed a call to the University of Göttingen, then an institution of the newly founded Kingdom of Westphalia under Jérôme Bonaparte, as full professor and director of the astronomical observatory, and kept the chair until his death in 1855. He was soon confronted with the demand for two thousand francs from the Westphalian government as a war contribution, which he could not afford to pay. Both Olbers and Laplace wanted to help him with the payment, but Gauss refused their assistance. Finally, an anonymous person from Frankfurt, later discovered to be Prince-primate Dalberg, paid the sum.

Gauss took on the directorate of the 60-year-old observatory, founded in 1748 by Prince-elector George II and built on a converted fortification tower, with usable, but partly out-of-date instruments. The construction of a new observatory had been approved by Prince-elector George III in principle since 1802, and the Westphalian government continued the planning, but Gauss could not move to his new place of work until September 1816. He got new up-to-date instruments, including two meridian circles from Repsold and Reichenbach, and a heliometer from Fraunhofer.

The scientific activity of Gauss, besides pure mathematics, can be roughly divided into three periods: astronomy was the main focus in the first two decades of the 19th century, geodesy in the third decade, and physics, mainly magnetism, in the fourth decade.

Gauss made no secret of his aversion to giving academic lectures. But from the start of his academic career at Göttingen, he continuously gave lectures until 1854. He often complained about the burdens of teaching, feeling that it was a waste of his time. On the other hand, he occasionally described some students as talented. Most of his lectures dealt with astronomy, geodesy, and applied mathematics, and only three lectures on subjects of pure mathematics. Some of Gauss&#x27;s students went on to become renowned mathematicians, physicists, and astronomers: Moritz Cantor, Dedekind, Dirksen, Encke, Gould, Heine, Klinkerfues, Kupffer, Listing, Möbius, Nicolai, Riemann, Ritter, Schering, Scherk, Schumacher, von Staudt, Stern, Ursin; as geoscientists Sartorius von Waltershausen, and Wappäus.

Gauss did not write any textbook and disliked the popularization of scientific matters. His only attempts at popularization were his works on the date of Easter (1800/1802) and the essay &quot;Erdmagnetismus und Magnetometer&quot; of 1836. Gauss published his papers and books exclusively in Latin or German. He wrote Latin in a classical style but used some customary modifications set by contemporary mathematicians.


In his inaugural lecture at Göttingen University from 1808, Gauss claimed reliable observations and results attained only by a strong calculus as the sole tasks of astronomy. At university, he was accompanied by a staff of other lecturers in his disciplines, who completed the educational program; these included the mathematician Thibaut with his lectures, the physicist Mayer, known for his textbooks, his successor Weber since 1831, and in the observatory Harding, who took the main part of lectures in practical astronomy. When the observatory was completed, Gauss took his living accommodation in the western wing of the new observatory and Harding in the eastern one. They had once been on friendly terms, but over time they became alienated, possibly – as some biographers presume – because Gauss had wished the equal-ranked Harding to be no more than his assistant or observer. Gauss used the new meridian circles nearly exclusively, and kept them away from Harding, except for some very seldom joint observations.

Brendel subdivides Gauss&#x27;s astronomic activity chronologically into seven periods, of which the years since 1820 are taken as a &quot;period of lower astronomical activity&quot;. The new, well-equipped observatory did not work as effectively as other ones; Gauss&#x27;s astronomical research had the character of a one-man enterprise without a long-time observation program, and the university established a place for an assistant only after Harding died in 1834.

Nevertheless, Gauss twice refused the opportunity to solve the problem by accepting offers from Berlin in 1810 and 1825 to become a full member of the Prussian Academy without burdening lecturing duties, as well as from Leipzig University in 1810 and from Vienna University in 1842, perhaps because of the family&#x27;s difficult situation. Gauss&#x27;s salary was raised from 1000 Reichsthaler in 1810 to 2400 Reichsthaler in 1824, and in his later years he was one of the best-paid professors of the university.

When Gauss was asked for help by his colleague and friend Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel in 1810, who was in trouble at Königsberg University because of his lack of an academic title, Gauss provided a doctorate &quot;honoris causa&quot; for Bessel from the Philosophy Faculty of Göttingen in March 1811. Gauss gave another recommendation for an honorary degree for Sophie Germain but only shortly before her death, so she never received it. He also gave successful support to the mathematician Gotthold Eisenstein in Berlin.

Gauss was loyal to the House of Hanover. After King William IV died in 1837, the new Hanoverian King Ernest Augustus annulled the 1833 constitution. Seven professors, later known as the &quot;Göttingen Seven&quot;, protested against this, among them his friend and collaborator Wilhelm Weber and Gauss&#x27;s son-in-law Heinrich Ewald. All of them were dismissed, and three of them were expelled, but Ewald and Weber could stay in Göttingen. Gauss was deeply affected by this quarrel but saw no possibility to help them.

Gauss took part in academic administration: three times he was elected as dean of the Faculty of Philosophy. Being entrusted with the widow&#x27;s pension fund of the university, he dealt with actuarial science and wrote a report on the strategy for stabilizing the benefits. He was appointed director of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Göttingen for nine years.

Gauss remained mentally active into his old age, even while suffering from gout and general unhappiness. On 23 February 1855, he died of a heart attack in Göttingen; and was interred in the Albani Cemetery there. Heinrich Ewald, Gauss&#x27;s son-in-law, and Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen, Gauss&#x27;s close friend and biographer, gave eulogies at his funeral.

Gauss was a successful investor and accumulated considerable wealth with stocks and securities, finally a value of more than 150 thousand Thaler; after his death, about 18 thousand Thaler were found hidden in his rooms.

=== Gauss&#x27;s brain ===
The day after Gauss&#x27;s death his brain was removed, preserved, and studied by Rudolf Wagner, who found its mass to be slightly above average, at . Wagner&#x27;s son Hermann, a geographer, estimated the cerebral area to be in his doctoral thesis. In 2013, a neurobiologist at the Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry in Göttingen discovered that Gauss&#x27;s brain had been mixed up soon after the first investigations, due to mislabelling, with that of the physician Conrad Heinrich Fuchs, who died in Göttingen a few months after Gauss. A further investigation showed no remarkable anomalies in the brains of both persons. Thus, all investigations on Gauss&#x27;s brain until 1998, except the first ones of Rudolf and Hermann Wagner, actually refer to the brain of Fuchs.

=== Family ===

Gauss married Johanna Osthoff on 9 October 1805 in St. Catherine&#x27;s church in Brunswick. They had two sons and one daughter: Joseph (1806–1873), Wilhelmina (1808–1840), and Louis (1809–1810). Johanna died on 11 October 1809, one month after the birth of Louis, who himself died a few months later. Gauss chose the first names of his children in honour of Giuseppe Piazzi, Wilhelm Olbers, and Karl Ludwig Harding, the discoverers of the first asteroids.

On 4 August 1810, Gauss married Wilhelmine (Minna) Waldeck, a friend of his first wife, with whom he had three more children: Eugen (later Eugene) (1811–1896), Wilhelm (later William) (1813–1879), and Therese (1816–1864). Minna Gauss died on 12 September 1831 after being seriously ill for more than a decade. Therese then took over the household and cared for Gauss for the rest of his life; after her father&#x27;s death, she married actor Constantin Staufenau. Her sister Wilhelmina married the orientalist Heinrich Ewald. Gauss&#x27;s mother Dorothea lived in his house from 1817 until she died in 1839.

The eldest son Joseph, while still a schoolboy, helped his father as an assistant during the survey campaign in the summer of 1821. After a short time at university, in 1824 Joseph joined the Hanoverian army and assisted in surveying again in 1829. In the 1830s he was responsible for the enlargement of the survey network to the western parts of the kingdom. With his geodetical qualifications, he left the service and engaged in the construction of the railway network as director of the Royal Hanoverian State Railways. In 1836 he studied the railroad system in the US for some months.

Eugen left Göttingen in September 1830 and emigrated to the United States, where he joined the army for five years. He then worked for the American Fur Company in the Midwest. Later, he moved to Missouri and became a successful businessman. Wilhelm married a niece of the astronomer Bessel; he then moved to Missouri, started as a farmer and became wealthy in the shoe business in St. Louis in later years. Eugene and William have numerous descendants in America, but the Gauss descendants left in Germany all derive from Joseph, as the daughters had no children.

=== Personality ===
==== Scholar ====
In the first two decades of the 19th century, Gauss was the only important mathematician in Germany, comparable to the leading French ones; his &quot;Disquisitiones Arithmeticae&quot; was the first mathematical book from Germany to be translated into the French language.

Gauss was &quot;in front of the new development&quot; with documented research since 1799, his wealth of new ideas, and his rigour of demonstration. Whereas previous mathematicians like Leonhard Euler let the readers take part in their reasoning for new ideas, including certain erroneous deviations from the correct path, Gauss however introduced a new style of direct and complete explanation that did not attempt to show the reader the author&#x27;s train of thought.

But for himself, he propagated a quite different ideal, given in a letter to Farkas Bolyai as follows:
The posthumous papers, his scientific diary, and short glosses in his own textbooks show that he empirically worked to a great extent. He was a lifelong busy and enthusiastic calculator, who made his calculations with extraordinary rapidity, mostly without precise controlling, but checked the results by masterly estimation. Nevertheless, his calculations were not always free from mistakes. He coped with the enormous workload by using skillful tools. Gauss used a lot of mathematical tables, examined their exactness, and constructed new tables on various matters for personal use. He developed new tools for effective calculation, for example the Gaussian elimination. It has been taken as a curious feature of his working style that he carried out calculations with a high degree of precision much more than required, and prepared tables with more decimal places than ever requested for practical purposes. Very likely, this method gave him a lot of material which he used in finding theorems in number theory.
Gauss refused to publish work that he did not consider complete and above criticism. This perfectionism was in keeping with the motto of his personal seal (&quot;Few, but Ripe&quot;). Many colleagues encouraged him to publicize new ideas and sometimes rebuked him if he hesitated too long, in their opinion. Gauss defended himself, claiming that the initial discovery of ideas was easy, but preparing a presentable elaboration was a demanding matter for him, for either lack of time or &quot;serenity of mind&quot;. Nevertheless, he published many short communications of urgent content in various journals, but left a considerable literary estate, too. Gauss referred to mathematics as &quot;the queen of sciences&quot; and arithmetics as &quot;the queen of mathematics&quot;, and supposedly once espoused a belief in the necessity of immediately understanding Euler&#x27;s identity as a benchmark pursuant to becoming a first-class mathematician.

On certain occasions, Gauss claimed that the ideas of another scholar had already been in his possession previously. Thus his concept of priority as &quot;the first to discover, not the first to publish&quot; differed from that of his scientific contemporaries. In contrast to his perfectionism in presenting mathematical ideas, he was criticized for a negligent way of quoting. He justified himself with a very special view of correct quoting: if he gave references, then only in a quite complete way, with respect to the previous authors of importance, which no one should ignore; but quoting in this way needed knowledge of the history of science and more time than he wished to spend.

==== Private man ====
Soon after Gauss&#x27;s death, his friend Sartorius published the first biography (1856), written in a rather enthusiastic style. Sartorius saw him as a serene and forward-striving man with childlike modesty, but also of &quot;iron character&quot; with an unshakeable strength of mind. Apart from his closer circle, others regarded him as reserved and unapproachable &quot;like an Olympian sitting enthroned on the summit of science&quot;. His close contemporaries agreed that Gauss was a man of difficult character. He often refused to accept compliments. His visitors were occasionally irritated by his grumpy behaviour, but a short time later his mood could change, and he would become a charming, open-minded host. Gauss abominated polemic natures; together with his colleague Hausmann he opposed to a call for Justus Liebig on a university chair in Göttingen, &quot;because he was always involved in some polemic.&quot;
Gauss&#x27;s life was overshadowed by severe problems in his family. When his first wife Johanna suddenly died shortly after the birth of their third child, he revealed the grief in a last letter to his dead wife in the style of an ancient threnody, the most personal surviving document of Gauss. The situation worsened when tuberculosis ultimately destroyed the health of his second wife Minna over 13 years; both his daughters later suffered from the same disease. Gauss himself gave only slight hints of his distress: in a letter to Bessel dated December 1831 he described himself as &quot;the victim of the worst domestic sufferings&quot;.

Because of his wife&#x27;s illness, both younger sons were educated for some years in Celle, far from Göttingen. The military career of his elder son Joseph ended after more than two decades with the rank of a poorly paid first lieutenant, although he had acquired a considerable knowledge of geodesy. He needed financial support from his father even after he was married. The second son Eugen shared a good measure of his father&#x27;s talent in computation and languages but had a vivacious and sometimes rebellious character. He wanted to study philology, whereas Gauss wanted him to become a lawyer. Having run up debts and caused a scandal in public, Eugen suddenly left Göttingen under dramatic circumstances in September 1830 and emigrated via Bremen to the United States. He wasted the little money he had taken to start, after which his father refused further financial support. The youngest son Wilhelm wanted to qualify for agricultural administration, but had difficulties getting an appropriate education, and eventually emigrated as well. Only Gauss&#x27;s youngest daughter Therese accompanied him in his last years of life.

Collecting numerical data on very different things, useful or useless, became a habit in his later years, for example, the number of paths from his home to certain places in Göttingen, or the number of living days of persons; he congratulated Humboldt in December 1851 for having reached the same age as Isaac Newton at his death, calculated in days.

Similar to his excellent knowledge of Latin he was also acquainted with modern languages. At the age of 62, he began to teach himself Russian, very likely to understand scientific writings from Russia, among them those of Lobachevsky on non-Euclidean geometry. Gauss read both classical and modern literature, and English and French works in the original languages. His favorite English author was Walter Scott, his favorite German Jean Paul. Gauss liked singing and went to concerts. He was a busy newspaper reader; in his last years, he used to visit an academic press salon of the university every noon. Gauss did not care much for philosophy, and mocked the &quot;splitting hairs of the so-called metaphysicians&quot;, by which he meant proponents of the contemporary school of &quot;Naturphilosophie&quot;.

Gauss had an &quot;aristocratic and through and through conservative nature&quot;, with little respect for people&#x27;s intelligence and morals, following the motto &quot;mundus vult decipi&quot;. He disliked Napoleon and his system, and all kinds of violence and revolution caused horror to him. Thus he condemned the methods of the Revolutions of 1848, though he agreed with some of their aims, such as the idea of a unified Germany. As far as the political system is concerned, he had a low estimation of the constitutional system; he criticized parliamentarians of his time for a lack of knowledge and logical errors.

Some Gauss biographers have speculated on his religious beliefs. He sometimes said &quot;God arithmetizes&quot; and &quot;I succeeded – not on account of my hard efforts, but by the grace of the Lord.&quot; Gauss was a member of the Lutheran church, like most of the population in northern Germany. It seems that he did not believe all dogmas or understand the Holy Bible quite literally. Sartorius mentioned Gauss&#x27;s religious tolerance, and estimated his &quot;insatiable thirst for truth&quot; and his sense of justice as motivated by religious convictions.

== Scientific work ==

=== Algebra and number theory ===
==== Fundamental theorem of algebra ====

In his doctoral thesis from 1799, Gauss proved the fundamental theorem of algebra which states that every non-constant single-variable polynomial with complex coefficients has at least one complex root. Mathematicians including Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert had produced false proofs before him, and Gauss&#x27;s dissertation contains a critique of d&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s work. He subsequently produced three other proofs, the last one in 1849 being generally rigorous. His attempts clarified the concept of complex numbers considerably along the way.

==== &quot;Disquisitiones Arithmeticae&quot; ====

In the preface to the &quot;Disquisitiones&quot;, Gauss dates the beginning of his work on number theory to 1795. By studying the works of previous mathematicians like Fermat, Euler, Lagrange, and Legendre, he realized that these scholars had already found much of what he had discovered by himself. The &quot;Disquisitiones Arithmeticae&quot;, written in 1798 and published in 1801, consolidated number theory as a discipline and covered both elementary and algebraic number theory. Therein he introduces the triple bar symbol () for congruence and uses it for a clean presentation of modular arithmetic. It deals with the unique factorization theorem and primitive roots modulo n. In the main sections, Gauss presents the first two proofs of the law of quadratic reciprocity and develops the theories of binary and ternary quadratic forms.

The &quot;Disquisitiones&quot; include the Gauss composition law for binary quadratic forms, as well as the enumeration of the number of representations of an integer as the sum of three squares. As an almost immediate corollary of his theorem on three squares, he proves the triangular case of the Fermat polygonal number theorem for &quot;n&quot; = 3. From several analytic results on class numbers that Gauss gives without proof towards the end of the fifth section, it appears that Gauss already knew the class number formula in 1801.

In the last section, Gauss gives proof for the constructibility of a regular heptadecagon (17-sided polygon) with straightedge and compass by reducing this geometrical problem to an algebraic one. He shows that a regular polygon is constructible if the number of its sides is either a power of 2 or the product of a power of 2 and any number of distinct Fermat primes. In the same section, he gives a result on the number of solutions of certain cubic polynomials with coefficients in finite fields, which amounts to counting integral points on an elliptic curve. An unfinished eighth chapter was found among left papers only after his death, consisting of work done during 1797–1799.

==== Further investigations ====
One of Gauss&#x27;s first results was the empirically found conjecture of 1792 – the later called prime number theorem – giving an estimation of the number of prime numbers by using the integral logarithm.

When Olbers encouraged Gauss in 1816 to compete for a prize from the French Academy on the proof for Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem (FLT), he refused because of his low esteem on this matter. However, among his left works a short undated paper was found with proofs of FLT for the cases &quot;n&quot; = 3 and &quot;n&quot; = 5. The particular case of &quot;n&quot; = 3 was proved much earlier by Leonhard Euler, but Gauss developed a more streamlined proof which made use of Eisenstein integers; though more general, the proof was simpler than in the real integers case.

Gauss contributed to solving the Kepler conjecture in 1831 with the proof that a greatest packing density of spheres in the three-dimensional space is given when the centres of the spheres form a cubic face-centred arrangement, when he reviewed a book of Ludwig August Seeber on the theory of reduction of positive ternary quadratic forms. Having noticed some lacks in Seeber&#x27;s proof, he simplified many of his arguments, proved the central conjecture, and remarked that this theorem is equivalent to the Kepler conjecture for regular arrangements.

In two papers on biquadratic residues (1828, 1832) Gauss introduced the ring of Gaussian integers formula_1, showed that it is a unique factorization domain. and generalized some key arithmetic concepts, such as Fermat&#x27;s little theorem and Gauss&#x27;s lemma. The main objective of introducing this ring was to formulate the law of biquadratic reciprocity – as Gauss discovered, rings of complex integers are the natural setting for such higher reciprocity laws.

In the second paper, he stated the general law of biquadratic reciprocity and proved several special cases of it. In an earlier publication from 1818 containing his fifth and sixth proofs of quadratic reciprocity, he claimed the techniques of these proofs (Gauss sums) can be applied to prove higher reciprocity laws.

=== Analysis ===
One of Gauss&#x27;s first discoveries was the notion of the arithmetic-geometric mean (AGM) of two positive real numbers. He discovered its relation to elliptic integrals in the years 1798–1799 through the Landen&#x27;s transformation, and a diary entry recorded the discovery of the connection of Gauss&#x27;s constant to lemniscatic elliptic functions, a result that Gauss stated that &quot;will surely open an entirely new field of analysis&quot;. He also made early inroads into the more formal issues of the foundations of complex analysis, and from a letter to Bessel in 1811 it is clear that he knew the &quot;fundamental theorem of complex analysis&quot; – Cauchy&#x27;s integral theorem – and understood the notion of complex residues when integrating around poles.

Euler&#x27;s pentagonal numbers theorem, together with other researches on the AGM and lemniscatic functions, led him to plenty of results on Jacobi theta functions, culminating in the discovery in 1808 of the later called Jacobi triple product identity, which includes Euler&#x27;s theorem as a special case. His works show that he knew modular transformations of order 3, 5, 7 for elliptic functions since 1808.

Several mathematical fragments in his Nachlass indicate that he knew parts of the modern theory of modular forms. In his work on the multivalued AGM of two complex numbers, he discovered a deep connection between the infinitely many values of the AGM to its two &quot;simplest values&quot;. In his unpublished writings he recognized and made a sketch of the key concept of fundamental domain for the modular group. One of Gauss&#x27;s sketches of this kind was a drawing of a tessellation of the unit disk by &quot;equilateral&quot; hyperbolic triangles with all angles equal to formula_2.

An example of Gauss&#x27;s insight in the fields of analysis is the cryptic remark that the principles of circle division by compass and straightedge can also be applied to the division of the lemniscate curve, which inspired Abel&#x27;s theorem on lemniscate division. Another example is his publication &quot;Summatio quarundam serierum singularium&quot; (1811) on the determination of the sign of quadratic Gauss sum, in which he solved the main problem by introducing q-analogs of binomial coefficients and manipulating them by several original identities that seem to stem out of his work on elliptic functions theory; however, Gauss cast his argument in a formal way that does not reveal its origin in elliptic functions theory, and only the later work of mathematicians such as Jacobi and Hermite has exposed the crux of his argument.

In the &quot;Disquisitiones generales circa series infinitam...&quot; (1813), he provides the first systematic treatment of the general hypergeometric function formula_3, and shows that many of the functions known at the time are special cases of the hypergeometric function. This work is the first one with an exact inquiry of convergence of infinite series in the history of mathematics. Furthermore, it deals with infinite continued fractions arising as ratios of hypergeometric functions which are now called Gauss continued fractions.

In 1823, Gauss won the prize of the Danish Society with an essay on conformal mappings, which contains several developments that pertain to the field of complex analysis. Gauss stated that angle-preserving mappings in the complex plane must be complex analytic functions, and used the later called Beltrami equation to prove the existence of isothermal coordinates on analytic surfaces. The essay concludes with examples of conformal mappings into a sphere and an ellipsoid of revolution.

==== Numeric analysis ====
Gauss often deduced theorems inductively from numerical data he had collected empirically. As such, the use of efficient algorithms to facilitate calculations was vital to his research, and he made many contributions to numeric analysis, as the method of Gaussian quadrature published in 1816.

In a private letter to Gerling from 1823, he described a solution of a 4X4 system of linear equations by using Gauss-Seidel method – an &quot;indirect&quot; iterative method for the solution of linear systems, and recommended it over the usual method of &quot;direct elimination&quot; for systems of more than two equations.

Gauss invented an algorithm for calculating what is now called discrete Fourier transforms, when calculating the orbits of Pallas and Juno in 1805, 160 years before Cooley and Tukey found their similar Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm. He developed it as a trigonometric interpolation method, but the paper &quot;Theoria Interpolationis Methodo Nova Tractata&quot; was published only posthumously in 1876, preceded by the first presentation by Joseph Fourier on the subject in 1807.

=== Chronology ===
The first publication following the doctoral thesis dealt with the determination of the date of Easter (1800), an elementary matter of mathematics. Gauss aimed to present a most convenient algorithm for people without any knowledge of ecclesiastical or even astronomical chronology, and thus avoided the usually required terms of golden number, epact, solar cycle, domenical letter, and any religious connotations. Biographers speculated on the reason why Gauss dealt with this matter, but it is likely comprehensible by the historical background. The replacement of the Julian calendar by the Gregorian calendar had caused confusion in the Holy Roman Empire since the 16th century and was not finished in Germany until 1700 when the difference of eleven days was deleted, but the difference in calculating the date of Easter remained between Protestant and Catholic territories. A further agreement of 1776 equalized the confessional way of counting; thus in the Protestant states like the Duchy of Brunswick the Easter of 1777, five weeks before Gauss&#x27;s birth, was the first one calculated in the new manner.

=== Astronomy ===
On 1 January 1801, Italian astronomer Giuseppe Piazzi discovered a new celestial object, presumed it to be the long searched planet between Mars and Jupiter according to the so-called Titius–Bode law, and named it Ceres. He could track it only for a short time until it disappeared behind the glare of the Sun. The mathematical tools of the time were not sufficient to extrapolate a position from the few data for its reappearance. Gauss tackled the problem and predicted a position for possible rediscovery in December 1801. This turned out to be accurate within a half-degree when Franz Xaver von Zach on 7 and 31 December at Gotha, and independently Heinrich Olbers on 1 and 2 January in Bremen, identified the object near the predicted position.

Gauss&#x27;s method leads to an equation of the eighth degree, of which one solution, the Earth&#x27;s orbit, is known. The solution sought is then separated from the remaining six based on physical conditions. In this work, Gauss used comprehensive approximation methods which he created for that purpose.

The discovery of Ceres led Gauss to the theory of the motion of planetoids disturbed by large planets, eventually published in 1809 as &quot;Theoria motus corporum coelestium in sectionibus conicis solem ambientum&quot;. It introduced the Gaussian gravitational constant.

Since the new asteroids had been discovered, Gauss occupied himself with the perturbations of their orbital elements. Firstly he examined Ceres with analytical methods similar to those of Laplace, but his favorite object was Pallas, because of its great eccentricity and orbital inclination, whereby Laplace&#x27;s method did not work. Gauss used his own tools: the arithmetic–geometric mean, the hypergeometric function, and his method of interpolation. He found an orbital resonance with Jupiter in proportion 18:7 in 1812; Gauss gave this result as cipher, and gave the explicit meaning only in letters to Olbers and Bessel. After long years of work, he finished it in 1816 without a result that seemed sufficient to him. This marked the end of his activities in theoretical astronomy.
One fruit of Gauss&#x27;s research on Pallas perturbations was the &quot;Determinatio Attractionis...&quot; (1818) on a method of theoretical astronomy that later became known as the &quot;elliptic ring method&quot;. It introduced an averaging conception in which a planet in orbit is replaced by a fictitious ring with mass density proportional to the time taking the planet to follow the corresponding orbital arcs. Gauss presents the method of evaluating the gravitational attraction of such an elliptic ring, which includes several steps; one of them involves a direct application of the arithmetic-geometric mean (AGM) algorithm to calculate an elliptic integral.

While Gauss&#x27;s contributions to theoretical astronomy came to an end, more practical activities in observational astronomy continued and occupied him during his entire career. Even early in 1799, Gauss dealt with the determination of longitude by use of the lunar parallax, for which he developed more convenient formulas than those were in common use. After appointment as director of observatory he attached importance to the fundamental astronomical constants in correspondence with Bessel. Gauss himself provided tables for nutation and aberration, the solar coordinates, and refraction. He made many contributions to spherical geometry, and in this context solved some practical problems about navigation by stars. He published a great number of observations, mainly on minor planets and comets; his last observation was the solar eclipse of 28 July 1851.

=== Theory of errors ===
Gauss likely used the method of least squares for calculating the orbit of Ceres to minimize the impact of measurement error. The method was published first by Adrien-Marie Legendre in 1805, but Gauss claimed in &quot;Theoria motus&quot; (1809) that he had been using it since 1794 or 1795. In the history of statistics, this disagreement is called the &quot;priority dispute over the discovery of the method of least squares&quot;. Gauss proved that the method has the lowest sampling variance within the class of linear unbiased estimators under the assumption of normally distributed errors (Gauss–Markov theorem), in the two-part paper &quot;Theoria combinationis observationum erroribus minimis obnoxiae&quot; (1823).

In the first paper he proved Gauss&#x27;s inequality (a Chebyshev-type inequality) for unimodal distributions, and stated without proof another inequality for moments of the fourth order (a special case of Gauss-Winckler inequality). He derived lower and upper bounds for the variance of sample variance. In the second paper, Gauss described recursive least squares methods. His work on the theory of errors was extended in several directions by the geodesist Friedrich Robert Helmert to the Gauss-Helmert model.

Gauss also contributed to problems in probability theory that are not directly concerned with the theory of errors. One example appears as a diary note where he tried to describe the asymptotic distribution of entries in the continued fraction expansion of a random number uniformly distributed in &quot;(0,1)&quot;. He derived this distribution, now known as the Gauss-Kuzmin distribution, as a by-product of the discovery of the ergodicity of the Gauss map for continued fractions. Gauss&#x27;s solution is the first-ever result in the metrical theory of continued fractions.

=== Arc measurement and geodetic survey ===

Gauss was busy with geodetic problems since 1799 when he helped Karl Ludwig von Lecoq with calculations during his survey in Westphalia. Beginning in 1804, he taught himself some geodetic practice with a sextant in Brunswick, and Göttingen.

Since 1816, Gauss&#x27;s former student Heinrich Christian Schumacher, then professor in Copenhagen, but living in Altona (Holstein) near Hamburg as head of an observatory, carried out a triangulation of the Jutland peninsula from Skagen in the north to Lauenburg in the south. This project was the basis for map production but also aimed at determining the geodetic arc between the terminal sites. Data from geodetic arcs were used to determine the dimensions of the earth geoid, and long arc distances brought more precise results. Schumacher asked Gauss to continue this work further to the south in the Kingdom of Hanover; Gauss agreed after a short time of hesitation. Finally, in May 1820, King George IV gave the order to Gauss.

An arc measurement needs a precise astronomical determination of at least two points in the network. Gauss and Schumacher used the favourite occasion that both observatories in Göttingen and Altona, in the garden of Schumacher&#x27;s house, laid nearly in the same longitude. The latitude was measured with both their instruments and a zenith sector of Ramsden that was transported to both observatories.

Gauss and Schumacher had already determined some angles between Lüneburg, Hamburg, and Lauenburg for the geodetic connection in October 1818. During the summers of 1821 until 1825 Gauss directed the triangulation work personally, from Thuringia in the south to the river Elbe in the north. The triangle between Hoher Hagen, Großer Inselsberg in the Thuringian Forest, and Brocken in the Harz mountains was the largest one Gauss had ever measured with a maximum size of . In the thinly populated Lüneburg Heath without significant natural summits or artificial buildings, he had difficulties finding suitable triangulation points; sometimes cutting lanes through the vegetation was necessary.

For pointing signals, Gauss invented a new instrument with movable mirrors and a small telescope that reflects the sunbeams to the triangulation points, and named it &quot;heliotrope&quot;. Another suitable construction for the same purpose was a sextant with an additional mirror which he named &quot;vice heliotrope&quot;. Gauss got assistance by soldiers of the Hanoverian army, among them his eldest son Joseph. Gauss took part in the baseline measurement (Braak Base Line) of Schumacher in the village of Braak near Hamburg in 1820, and used the result for the evaluation of the Hanoverian triangulation.

An additional result was a better value of flattening of the approximative Earth ellipsoid. Gauss developed the universal transverse Mercator projection of the ellipsoidal shaped Earth (what he named &quot;conform projection&quot;) for representing geodetical data in plane charts.

When the arc measurement was finished, Gauss began the enlargement of the triangulation to the west to get a survey of the whole Kingdom of Hanover with a Royal decree from 25 March 1828. The practical work was directed by three army officers, among them Lieutenant Joseph Gauss. The complete data evaluation laid in the hands of Gauss, who applied his mathematical inventions such as the method of least squares and the elimination method to it. The project was finished in 1844, and Gauss sent a final report of the project to the government; his method of projection was not edited until 1866.

In 1828, when studying differences in latitude, Gauss first defined a physical approximation for the figure of the Earth as the surface everywhere perpendicular to the direction of gravity; later his doctoral student Johann Benedict Listing called this the &quot;geoid&quot;.

=== Differential geometry ===

The geodetic survey of Hanover fuelled Gauss&#x27;s interest in differential geometry and topology, fields of mathematics dealing with curves and surfaces. This led him in 1828 to the publication of a memoir that marks the birth of modern differential geometry of surfaces, as it departed from the traditional ways of treating surfaces as cartesian graphs of functions of two variables, and that initiated the exploration of surfaces from the &quot;inner&quot; point of view of a two-dimensional being constrained to move on it. As a result, the Theorema Egregium (&quot;remarkable theorem&quot;), established a property of the notion of Gaussian curvature. Informally, the theorem says that the curvature of a surface can be determined entirely by measuring angles and distances on the surface, regardless of the embedding of the surface in three-dimensional or two-dimensional space.

The Theorema Egregium leads to the abstraction of surfaces as doubly-extended manifolds; it clarifies the distinction between the intrinsic properties of the manifold (the metric) and its physical realization in ambient space. A consequence is the impossibility of an isometric transformation between surfaces of different Gaussian curvature. This means practically that a sphere or an ellipsoid cannot be transformed to a plane without distortion, which causes a fundamental problem in designing projections for geographical maps. A portion of this essay is dedicated to a profound study of geodesics. In particular, Gauss proves the local Gauss–Bonnet theorem on geodesic triangles, and generalizes Legendre&#x27;s theorem on spherical triangles to geodesic triangles on arbitrary surfaces with continuous curvature; he found that the angles of a &quot;sufficiently small&quot; geodesic triangle deviate from that of a planar triangle of the same sides in a way that depends only on the values of the surface curvature at the vertices of the triangle, regardless of the behaviour of the surface in the triangle interior.

Gauss&#x27;s memoir from 1828 lacks the conception of geodesic curvature. However, in a previously unpublished manuscript, very likely written in 1822–1825, he introduced the term &quot;side curvature&quot; (German: &quot;Seitenkrümmung&quot;) and proved its invariance under isometric transformations, a result that was later obtained by Ferdinand Minding and published by him in 1830. This Gauss paper contains the core of his lemma on total curvature, but also its generalization, found and proved by Pierre Ossian Bonnet in 1848 and known as Gauss–Bonnet theorem.

=== Non-Euclidean geometry===
In the lifetime of Gauss, a vivid discussion on the Parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry was going on. Numerous efforts were made to prove it in the frame of the Euclidean axioms, whereas some mathematicians discussed the possibility of geometrical systems without it. Gauss thought about the basics of geometry since the 1790s years, but in the 1810s he realized that a non-Euclidean geometry without the parallel postulate could solve the problem. In a letter to Franz Taurinus of 1824, he presented a short comprehensible outline of what he named a &quot;non-Euclidean geometry&quot;, but he strongly forbade Taurinus to make any use of it. Gauss is credited with having been the one to first discover and study non-Euclidean geometry, even coining the term as well.

The first publications on non-Euclidean geometry in the history of mathematics were authored by Nikolai Lobachevsky in 1829 and Janos Bolyai in 1832. In the following years, Gauss wrote his ideas on the topic but did not publish them, thus avoiding influencing the contemporary scientific discussion. Gauss commended the ideas of Janos Bolyai in a letter to his father and university friend Farkas Bolyai claiming that these were congruent to his own thoughts of some decades. However, it is not quite clear to what extent he preceded Lobachevsky and Bolyai, as his letter remarks are only vague and obscure.

Sartorius mentioned Gauss&#x27;s work on non-Euclidean geometry firstly in 1856, but only the edition of left papers in Volume VIII of the Collected Works (1900) showed Gauss&#x27;s ideas on that matter, at a time when non-Euclidean geometry had yet grown out of controversial discussion.

=== Early topology ===
Gauss was also an early pioneer of topology or &quot;Geometria Situs&quot;, as it was called in his lifetime. The first proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra in 1799 contained an essentially topological argument; fifty years later, he further developed the topological argument in his fourth proof of this theorem.
Another encounter with topological notions occurred to him in the course of his astronomical work in 1804, when he determined the limits of the region on the celestial sphere in which comets and asteroids might appear, and which he termed &quot;Zodiacus&quot;. He discovered that if the Earth&#x27;s and comet&#x27;s orbits are linked, then by topological reasons the Zodiacus is the entire sphere. In 1848, in the context of the discovery of the asteroid 7 Iris, he published a further qualitative discussion of the Zodiacus.

In Gauss&#x27;s letters of 1820–1830, he thought intensively on topics with close affinity to Geometria Situs, and became gradually conscious of semantic difficulty in this field. Fragments from this period reveal that he tried to classify &quot;tract figures&quot;, which are closed plane curves with a finite number of transverse self-intersections, that may also be planar projections of knots. To do so he devised a symbolical scheme, the Gauss code, that in a sense captured the characteristic features of tract figures.

In a fragment from 1833, Gauss defined the linking number of two space curves by a certain double integral, and in doing so provided for the first time an analytical formulation of a topological phenomenon. On the same note, he lamented the little progress made in Geometria Situs, and remarked that one of its central problems will be &quot;to count the intertwinings of two closed or infinite curves&quot;. His notebooks from that period reveal that he was also thinking about other topological objects such as braids and tangles.

Gauss&#x27;s influence in later years to the emerging field of topology, which he held in high esteem, was through occasional remarks and oral communications to Mobius and Listing.

=== Minor mathematical accomplishments ===
Gauss applied the concept of complex numbers to solve well-known problems in a new concise way. For example, in a short note from 1836 on geometric aspects of the ternary forms and their application to crystallography, he stated the fundamental theorem of axonometry, which tells how to represent a 3D cube on a 2D plane with complete accuracy, via complex numbers. He described rotations of this sphere as the action of certain linear fractional transformations on the extended complex plane, and gave a proof for the geometric theorem that the altitudes of a triangle always meet in a single orthocenter.

Gauss was concerned with John Napier&#x27;s &quot;Pentagramma mirificum&quot; – a certain spherical pentagram – for several decades; he approached it from various points of view, and gradually gained a full understanding of its geometric, algebraic, and analytic aspects. In particular, in 1843 he stated and proved several theorems connecting elliptic functions, Napier spherical pentagons, and Poncelet pentagons in the plane.

Furthermore, he contributed a solution to the problem of constructing the largest-area ellipse inside a given quadrilateral, and discovered a surprising result about the computation of area of pentagons.

=== Magnetism and telegraphy ===
==== Geomagnetism ====
Gauss had been interested in magnetism since 1803. After Alexander von Humboldt visited Göttingen in 1826, both scientists began intensive research on geomagnetism, partly independently, partly in productive cooperation. In 1828, Gauss was Humboldt&#x27;s guest during the conference of the Society of German Natural Scientists and Physicians in Berlin, where he got acquainted with the physicist Wilhelm Weber.

When Weber got the chair for physics in Göttingen as successor of Johann Tobias Mayer by Gauss&#x27;s recommendation in 1831, both of them started a fruitful collaboration, leading to a new knowledge of magnetism with a representation for the unit of magnetism in terms of mass, charge, and time. They founded the &quot;Magnetic Association&quot; (German: &quot;Magnetischer Verein&quot;), an international working group of several observatories, which supported measurements of Earth&#x27;s magnetic field in many regions of the world with equal methods at arranged dates in the years 1836 to 1841.

In 1836, Humboldt suggested the establishment of a worldwide net of geomagnetic stations in the British dominions with a letter to the Duke of Sussex, then president of the Royal Society; he proposed that magnetic measures should be taken under standardized conditions using his methods. Together with other instigators, this led to a global program known as &quot;Magnetical crusade&quot; under the direction of Edward Sabine. The dates, times, and intervals of observations were determined in advance, the &quot;Göttingen mean time&quot; was used as the standard. 61 stations on all five continents participated in this global program. Gauss and Weber founded a series for publication of the results, six volumes were edited between 1837 and 1843. Weber&#x27;s departure to Leipzig in 1843 as late effect of the Göttingen Seven affair marked the end of Magnetic Association activity.

Following Humboldt&#x27;s example, Gauss ordered a magnetic observatory to be built in the garden of the observatory, but the scientists differed over instrumental equipment; Gauss preferred stationary instruments, which he thought to give more precise results, whereas Humboldt was accustomed to movable instruments. Gauss was interested in the temporal and spatial variation of magnetic declination, inclination, and intensity, but discriminated Humboldt&#x27;s concept of magnetic intensity to the terms of &quot;horizontal&quot; and &quot;vertical&quot; intensity. Together with Weber, he developed methods of measuring the components of the intensity of the magnetic field and constructed a suitable magnetometer to measure &quot;absolute values&quot; of the strength of the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field, not more relative ones that depended on the apparatus. The precision of the magnetometer was about ten times higher than of previous instruments. With this work, Gauss was the first to derive a non-mechanical quantity by basic mechanical quantities.

Gauss carried out a &quot;General Theory of Terrestrial Magnetism&quot; (1839), in what he believed to describe the nature of magnetic force; according to Felix Klein, this work is a presentation of observations by use of spherical harmonics rather than a physical theory. The theory predicted the existence of exactly two magnetic poles on the Earth, thus Hansteen&#x27;s idea of four magnetic poles became obsolete, and the data allowed to determine their location with rather good precision.

Gauss influenced the beginning of geophysics in Russia, when Adolph Theodor Kupffer, one of his former students, founded a magnetic observatory in St. Petersburg, following the example of the observatory in Göttingen, and similarly, Ivan Simonov in Kazan.

==== Electromagnetism ====

The discoveries of Hans Christian Ørsted on electromagnetism and Michael Faraday on electromagnetic induction drew Gauss&#x27;s attention to these matters. Gauss and Weber found rules for branched electric circuits, which were later found independently and firstly published by Gustav Kirchhoff and benamed after him as Kirchhoff&#x27;s circuit laws, and made inquiries on electromagnetism. They constructed the first electromechanical telegraph in 1833, and Weber himself connected the observatory with the institute for physics in the town centre of Göttingen, but they did not care for any further development of this invention for commercial purposes.

Gauss&#x27;s main theoretical interests in electromagnetism were reflected in his attempts to formulate quantitive laws governing electromagnetic induction. In notebooks from these years, he recorded several innovative formulations; he discovered the idea of vector potential function (independently rediscovered by Franz Ernst Neumann in 1845), and in January 1835 he wrote down an &quot;induction law&quot; equivalent to Faraday&#x27;s law, which stated that the electromotive force at a given point in space is equal to the instantaneous rate of change (with respect to time) of this function.

Gauss tried to find a unifying law for long-distance effects of electrostatics, electrodynamics, electromagnetism, and induction, comparable to Newton&#x27;s law of gravitation, but his attempt ended in a &quot;tragic failure&quot;.

===Potential theory===
Since Isaac Newton had shown theoretically that the Earth and rotating stars assume non-spherical shapes, the problem of attraction of ellipsoids gained importance in mathematical astronomy. In his first publication on potential theory, the &quot;Theoria attractionis...&quot; (1813), Gauss provided a closed-form expression to the gravitational attraction of a homogeneous triaxial ellipsoid at every point in space. In contrast to previous research of Maclaurin, Laplace and Lagrange, Gauss&#x27;s new solution treated the attraction more directly in the form of an elliptic integral. In the process, he also proved and applied some special cases of the so-called Gauss&#x27;s theorem in vector analysis.

In the &quot;General theorems concerning the attractive and repulsive forces acting in reciprocal proportions of quadratic distances&quot; (1840) Gauss gave the baseline of a theory of the magnetic potential, based on Lagrange, Laplace, and Poisson; it seems rather unlikely that he knew the previous works of George Green on this subject. However, Gauss could never give any reasons for magnetism, nor a theory of magnetism similar to Newton&#x27;s work on gravitation, that enabled scientists to predict geomagnetic effects in the future.

=== Optics ===
Gauss&#x27;s calculations enabled instrument maker Johann Georg Repsold in Hamburg to construct a new achromatic lens system in 1810. A main problem, among other difficulties, was the nonprecise knowledge of the refractive index and dispersion of the used glass types. In a short article from 1817 Gauss dealt with the problem of removal of chromatic aberration in double lenses, and computed adjustments of the shape and coefficients of refraction required to minimize it. His work was noted by the optician Carl August von Steinheil, who in 1860 introduced the achromatic Steinheil doublet, partly based on Gauss&#x27;s calculations. Many results in geometrical optics are only scattered in Gauss&#x27;s correspondences and hand notes.
In the &quot;Dioptrical Investigations&quot; (1840), Gauss gave the first systematic analysis on the formation of images under a paraxial approximation (Gaussian optics). He characterized optical systems under a paraxial approximation only by its cardinal points, and he derived the Gaussian lens formula, applicable without restrictions in respect to the thickness of the lenses.

=== Mechanics ===
Gauss&#x27;s first business in mechanics concerned the earth&#x27;s rotation. When his university friend Benzenberg carried out experiments to determine the deviation of falling masses from the perpendicular in 1802, what today is known as an effect of the Coriolis force, he asked Gauss for a theory-based calculation of the values for comparison with the experimental ones. Gauss elaborated a system of fundamental equations for the motion, and the results corresponded sufficiently with Benzenberg&#x27;s data, who added Gauss&#x27;s considerations as an appendix to his book on falling experiments.

After Foucault had demonstrated the earth&#x27;s rotation by his pendulum experiment in public in 1851, Gerling questioned Gauss for further explanations. This instigated Gauss to design a new apparatus for demonstration with a much shorter length of pendulum than Foucault&#x27;s one. The oscillations were observed with a reading telescope, with a vertical scale and a mirror fastened at the pendulum. It is described in the Gauss–Gerling correspondence and Weber made some experiments with this apparatus in 1853, but no data were published.

Gauss&#x27;s principle of least constraint of 1829 was established as a general concept to overcome the division of mechanics into statics and dynamics, combining D&#x27;Alembert&#x27;s principle with Lagrange&#x27;s principle of virtual work, and showing analogies to the method of least squares.
=== Metrology ===
In 1828, Gauss was appointed to head of a Board for weights and measures of the Kingdom of Hanover. He provided the creation of standards of length and measures. Gauss himself took care of the time-consuming measures and gave detailed orders for the mechanical preparation. In the correspondence with Schumacher, who was also working on this matter, he described new ideas for scales of high precision. He submitted the final reports on the Hanoverian foot and pound to the government in 1841. This work got more than regional importance by the order of a law of 1836 that connected the Hanoverian measures with the English ones.

== Honours and awards ==

The first membership of a scientific society was given to Gauss in 1802 by the Russian Academy of Sciences. Further memberships (corresponding, foreign or full) were awarded from the Academy of Sciences in Göttingen (1802/ 1807), the French Academy of Sciences (1804/ 1820), the Royal Society of London (1804), the Royal Prussian Academy in Berlin (1810), the National Academy of Science in Verona (1810), the Royal Society of Edinburgh (1820), the Bavarian Academy of Sciences of Munich (1820), the Royal Danish Academy in Copenhagen (1821), the Royal Astronomical Society in London (1821), the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences (1821), the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in Boston (1822), the Royal Bohemian Society of Sciences in Prague (1833), the Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium (1841/1845), the Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala (1843), the Royal Irish Academy in Dublin (1843), the Royal Institute of the Netherlands (1845/ 1851), the Spanish Royal Academy of Sciences in Madrid (1850), the Russian Geographical Society (1851), the Imperial Academy of Sciences in Vienna (1848), the American Philosophical Society (1853), the Cambridge Philosophical Society, and the Royal Hollandish Society of Sciences in Haarlem.

Both the University of Kazan and the Philosophy Faculty of the University of Prague appointed him honorary member in 1848.

Gauss received the Lalande Prize from the French Academy of Science in 1809 for the theory of planets and the means of determining their orbits from only three observations, the Danish Academy of Science prize in 1823 for his memoir on conformal projection, and the Copley Medal from the Royal Society in 1838 for &quot;his inventions and mathematical researches in magnetism&quot;.

Gauss was appointed Knight of the French Legion of Honour in 1837, and was taken as one of the first members of the Prussian Order Pour le Merite (Civil class) when it was established in 1842. He received the Order of the Crown of Westphalia (1810), the Danish Order of the Dannebrog (1817), the Hanoverian Royal Guelphic Order (1815), the Swedish Order of the Polar Star (1844), the Order of Henry the Lion (1849), and the Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art (1853).

The Kings of Hanover appointed him the honorary titles &quot;Hofrath&quot; (1816) and &quot;Geheimer Hofrath&quot; (1845). In 1949, on the occasion of his golden doctor degree jubilee, he got the honorary citizenship of both towns of Brunswick and Göttingen. Soon after his death a medal was issued by order of King George V of Hanover with the back inscription dedicated &quot;to the Prince of Mathematicians&quot;.

The &quot;Gauss-Gesellschaft Göttingen&quot; (&quot;Göttingen Gauss Society&quot;) was founded in 1964 for research on life and work of Carl Friedrich Gauss and related persons and edits the &quot;Mitteilungen der Gauss-Gesellschaft&quot; (&quot;Communications of the Gauss Society&quot;).

== Names and commemorations ==
* List of things named after Carl Friedrich Gauss

== Selected writings ==
=== Mathematics and astronomy ===

* 1799: (Doctoral thesis on the fundamental theorem of algebra, University of Helmstedt) Original book
* 1816: Original
* 1816: Original
* 1850: Original (Lecture from 1849)
** (German)
* 1800: Original
* 1801: 
** (translated from the second German edition, Göttingen 1860)
* 1802: Original
* 1804: Original (on the Zodiacus)
* 1808: Original (Introduces Gauss&#x27;s lemma, uses it in the third proof of quadratic reciprocity)
* 1808: 
* 1809: Original book
* 1811: Original (from 1810) (Orbit of Pallas)
* 1811: Original (from 1808) (Determination of the sign of the quadratic Gauss sum, uses this to give the fourth proof of quadratic reciprocity)
* 1813: Original (from 1812, contains the Gauss&#x27;s continued fraction)
* 1816: Original (from 1814)
* 1818: Original (from 1817) (Fifth and sixth proofs of quadratic reciprocity)
* 1818: Original (Only reference to the – mostly unpublished – work on the algorithm of the arithmetic-geometric mean.)
* 1823: Original (from 1821)
* 1823: Original 
* 1825: (Prize winning essay from 1822 on conformal mapping)
* 1828: Original book
* 1828: (from 1826)
** (Three essays concerning the calculation of probabilities as the basis of the Gaussian law of error propagation)
* 1828: Original (from 1827)
* 1828: Original (from 1825)
* 1832: Original (from 1831) (Introduces the Gaussian integers, states (without proof) the law of biquadratic reciprocity, proves the supplementary law for 1 + &quot;i&quot;)
* 1845: Original (from 1843)
* 1847: Original (from 1846)
* 1848: Original
* 1903: Wissenschaftliches Tagebuch () Original book (from 1847, on the Zodiacus)

=== Physics ===
* 1804: Fundamentalgleichungen für die Bewegung schwerer Körper auf der Erde ( in original book: Original)
* 1813: Original (contains Gauss&#x27;s theorem of vector analysis)
* 1817: 
* 1829: 
* 1830: Original (from 1829)
* 1841: Original (from 1832)
** The Intensity of the Earth&#x27;s Magnetic Force Reduced to Absolute Measurement. Translated by Susan P. Johnson.
* 1836: Erdmagnetismus und Magnetometer (Original book: )
* 1840: Allgemeine Lehrsätze in Beziehung auf die im verkehrten Verhältnis des Quadrats der Entfernung wirkenden Anziehungs- und Abstoßungskräfte (Original book: 
* 1843: Original (from 1840)

==== Together with Wilhelm Weber ====
* 1837–1839: 
* 1840–1843: 
* 1840: 

=== Collected works ===
* (includes unpublished literary estate)

=== Correspondence ===
* (letters from December 1804 to August 1844)
* (letters to Boguslawski from February 1835 to January 1848)
* (letters from February 1802 to October 1826)
* (letters from September 1797 to February 1853; added letters of other correspondents)
* (letters from June 1810 to June 1854)
* (letters from June 1810 to June 1854)
* (letters from July 1807 to December 1854; added letters of other correspondents)
* (letters from 1835 to 1843)
* (letters from February 1799 to September 1800)
* 
* (letters from January 1802 to October 1819)
* (letters from January 1820 to May 1839; added letters of other correspondents)
** Volumes 1+2 (letters from April 1808 to March 1836)
** Volumes 3+4 (letters from March 1836 to April 1845)
** Volumes 5+6 (letters from April 1845 to November 1850)
* (letters from 1795 to 1815)

The Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities provides a complete collection of the known letters from and to Carl Friedrich Gauss that is accessible online. The literary estate is kept and provided by the Göttingen State and University Library. Written materials from Carl Friedrich Gauss and family members can also be found in the municipal archive of Brunswick.

== References ==
=== Notes ===
===Citations===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* First edition: 
** With a critical view on Dunnington&#x27;s style and appraisals
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== Further reading ==
* 
* 

=== Fictional ===
** 
== External links ==

* 
* Publications of C. F. Gauss in Astrophysics Data System
* 
* 
* 
* Carl Friedrich Gauss – Spuren seines Lebens (Places used as points for triangulation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6722" start="0" end="27" title="Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="Johann Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="79" end="92" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="94" end="104" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131089" start="106" end="115" title="Geodesy" label="geodesist"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="121" end="130" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q177848" start="213" end="234" title="Göttingen Observatory" label="Göttingen Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="392" end="415" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="452" end="459" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="482" end="493" title="masterpiece" label="masterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q510675" start="501" end="528" title="Disquisitiones Arithmeticae" label="Disquisitiones Arithmeticae"/>
<link wikidata="Q192760" start="659" end="689" title="fundamental theorem of algebra" label="fundamental theorem of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="713" end="726" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="843" end="848" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496380" start="963" end="994" title="Gaussian gravitational constant" label="Gaussian gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="1003" end="1026" title="Least squares" label="method of least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q191021" start="1059" end="1080" title="Adrien-Marie Legendre" label="Adrien-Marie Legendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q46255" start="1264" end="1274" title="geophysics" label="geophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="1320" end="1329" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602577" start="1387" end="1397" title="Heliotrope (instrument)" label="heliotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="1409" end="1421" title="magnetometer" label="magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76707" start="1446" end="1466" title="Wilhelm Eduard Weber" label="Wilhelm Eduard Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="1495" end="1504" title="Telegraphy" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="1557" end="1579" title="non-Euclidean geometry" label="non-Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q623950" start="1630" end="1652" title="fast Fourier transform" label="fast Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q382207" start="1675" end="1685" title="John Tukey" label="John Tukey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384972" start="1690" end="1702" title="James Cooley" label="James Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q114363290" start="1782" end="1794" title="Posthumous publication" label="posthumously"/>
<link wikidata="Q76556" start="2003" end="2019" title="Richard Dedekind" label="Richard Dedekind"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="2024" end="2040" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Bernhard Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="2122" end="2131" title="Braunschweig" label="Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q830084" start="2139" end="2170" title="Duchy of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel" label="Duchy of Brunswick-Wolfenbüttel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197" start="2199" end="2211" title="Lower Saxony" label="Lower Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q205178" start="2705" end="2718" title="child prodigy" label="child prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q58773" start="2841" end="2858" title="Charles William Ferdinand, Duke of Brunswick" label="Duke of Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q213607" start="2959" end="2997" title="Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann" label="Eberhard August Wilhelm von Zimmermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="3110" end="3129" title="Classics" label="classical languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="3137" end="3160" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q61813" start="3206" end="3230" title="Abraham Gotthelf Kästner" label="Abraham Gotthelf Kästner"/>
<link wikidata="Q193121" start="3358" end="3365" title="epigram" label="epigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q25926676" start="3392" end="3410" title="Karl Felix Seyffer" label="Karl Felix Seyffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="3471" end="3477" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthias Olbers" label="Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q57554" start="3564" end="3591" title="Georg Christoph Lichtenberg" label="Georg Christoph Lichtenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q63182" start="3624" end="3647" title="Christian Gottlob Heyne" label="Christian Gottlob Heyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q75088" start="3740" end="3767" title="Johann Friedrich Benzenberg" label="Johann Friedrich Benzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q252311" start="3769" end="3782" title="Farkas Bolyai" label="Farkas Bolyai"/>
<link wikidata="Q66556" start="3788" end="3812" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Brandes" label="Heinrich Wilhelm Brandes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="3995" end="4009" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q37555" start="4051" end="4058" title="polygon" label="polygon"/>
<link wikidata="Q115368" start="4082" end="4106" title="Compass and straightedge constructions" label="compass and straightedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="4177" end="4186" title="philology" label="philology"/>
<link wikidata="Q510675" start="4368" end="4395" title="Disquisitiones Arithmeticae" label="Disquisitiones Arithmeticae"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="4470" end="4490" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Doctor of Philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q77361" start="4668" end="4690" title="Johann Friedrich Pfaff" label="Johann Friedrich Pfaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054021" start="4752" end="4763" title="Graduation" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="4926" end="4953" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="4957" end="4970" title="St. Peterburg" label="St. Peterburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55044" start="4975" end="4994" title="Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich" label="Landshut University"/>
<link wikidata="Q108310" start="5090" end="5108" title="Peter Joseph Krahe" label="Peter Joseph Krahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q605977" start="5146" end="5166" title="War of the Fourth Coalition" label="Napoleon&amp;#x27;s wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q154426" start="5217" end="5231" title="Battle of Jena–Auerstedt" label="battle of Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="5469" end="5475" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q499920" start="5480" end="5490" title="Lilienthal, Lower Saxony" label="Lilienthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="5503" end="5517" title="Wilhelm Olbers" label="Wilhelm Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q77052" start="5519" end="5538" title="Karl Ludwig Harding" label="Karl Ludwig Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="5544" end="5568" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1389100" start="5628" end="5644" title="Celestial police" label="Celestial police"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5863" end="5896" title="Theoria motus corporum coelestium" label="Theoria motus corporum coelestium"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="5991" end="6014" title="University of Göttingen" label="University of Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q153943" start="6057" end="6078" title="Kingdom of Westphalia" label="Kingdom of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151087" start="6085" end="6101" title="Jérôme Bonaparte" label="Jérôme Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q177848" start="6141" end="6165" title="Göttingen Observatory" label="astronomical observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403377" start="6267" end="6272" title="franc" label="franc"/>
<link wikidata="Q44481" start="6379" end="6386" title="Pierre-Simon Laplace" label="Laplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="6494" end="6503" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q315652" start="6528" end="6542" title="Prince-primate" label="Prince-primate"/>
<link wikidata="Q61353" start="6543" end="6550" title="Karl Theodor Anton Maria von Dalberg" label="Dalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="6648" end="6662" title="Prince-elector" label="Prince-elector"/>
<link wikidata="Q131981" start="6663" end="6672" title="George II of Great Britain" label="George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="6842" end="6852" title="George III" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q364882" start="7054" end="7069" title="meridian circle" label="meridian circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q67252" start="7076" end="7083" title="Johann Georg Repsold" label="Repsold"/>
<link wikidata="Q69736" start="7088" end="7099" title="Georg Friedrich von Reichenbach" label="Reichenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548206" start="7107" end="7117" title="heliometer" label="heliometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q43948" start="7123" end="7133" title="Joseph von Fraunhofer" label="Fraunhofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q33521" start="7781" end="7800" title="applied mathematics" label="applied mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q61751" start="7961" end="7974" title="Moritz Cantor" label="Moritz Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q76556" start="7976" end="7984" title="Richard Dedekind" label="Dedekind"/>
<link wikidata="Q87940" start="7986" end="7993" title="Enno Dirksen" label="Dirksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57294" start="7995" end="8000" title="Johann Franz Encke" label="Encke"/>
<link wikidata="Q520915" start="8002" end="8007" title="Benjamin Apthorp Gould" label="Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q77301" start="8009" end="8014" title="Eduard Heine" label="Heine"/>
<link wikidata="Q68175" start="8016" end="8027" title="Ernst Klinkerfues" label="Klinkerfues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960679" start="8029" end="8036" title="Adolph Theodor Kupffer" label="Kupffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q62313" start="8038" end="8045" title="Johann Benedict Listing" label="Listing"/>
<link wikidata="Q57335" start="8047" end="8053" title="August Ferdinand Möbius" label="Möbius"/>
<link wikidata="Q101402" start="8055" end="8062" title="Friedrich Bernhard Gottfried Nicolai" label="Nicolai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42299" start="8064" end="8071" title="Bernhard Riemann" label="Riemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q71035" start="8073" end="8079" title="August Ritter (civil engineer)" label="Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q91390" start="8081" end="8089" title="Ernst Christian Julius Schering" label="Schering"/>
<link wikidata="Q72997" start="8091" end="8097" title="Heinrich Scherk" label="Scherk"/>
<link wikidata="Q63140" start="8099" end="8109" title="Heinrich Christian Schumacher" label="Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q77502" start="8111" end="8121" title="Karl Georg Christian von Staudt" label="von Staudt"/>
<link wikidata="Q77510" start="8123" end="8128" title="Moritz Abraham Stern" label="Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476996" start="8130" end="8135" title="Georg Frederik Ursin" label="Ursin"/>
<link wikidata="Q63464" start="8154" end="8181" title="Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen" label="Sartorius von Waltershausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108061" start="8187" end="8194" title="Johann Eduard Wappäus" label="Wappäus"/>
<link wikidata="Q995600" start="8247" end="8261" title="Popular science" label="popularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="8489" end="8494" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="8498" end="8504" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q215965" start="8990" end="8995" title="Johann Tobias Mayer" label="Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76707" start="9036" end="9041" title="Wilhelm Eduard Weber" label="Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q77052" start="9077" end="9084" title="Karl Ludwig Harding" label="Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q86178" start="9642" end="9649" title="Martin Brendel" label="Brendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="10332" end="10350" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig University"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="10368" end="10385" title="Vienna University" label="Vienna University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15944605" start="10494" end="10506" title="Reichsthaler" label="Reichsthaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="10685" end="10709" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q672420" start="10741" end="10762" title="Königsberg University" label="Königsberg University"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="10822" end="10857" title="Honorary degree" label="doctorate &amp;quot;honoris causa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103" start="10986" end="11000" title="Sophie Germain" label="Sophie Germain"/>
<link wikidata="Q61047" start="11115" end="11134" title="Gotthold Eisenstein" label="Gotthold Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q157217" start="11170" end="11186" title="House of Hanover" label="House of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q130822" start="11199" end="11209" title="William IV" label="William IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q162302" start="11248" end="11263" title="Ernest Augustus, King of Hanover" label="Ernest Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q632130" start="11339" end="11354" title="Göttingen Seven" label="Göttingen Seven"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="11743" end="11747" title="Dean (education)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q182103" start="11816" end="11828" title="pension fund" label="pension fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128453" start="11862" end="11879" title="actuarial science" label="actuarial science"/>
<link wikidata="Q133087" start="12109" end="12113" title="gout" label="gout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637231" start="12224" end="12239" title="Albanifriedhof" label="Albani Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q62686" start="12247" end="12261" title="Heinrich Ewald" label="Heinrich Ewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q63464" start="12292" end="12328" title="Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen" label="Wolfgang Sartorius von Waltershausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q65860" start="12733" end="12746" title="Rudolf Wagner" label="Rudolf Wagner"/>
<link wikidata="Q71326" start="12820" end="12827" title="Hermann Wagner (geographer)" label="Hermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q836125" start="12934" end="12980" title="Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry" label="Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q10377100" start="13132" end="13153" title="Conrad Heinrich Fuchs" label="Conrad Heinrich Fuchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q14280" start="13814" end="13829" title="Giuseppe Piazzi" label="Giuseppe Piazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q62686" start="14423" end="14437" title="Heinrich Ewald" label="Heinrich Ewald"/>
<link wikidata="Q97623079" start="14714" end="14729" title="Hanoverian army" label="Hanoverian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q316355" start="15012" end="15043" title="Royal Hanoverian State Railways" label="Royal Hanoverian State Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q464673" start="15251" end="15271" title="American Fur Company" label="American Fur Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="15307" end="15315" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q75845" start="15395" end="15401" title="Friedrich Bessel" label="Bessel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="15493" end="15502" title="St. Louis, Missouri" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="16174" end="16188" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527815" start="16601" end="16606" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s diary" label="diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763948" start="17037" end="17055" title="mathematical table" label="mathematical table"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="17214" end="17234" title="Gaussian elimination" label="Gaussian elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121749" start="17669" end="17682" title="perfectionism (psychology)" label="perfectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q162919" start="17729" end="17733" title="Seal (emblem)" label="seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q204819" start="18441" end="18462" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s identity" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q101609" start="19622" end="19630" title="Twelve Olympians" label="Olympian"/>
<link wikidata="Q73070" start="20022" end="20030" title="Johann Friedrich Ludwig Hausmann" label="Hausmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q16571" start="20056" end="20069" title="Justus Liebig" label="Justus Liebig"/>
<link wikidata="Q177771" start="20406" end="20414" title="threnody" label="threnody"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="20491" end="20503" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933" start="20897" end="20902" title="Celle" label="Celle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715023" start="21033" end="21049" title="first lieutenant" label="first lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="22256" end="22268" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="22342" end="22347" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="22438" end="22445" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q129199" start="22526" end="22537" title="Nikolai Lobachevsky" label="Lobachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="22702" end="22714" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q77079" start="22736" end="22745" title="Jean Paul" label="Jean Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q17051382" start="23092" end="23108" title="Naturphilosophie" label="Naturphilosophie"/>
<link wikidata="Q685929" start="23289" end="23307" title="Mundus vult decipi, ergo decipiatur" label="mundus vult decipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="23452" end="23471" title="Revolutions of 1848" label="Revolutions of 1848"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="23974" end="23989" title="Lutheran church" label="Lutheran church"/>
<link wikidata="Q620749" start="24077" end="24082" title="dogma" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="24163" end="24182" title="religious tolerance" label="religious tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192760" start="24457" end="24487" title="fundamental theorem of algebra" label="fundamental theorem of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="24541" end="24551" title="polynomial" label="polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="24603" end="24607" title="root of a function" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="24634" end="24662" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q510675" start="25319" end="25346" title="Disquisitiones Arithmeticae" label="Disquisitiones Arithmeticae"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="25478" end="25491" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843500" start="25519" end="25529" title="triple bar" label="triple bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349849" start="25544" end="25554" title="Congruence relation" label="congruence"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="25595" end="25613" title="modular arithmetic" label="modular arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q670235" start="25633" end="25661" title="unique factorization theorem" label="unique factorization theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q948010" start="25666" end="25690" title="primitive root modulo n" label="primitive roots modulo n"/>
<link wikidata="Q472883" start="25764" end="25785" title="quadratic reciprocity" label="quadratic reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q864134" start="25815" end="25821" title="Binary quadratic form" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q736753" start="25834" end="25848" title="quadratic form" label="quadratic form"/>
<link wikidata="Q116701549" start="25895" end="25916" title="Gauss composition law" label="Gauss composition law"/>
<link wikidata="Q15940470" start="26088" end="26112" title="Legendre&amp;#x27;s three-square theorem" label="theorem on three squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146791" start="26151" end="26182" title="Fermat polygonal number theorem" label="Fermat polygonal number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q912083" start="26239" end="26252" title="ideal class group" label="class numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291120" start="26361" end="26381" title="class number formula" label="class number formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q268132" start="26439" end="26455" title="Constructible polygon" label="constructibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q542476" start="26469" end="26481" title="heptadecagon" label="heptadecagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q115368" start="26506" end="26530" title="Compass and straightedge constructions" label="straightedge and compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136880" start="26677" end="26687" title="power of 2" label="power of 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q207264" start="26746" end="26758" title="Fermat prime" label="Fermat prime"/>
<link wikidata="Q603880" start="26877" end="26889" title="finite field" label="finite field"/>
<link wikidata="Q268493" start="26940" end="26954" title="elliptic curve" label="elliptic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q386292" start="27209" end="27229" title="prime number theorem" label="prime number theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350206" start="27297" end="27315" title="Logarithmic integral function" label="integral logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="27419" end="27445" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="27710" end="27724" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q262370" start="27789" end="27808" title="Eisenstein integers" label="Eisenstein integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q966873" start="27919" end="27936" title="Kepler conjecture" label="Kepler conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037840" start="27967" end="27991" title="Close-packing of equal spheres" label="greatest packing density"/>
<link wikidata="Q473227" start="28082" end="28100" title="Cubic crystal system" label="cubic face-centred"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317107" start="28141" end="28161" title="Ludwig August Seeber" label="Ludwig August Seeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495708" start="28458" end="28477" title="Quartic reciprocity" label="biquadratic residue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208658" start="28513" end="28517" title="ring theory" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q724975" start="28521" end="28538" title="Gaussian integers" label="Gaussian integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052579" start="28570" end="28597" title="unique factorization domain" label="unique factorization domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q188295" start="28653" end="28681" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s little theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526246" start="28686" end="28704" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s lemma (number theory)" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q526221" start="29167" end="29176" title="Gauss sum" label="Gauss sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q476167" start="29306" end="29331" title="arithmetic-geometric mean" label="arithmetic-geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11347570" start="29452" end="29480" title="Landen&amp;#x27;s transformation" label="Landen&amp;#x27;s transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248689" start="29544" end="29565" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s constant" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521248" start="29569" end="29599" title="lemniscatic elliptic functions" label="lemniscatic elliptic functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q193756" start="29774" end="29790" title="complex analysis" label="complex analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q834025" start="29911" end="29941" title="Cauchy&amp;#x27;s integral theorem" label="Cauchy&amp;#x27;s integral theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q753375" start="29973" end="29989" title="residue (complex analysis)" label="complex residues"/>
<link wikidata="Q899731" start="30014" end="30019" title="pole (complex analysis)" label="poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q282649" start="30022" end="30061" title="Pentagonal number theorem" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s pentagonal numbers theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154787" start="30164" end="30186" title="Jacobi theta functions" label="Jacobi theta functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q507393" start="30245" end="30275" title="Jacobi triple product identity" label="Jacobi triple product identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3827332" start="30475" end="30483" title="Nachlass" label="Nachlass"/>
<link wikidata="Q870797" start="30536" end="30549" title="modular forms" label="modular forms"/>
<link wikidata="Q629085" start="30570" end="30581" title="Multivalued function" label="multivalued"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474108" start="30810" end="30828" title="fundamental domain" label="fundamental domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834342" start="30837" end="30850" title="modular group" label="modular group"/>
<link wikidata="Q214856" start="30913" end="30925" title="tessellation" label="tessellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390323" start="30933" end="30942" title="unit disk" label="unit disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246553" start="30970" end="30989" title="hyperbolic triangle" label="hyperbolic triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10545374" start="31221" end="31237" title="lemniscate curve" label="lemniscate curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268351" start="31428" end="31447" title="quadratic Gauss sum" label="quadratic Gauss sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527834" start="31500" end="31533" title="Gaussian binomial coefficient" label="q-analogs of binomial coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q168401" start="31824" end="31831" title="Hermite" label="Hermite"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028472" start="32007" end="32030" title="hypergeometric function" label="hypergeometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383143" start="32199" end="32210" title="Convergence (series)" label="convergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115724" start="32297" end="32315" title="continued fraction" label="continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812487" start="32384" end="32408" title="Gauss continued fraction" label="Gauss continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q850275" start="32480" end="32497" title="conformal mapping" label="conformal mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q215084" start="32664" end="32681" title="analytic function" label="analytic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884794" start="32710" end="32727" title="Beltrami equation" label="Beltrami equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996692" start="32754" end="32776" title="isothermal coordinates" label="isothermal coordinates"/>
<link wikidata="Q208395" start="32876" end="32899" title="ellipsoid of revolution" label="ellipsoid of revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="32958" end="32969" title="Inductive reasoning" label="inductively"/>
<link wikidata="Q11216" start="33149" end="33165" title="numeric analysis" label="numeric analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q767680" start="33184" end="33203" title="Gaussian quadrature" label="Gaussian quadrature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069090" start="33335" end="33354" title="Gauss-Seidel method" label="Gauss-Seidel method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321565" start="33381" end="33397" title="iterative method" label="iterative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878" start="33613" end="33639" title="discrete Fourier transform" label="discrete Fourier transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384972" start="33715" end="33721" title="James Cooley" label="Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q382207" start="33726" end="33731" title="John Tukey" label="Tukey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167446" start="33752" end="33778" title="Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm" label="Cooley–Tukey FFT algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q464356" start="33801" end="33828" title="trigonometric interpolation" label="trigonometric interpolation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8772" start="33988" end="34002" title="Joseph Fourier" label="Joseph Fourier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34135" end="34149" title="Date of Easter#Gauss&amp;#x27;s Easter algorithm" label="date of Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q971128" start="34377" end="34390" title="Golden number (time)" label="golden number"/>
<link wikidata="Q376317" start="34392" end="34397" title="epact" label="epact"/>
<link wikidata="Q676397" start="34399" end="34410" title="Solar cycle (calendar)" label="solar cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q672461" start="34412" end="34428" title="Dominical letter" label="domenical letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="34618" end="34633" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12138" start="34641" end="34659" title="Gregorian calendar" label="Gregorian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="34688" end="34705" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14280" start="35220" end="35235" title="Giuseppe Piazzi" label="Giuseppe Piazzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193698" start="35366" end="35381" title="Titius–Bode law" label="Titius–Bode law"/>
<link wikidata="Q596" start="35396" end="35401" title="Ceres (dwarf planet)" label="Ceres"/>
<link wikidata="Q60662" start="35765" end="35785" title="Franz Xaver von Zach" label="Franz Xaver von Zach"/>
<link wikidata="Q315157" start="35810" end="35815" title="Gotha Observatory" label="Gotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q75828" start="35835" end="35850" title="Heinrich Wilhelm Matthäus Olbers" label="Heinrich Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="35873" end="35879" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11860323" start="35933" end="35952" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s method" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s method"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496380" start="36480" end="36511" title="Gaussian gravitational constant" label="Gaussian gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q803623" start="36591" end="36603" title="Perturbation (astronomy)" label="perturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q272626" start="36614" end="36630" title="orbital elements" label="orbital elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="36739" end="36745" title="(2) Pallas" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="36768" end="36780" title="Eccentricity (astronomy)" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="36785" end="36804" title="orbital inclination" label="orbital inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q476167" start="36880" end="36905" title="arithmetic–geometric mean" label="arithmetic–geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q21028472" start="36911" end="36934" title="hypergeometric function" label="hypergeometric function"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36981" end="36998" title="orbital resonance#Coincidental &amp;#x27;near&amp;#x27; ratios of mean motion" label="orbital resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="37004" end="37011" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681865" start="37066" end="37072" title="cipher" label="cipher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126603" start="37953" end="37970" title="elliptic integral" label="elliptic integral"/>
<link wikidata="Q818557" start="38076" end="38099" title="observational astronomy" label="observational astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q326905" start="38599" end="38617" title="spherical geometry" label="spherical geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063512" start="38676" end="38695" title="Celestial navigation" label="navigation by stars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38807" end="38836" title="solar eclipse of 28 July 1851" label="solar eclipse of 28 July 1851"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="38886" end="38909" title="Least squares" label="method of least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q196372" start="38971" end="38988" title="Observational error" label="measurement error"/>
<link wikidata="Q191021" start="39024" end="39045" title="Adrien-Marie Legendre" label="Adrien-Marie Legendre"/>
<link wikidata="Q133871" start="39430" end="39450" title="normal distribution" label="normally distributed"/>
<link wikidata="Q428134" start="39459" end="39479" title="Gauss–Markov theorem" label="Gauss–Markov theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527816" start="39617" end="39640" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q249514" start="39644" end="39669" title="Chebyshev&amp;#x27;s inequality" label="Chebyshev-type inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896771" start="39675" end="39697" title="Unimodality" label="unimodal distributions"/>
<link wikidata="Q638982" start="39747" end="39754" title="Moment (mathematics)" label="moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="39864" end="39872" title="variance" label="variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q175199" start="39876" end="39891" title="sample variance" label="sample variance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835868" start="39930" end="39961" title="Recursive least squares filter" label="recursive least squares methods"/>
<link wikidata="Q45161" start="40048" end="40072" title="Friedrich Robert Helmert" label="Friedrich Robert Helmert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517078" start="40080" end="40099" title="Gauss-Helmert model" label="Gauss-Helmert model"/>
<link wikidata="Q5862903" start="40140" end="40158" title="probability theory" label="probability theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258320" start="40466" end="40491" title="Gauss-Kuzmin distribution" label="Gauss-Kuzmin distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426803" start="40533" end="40543" title="ergodicity" label="ergodicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354602" start="40551" end="40584" title="Gauss-Kuzmin-Wirsing operator" label="Gauss map for continued fractions"/>
<link wikidata="Q98398" start="40790" end="40811" title="Karl Ludwig von Lecoq" label="Karl Ludwig von Lecoq"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="40841" end="40847" title="Surveying" label="survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q8614" start="40851" end="40861" title="Westphalia" label="Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q63140" start="41008" end="41037" title="Heinrich Christian Schumacher" label="Heinrich Christian Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="41057" end="41067" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630" start="41083" end="41089" title="Altona, Hamburg" label="Altona"/>
<link wikidata="Q704288" start="41091" end="41099" title="Duchy of Holstein" label="Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="41106" end="41113" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q188056" start="41155" end="41168" title="triangulation" label="triangulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25389" start="41176" end="41183" title="Jutland" label="Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215177" start="41199" end="41205" title="Skagen" label="Skagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q492380" start="41222" end="41231" title="Lauenburg" label="Lauenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q185969" start="41442" end="41447" title="geoid" label="geoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q130586" start="41669" end="41678" title="George IV" label="George IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259418" start="41708" end="41723" title="arc measurement" label="arc measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344447" start="41797" end="41804" title="Triangulation network" label="network"/>
<link wikidata="Q36477" start="41970" end="41979" title="longitude" label="longitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="41985" end="41993" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q22787" start="42041" end="42054" title="zenith sector" label="zenith sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338141" start="42058" end="42065" title="Jesse Ramsden" label="Ramsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3920" start="42175" end="42183" title="Lüneburg" label="Lüneburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205" start="42346" end="42355" title="Thuringia" label="Thuringia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="42382" end="42386" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19821" start="42405" end="42413" title="triangle" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623902" start="42422" end="42433" title="Hoher Hagen (Dransfeld)" label="Hoher Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548714" start="42435" end="42452" title="Großer Inselsberg" label="Großer Inselsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210" start="42460" end="42477" title="Thuringian Forest" label="Thuringian Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q155721" start="42483" end="42490" title="Brocken" label="Brocken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4186" start="42498" end="42502" title="Harz" label="Harz"/>
<link wikidata="Q311124" start="42606" end="42620" title="Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1602577" start="42976" end="42986" title="Heliotrope (instrument)" label="heliotrope"/>
<link wikidata="Q179430" start="43051" end="43058" title="sextant" label="sextant"/>
<link wikidata="Q810231" start="43243" end="43251" title="Baseline (surveying)" label="baseline"/>
<link wikidata="Q106175418" start="43265" end="43280" title="Braak Base Line" label="Braak Base Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q643606" start="43314" end="43319" title="Braak, Schleswig-Holstein" label="Braak"/>
<link wikidata="Q212750" start="43458" end="43468" title="flattening" label="flattening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335878" start="43490" end="43505" title="Earth ellipsoid" label="Earth ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43527" end="43567" title="Transverse Mercator projection#Ellipsoidal transverse Mercator" label="universal transverse Mercator projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q164079" start="43827" end="43845" title="Kingdom of Hanover" label="Kingdom of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="44087" end="44110" title="method of least squares" label="method of least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="44119" end="44137" title="Gaussian elimination" label="elimination method"/>
<link wikidata="Q34027" start="44334" end="44342" title="latitude" label="latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q437882" start="44397" end="44416" title="figure of the Earth" label="figure of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q62313" start="44513" end="44536" title="Johann Benedict Listing" label="Johann Benedict Listing"/>
<link wikidata="Q185969" start="44559" end="44564" title="geoid" label="geoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188444" start="44668" end="44689" title="differential geometry" label="differential geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="44694" end="44702" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="44739" end="44744" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q484298" start="44750" end="44758" title="Surface (topology)" label="surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502381" start="44843" end="44876" title="differential geometry of surfaces" label="differential geometry of surfaces"/>
<link wikidata="Q62912" start="44943" end="44959" title="Cartesian coordinate system" label="cartesian graphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048874" start="45150" end="45167" title="Theorema Egregium" label="Theorema Egregium"/>
<link wikidata="Q945953" start="45242" end="45260" title="Gaussian curvature" label="Gaussian curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="45363" end="45368" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q126017" start="45374" end="45382" title="distance" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q980509" start="45418" end="45427" title="embedding" label="embedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="45569" end="45577" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q757269" start="45663" end="45669" title="metric tensor" label="metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="45864" end="45870" title="sphere" label="sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="45877" end="45886" title="ellipsoid" label="ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q186386" start="45988" end="45998" title="map projection" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q213488" start="46083" end="46091" title="geodesic" label="geodesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q742833" start="46132" end="46152" title="Gauss–Bonnet theorem" label="Gauss–Bonnet theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226714" start="46192" end="46238" title="Legendre&amp;#x27;s theorem on spherical triangles" label="Legendre&amp;#x27;s theorem on spherical triangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460595" start="46669" end="46687" title="geodesic curvature" label="geodesic curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q188211" start="46874" end="46884" title="invariant (mathematics)" label="invariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q89442" start="46954" end="46971" title="Ferdinand Minding" label="Ferdinand Minding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250766" start="47119" end="47139" title="Pierre Ossian Bonnet" label="Pierre Ossian Bonnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q742833" start="47161" end="47181" title="Gauss–Bonnet theorem" label="Gauss–Bonnet theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207014" start="47266" end="47284" title="Parallel postulate" label="Parallel postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="47288" end="47306" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q78095" start="47683" end="47697" title="Franz Taurinus" label="Franz Taurinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q233858" start="47776" end="47798" title="non-Euclidean geometry" label="non-Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q129199" start="48085" end="48104" title="Nikolai Lobachevsky" label="Nikolai Lobachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16924" start="48117" end="48129" title="Janos Bolyai" label="Janos Bolyai"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="48947" end="48955" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q192760" start="49045" end="49075" title="fundamental theorem of algebra" label="fundamental theorem of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12134" start="49391" end="49407" title="celestial sphere" label="celestial sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760728" start="49561" end="49567" title="Link (knot theory)" label="linked"/>
<link wikidata="Q107495" start="49689" end="49695" title="7 Iris" label="7 Iris"/>
<link wikidata="Q849798" start="50152" end="50156" title="Knot theory" label="knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755115" start="50204" end="50214" title="Gauss code" label="Gauss code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000614" start="50331" end="50345" title="linking number" label="linking number"/>
<link wikidata="Q220409" start="50801" end="50806" title="Braid theory" label="braid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683003" start="50812" end="50818" title="Tangle (mathematics)" label="tangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q280191" start="51280" end="51313" title="Axonometry" label="fundamental theorem of axonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q595742" start="51476" end="51509" title="Mobius transformation" label="linear fractional transformations"/>
<link wikidata="Q339495" start="51593" end="51602" title="Altitude (triangle)" label="altitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q10621500" start="51641" end="51652" title="orthocenter" label="orthocenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q159592" start="51680" end="51691" title="John Napier" label="John Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q60170081" start="51705" end="51726" title="Pentagramma mirificum" label="Pentagramma mirificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q182186" start="51755" end="51764" title="pentagram" label="pentagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q36810" start="52195" end="52208" title="quadrilateral" label="quadrilateral"/>
<link wikidata="Q127840" start="52278" end="52286" title="pentagon" label="pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6694" start="52403" end="52425" title="Alexander von Humboldt" label="Alexander von Humboldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="52497" end="52509" title="geomagnetism" label="geomagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310480" start="52637" end="52688" title="Society of German Natural Scientists and Physicians" label="Society of German Natural Scientists and Physicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q76707" start="52743" end="52756" title="Wilhelm Eduard Weber" label="Wilhelm Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q215965" start="52825" end="52844" title="Johann Tobias Mayer" label="Johann Tobias Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294789" start="52962" end="52971" title="magnetism" label="magnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="53238" end="53265" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="53456" end="53473" title="British Empire" label="British dominions"/>
<link wikidata="Q375467" start="53495" end="53509" title="Prince Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex" label="Duke of Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53725" end="53743" title="Edward Sabine#Magnetical crusade" label="Magnetical crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q311223" start="53773" end="53786" title="Edward Sabine" label="Edward Sabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="54136" end="54143" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q632130" start="54174" end="54196" title="Göttingen Seven" label="Göttingen Seven affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q62832" start="54307" end="54318" title="observatory" label="observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q333921" start="54952" end="54964" title="magnetometer" label="magnetometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q877100" start="55529" end="55548" title="spherical harmonics" label="spherical harmonics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55630" end="55644" title="Poles of astronomical bodies#Magnetic poles" label="magnetic poles"/>
<link wikidata="Q705048" start="55664" end="55672" title="Christopher Hansteen" label="Hansteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960679" start="55864" end="55886" title="Adolph Theodor Kupffer" label="Adolph Theodor Kupffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="55950" end="55964" title="St. Petersburg" label="St. Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4419749" start="56036" end="56048" title="Ivan Simonov" label="Ivan Simonov"/>
<link wikidata="Q900" start="56052" end="56057" title="Kazan" label="Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44412" start="56107" end="56128" title="Hans Christian Ørsted" label="Hans Christian Ørsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="56132" end="56148" title="electromagnetism" label="electromagnetism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8750" start="56153" end="56168" title="Michael Faraday" label="Michael Faraday"/>
<link wikidata="Q988780" start="56172" end="56197" title="electromagnetic induction" label="electromagnetic induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="56285" end="56293" title="Electricity" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q60052" start="56366" end="56382" title="Gustav Kirchhoff" label="Gustav Kirchhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q187672" start="56408" end="56437" title="Kirchhoff&amp;#x27;s circuit laws" label="Kirchhoff&amp;#x27;s circuit laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="56506" end="56533" title="Electrical telegraph" label="electromechanical telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q521126" start="57004" end="57020" title="vector potential" label="vector potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q61774" start="57061" end="57080" title="Franz Ernst Neumann" label="Franz Ernst Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q181465" start="57168" end="57186" title="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law of induction" label="Faraday&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q185329" start="57210" end="57229" title="electromotive force" label="electromotive force"/>
<link wikidata="Q29175" start="57272" end="57300" title="instantaneous rate of change" label="instantaneous rate of change"/>
<link wikidata="Q26336" start="57407" end="57421" title="electrostatics" label="electrostatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406" start="57423" end="57438" title="electrodynamics" label="electrodynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q371907" start="57462" end="57471" title="electric Induction" label="induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q777407" start="57902" end="57924" title="closed-form expression" label="closed-form expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q190046" start="57974" end="57992" title="triaxial ellipsoid" label="triaxial ellipsoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8755" start="58054" end="58063" title="Colin Maclaurin" label="Maclaurin"/>
<link wikidata="Q338886" start="58266" end="58286" title="divergence theorem" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q200802" start="58290" end="58305" title="vector analysis" label="vector analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299100" start="58506" end="58515" title="Magnetic vector potential" label="potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q323294" start="58618" end="58630" title="George Green (mathematician)" label="George Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q67252" start="58916" end="58936" title="Johann Georg Repsold" label="Johann Georg Repsold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="58940" end="58947" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q174102" start="59077" end="59093" title="refractive index" label="refractive index"/>
<link wikidata="Q182893" start="59098" end="59108" title="Dispersion (optics)" label="dispersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087688" start="59206" end="59226" title="chromatic aberration" label="chromatic aberration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527822" start="59230" end="59243" title="Gauss lens" label="double lenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q707106" start="59374" end="59399" title="Carl August von Steinheil" label="Carl August von Steinheil"/>
<link wikidata="Q340600" start="59439" end="59456" title="Achromatic lens" label="Steinheil doublet"/>
<link wikidata="Q467980" start="59517" end="59535" title="geometrical optics" label="geometrical optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071734" start="59732" end="59754" title="paraxial approximation" label="paraxial approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527843" start="59756" end="59771" title="Gaussian optics" label="Gaussian optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q376733" start="59850" end="59865" title="Cardinal point (optics)" label="cardinal points"/>
<link wikidata="Q768575" start="59895" end="59899" title="lens" label="lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q244743" start="60058" end="60079" title="earth&amp;#x27;s rotation" label="earth&amp;#x27;s rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q75088" start="60108" end="60118" title="Johann Benzenberg" label="Benzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q169973" start="60260" end="60274" title="Coriolis force" label="Coriolis force"/>
<link wikidata="Q187966" start="60613" end="60621" title="Léon Foucault" label="Foucault"/>
<link wikidata="Q178841" start="60672" end="60680" title="Foucault pendulum" label="pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477313" start="61153" end="61195" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s principle of least constraint" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s principle of least constraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q753007" start="61316" end="61348" title="D&amp;#x27;Alembert&amp;#x27;s principle" label="D&amp;#x27;Alembert&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="61354" end="61362" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144923" start="61370" end="61395" title="principle of virtual work" label="principle of virtual work"/>
<link wikidata="Q74304" start="61436" end="61449" title="least squares" label="least squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271511" start="61597" end="61606" title="Standard (metrology)" label="standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710" start="61921" end="61925" title="Foot (unit)" label="foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q100995" start="61930" end="61935" title="Pound (mass)" label="pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q83172" start="62205" end="62232" title="Russian Academy of Sciences" label="Russian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q414188" start="62309" end="62328" title="Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities" label="Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q188771" start="62360" end="62386" title="French Academy of Sciences" label="French Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="62405" end="62418" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q329464" start="62441" end="62463" title="Prussian Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Prussian Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603946" start="62486" end="62513" title="Accademia nazionale delle scienze" label="National Academy of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q117467" start="62536" end="62562" title="Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q684415" start="62575" end="62603" title="Bavarian Academy of Sciences and Humanities" label="Bavarian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636237" start="62626" end="62646" title="Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters" label="Royal Danish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q753299" start="62673" end="62699" title="Royal Astronomical Society" label="Royal Astronomical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="62722" end="62755" title="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="62768" end="62805" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575786" start="62828" end="62862" title="Royal Bohemian Society of Sciences" label="Royal Bohemian Society of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q337580" start="62885" end="62943" title="Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium" label="Royal Academy of Science, Letters and Fine Arts of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q537736" start="62961" end="62997" title="Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala" label="Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala"/>
<link wikidata="Q110587" start="63010" end="63029" title="Royal Irish Academy" label="Royal Irish Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q253439" start="63052" end="63086" title="Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="Royal Institute of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q427318" start="63105" end="63138" title="Spanish Royal Academy of Sciences" label="Spanish Royal Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q726762" start="63161" end="63189" title="Russian Geographical Society" label="Russian Geographical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q299015" start="63202" end="63230" title="Austrian Academy of Sciences" label="Imperial Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="63253" end="63283" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025493" start="63296" end="63327" title="Cambridge Philosophical Society" label="Cambridge Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152308" start="63337" end="63373" title="Koninklijke Hollandsche Maatschappij der Wetenschappen" label="Royal Hollandish Society of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q113788" start="63396" end="63415" title="University of Kazan" label="University of Kazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="63450" end="63470" title="Charles University" label="University of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q627147" start="63530" end="63543" title="Lalande Prize" label="Lalande Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q28003" start="63777" end="63789" title="Copley Medal" label="Copley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="63936" end="63952" title="Legion of Honour" label="Legion of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="64020" end="64040" title="Order Pour le Merite#Civil class" label="Order Pour le Merite"/>
<link wikidata="Q570602" start="64104" end="64136" title="Order of the Crown of Westphalia" label="Order of the Crown of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20872" start="64156" end="64178" title="Order of the Dannebrog" label="Order of the Dannebrog"/>
<link wikidata="Q705153" start="64202" end="64222" title="Royal Guelphic Order" label="Royal Guelphic Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q961142" start="64243" end="64266" title="Order of the Polar Star" label="Order of the Polar Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q315617" start="64279" end="64302" title="Order of Henry the Lion" label="Order of Henry the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q565030" start="64319" end="64364" title="Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art" label="Bavarian Maximilian Order for Science and Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q11165895" start="64435" end="64442" title="Hofrath" label="Hofrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q987080" start="64570" end="64590" title="honorary citizenship" label="honorary citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q57428" start="64690" end="64709" title="George V of Hanover" label="George V of Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151773" start="65116" end="65163" title="List of things named after Carl Friedrich Gauss" label="List of things named after Carl Friedrich Gauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526246" start="65580" end="65598" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s lemma (number theory)" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002" start="65723" end="65729" title="2 Pallas" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268351" start="65794" end="65813" title="quadratic Gauss sum" label="quadratic Gauss sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4812487" start="65918" end="65949" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s continued fraction" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s continued fraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q476167" start="66151" end="66176" title="arithmetic-geometric mean" label="arithmetic-geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q724975" start="66548" end="66565" title="Gaussian integers" label="Gaussian integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495708" start="66601" end="66624" title="biquadratic reciprocity" label="biquadratic reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q338886" start="66986" end="67006" title="Gauss&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Gauss&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q67219" start="67696" end="67707" title="Palm Heinrich Ludwig von Boguslawski" label="Boguslawski"/>
<link wikidata="Q414188" start="68454" end="68498" title="Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities" label="Göttingen Academy of Sciences and Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q564783" start="68659" end="68697" title="Göttingen State and University Library" label="Göttingen State and University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q752099" start="69105" end="69129" title="Astrophysics Data System" label="Astrophysics Data System"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6130" wikidata="Q25289" url="?curid=6130" title="Cornish language">
<text>Cornish (Standard Written Form: or , ) is a Southwestern Brittonic language of the Celtic language family. Along with Welsh and Breton, Cornish is descended from the Common Brittonic language spoken throughout much of Great Britain before the English language came to dominate. For centuries, until it was pushed westwards by English, it was the main language of Cornwall, maintaining close links with its sister language Breton, with which it was mutually intelligible, perhaps even as long as Cornish continued to be spoken as a vernacular. Cornish continued to function as a common community language in parts of Cornwall until the mid 18th century, and there is some evidence for traditional speakers of the language persisting into the 19th century.

Cornish became extinct as a living community language in Cornwall by the end of the 18th century, although knowledge of Cornish, including speaking ability to a certain extent, persisted within some families and individuals. A revival started in the early 20th century, and in 2010 UNESCO reclassified the language as critically endangered, stating that its former classification of the language as extinct was no longer accurate. The language has a growing number of second-language speakers, and a very small number of families now raise children to speak revived Cornish as a first language.

Cornish is currently recognised under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, and the language is often described as an important part of Cornish identity, culture and heritage. Since the revival of the language, some Cornish textbooks and works of literature have been published, and an increasing number of people are studying the language. Recent developments include Cornish music, independent films, and children&#x27;s books. A small number of people in Cornwall have been brought up to be bilingual native speakers, and the language is taught in schools and appears on street nameplates. The first Cornish-language day care opened in 2010.

== Classification ==
Cornish is a Southwestern Brittonic language, a branch of the Insular Celtic section of the Celtic language family, which is a sub-family of the Indo-European language family. Brittonic also includes Welsh, Breton, Cumbric and possibly Pictish, the last two of which are extinct. Scottish Gaelic, Irish and Manx are part of the separate Goidelic branch of Insular Celtic.

Joseph Loth viewed Cornish and Breton as being two dialects of the same language, claiming that &quot;Middle Cornish is without doubt closer to Breton as a whole than the modern Breton dialect of Quiberon [] is to that of Saint-Pol-de-Léon [].&quot; Also, Kenneth Jackson argued that it is almost certain that Cornish and Breton would have been mutually intelligible as long as Cornish was a living language, and that Cornish and Breton are especially closely related to each other and less closely related to Welsh.

== History ==
Cornish evolved from the Common Brittonic spoken throughout Britain south of the Firth of Forth during the British Iron Age and Roman period. As a result of westward Anglo-Saxon expansion, the Britons of the southwest were separated from those in modern-day Wales and Cumbria, which Jackson links to the defeat of the Britons at the Battle of Deorham in about 577. The western dialects eventually evolved into modern Welsh and the now extinct Cumbric, while Southwestern Brittonic developed into Cornish and Breton, the latter as a result of emigration to parts of the continent, known as Brittany over the following centuries.

=== Old Cornish ===
The area controlled by the southwestern Britons was progressively reduced by the expansion of Wessex over the next few centuries. During the Old Cornish () period (800–1200), the Cornish-speaking area was largely coterminous with modern-day Cornwall, after the Saxons had taken over Devon in their south-westward advance, which probably was facilitated by a second migration wave to Brittany that resulted in the partial depopulation of Devon.

The earliest written record of the Cornish language comes from this period: a 9th-century gloss in a Latin manuscript of by Boethius, which used the words . The phrase may mean &quot;it [the mind] hated the gloomy places&quot;, or alternatively, as Andrew Breeze suggests, &quot;she hated the land&quot;. Other sources from this period include the &quot;Saints&#x27; List&quot;, a list of almost fifty Cornish saints, the Bodmin manumissions, which is a list of manumittors and slaves, the latter with mostly Cornish names, and, more substantially, a Latin–Cornish glossary (the or Cottonian Vocabulary), a Cornish translation of Ælfric of Eynsham&#x27;s Latin–Old English Glossary, which is thematically arranged into several groups, such as the Genesis creation narrative, anatomy, church hierarchy, the family, names for various kinds of artisans and their tools, flora, fauna, and household items. The manuscript was widely thought to be in Old Welsh until the 18th century when it was identified as Cornish by Edward Lhuyd. Some Brittonic glosses in the 9th-century colloquy were once identified as Old Cornish, but they are more likely Old Welsh, possibly influenced by a Cornish scribe. No single phonological feature distinguishes Cornish from both Welsh and Breton until the beginning of the assibilation of dental stops in Cornish, which is not found before the second half of the eleventh century, and it is not always possible to distinguish Old Cornish, Old Breton, and Old Welsh orthographically.

=== Middle Cornish ===

The Cornish language continued to flourish well through the Middle Cornish () period (1200–1600), reaching a peak of about 39,000 speakers in the 13th century, after which the number started to decline. This period provided the bulk of traditional Cornish literature, and was used to reconstruct the language during its revival. Most important is the , a cycle of three mystery plays, , and . Together these provide about 8,734 lines of text. The three plays exhibit a mixture of English and Brittonic influences, and, like other Cornish literature, may have been written at Glasney College near Penryn. From this period also are the hagiographical dramas (&quot;The Life of Meriasek&quot;) and (&quot;The Life of Ke&quot;), both of which feature as an antagonist the villainous and tyrannical King Tewdar (or Teudar), a historical medieval king in Armorica and Cornwall, who, in these plays, has been interpreted as a lampoon of either of the Tudor kings Henry VII or Henry VIII.

Others are the &quot;Charter Fragment&quot;, the earliest known continuous text in the Cornish language, apparently part of a play about a medieval marriage, and (&quot;The Passion of Our Lord&quot;), a poem probably intended for personal worship, were written during this period, probably in the second half of the 14th century. Another important text, the , was realized to be Cornish in 1949, having previously been incorrectly classified as Welsh. It is the longest text in the traditional Cornish language, consisting of around 30,000 words of continuous prose. This text is a late 16th century translation of twelve of Bishop Bonner&#x27;s thirteen homilies by a certain John Tregear, tentatively identified as a vicar of St Allen from Crowan, and has an additional catena, Sacrament an Alter, added later by his fellow priest, Thomas Stephyn. In the reign of Henry VIII, an account was given by Andrew Boorde in his 1542 . He states, &quot;&quot;

When Parliament passed the Act of Uniformity 1549, which established the 1549 edition of the English Book of Common Prayer as the sole legal form of worship in England, including Cornwall, people in many areas of Cornwall did not speak or understand English. The passing of this Act was one of the causes of the Prayer Book Rebellion (which may also have been influenced by government repression after the failed Cornish rebellion of 1497), with &quot;the commoners of Devonshyre and Cornwall&quot; producing a manifesto demanding a return to the old religious services and included an article that concluded, &quot;and so we the Cornyshe men (whereof certen of us understande no Englysh) utterly refuse thys newe Englysh.&quot; In response to their articles, the government spokesman (either Philip Nichols or Nicholas Udall) wondered why they did not just ask the king for a version of the liturgy in their own language. Archbishop Thomas Cranmer asked why the Cornishmen should be offended by holding the service in English, when they had before held it in Latin, which even fewer of them could understand. Anthony Fletcher points out that this rebellion was primarily motivated by religious and economic, rather than linguistic, concerns. The rebellion prompted a heavy-handed response from the government, and 5,500 people died during the fighting and the rebellion&#x27;s aftermath. Government officials then directed troops under the command of Sir Anthony Kingston to carry out pacification operations throughout the West Country. Kingston subsequently ordered the executions of numerous individuals suspected of involvement with the rebellion as part of the post-rebellion reprisals.

The rebellion eventually proved a turning-point for the Cornish language, as the authorities came to associate it with sedition and &quot;backwardness&quot;. This proved to be one of the reasons why the Book of Common Prayer was never translated into Cornish (unlike Welsh), as proposals to do so were suppressed in the rebellion&#x27;s aftermath. The failure to translate the Book of Common Prayer into Cornish led to the language&#x27;s rapid decline during the 16th and 17th centuries. Peter Berresford Ellis cites the years 1550–1650 as a century of immense damage for the language, and its decline can be traced to this period. In 1680 William Scawen wrote an essay describing 16 reasons for the decline of Cornish, among them the lack of a distinctive Cornish alphabet, the loss of contact between Cornwall and Brittany, the cessation of the miracle plays, loss of records in the Civil War, lack of a Cornish Bible and immigration to Cornwall. Mark Stoyle, however, has argued that the &#x27;glotticide&#x27; of the Cornish language was mainly a result of the Cornish gentry adopting English to dissociate themselves from the reputation for disloyalty and rebellion associated with the Cornish language since the 1497 uprising.

=== Late Cornish ===

By the middle of the 17th century, the language had retreated to Penwith and Kerrier, and transmission of the language to new generations had almost entirely ceased. In his &quot;Survey of Cornwall&quot;, published in 1602, Richard Carew writes:[M]ost of the inhabitants can speak no word of Cornish, but very few are ignorant of the English; and yet some so affect their own, as to a stranger they will not speak it; for if meeting them by chance, you inquire the way, or any such matter, your answer shall be, &quot;,&quot; &quot;I [will] speak no Saxonage.&quot;
The Late Cornish () period from 1600 to about 1800 has a less substantial body of literature than the Middle Cornish period, but the sources are more varied in nature, including songs, poems about fishing and curing pilchards, and various translations of verses from the Bible, the Ten Commandments, the Lord&#x27;s Prayer and the Creed. Edward Lhuyd&#x27;s &quot;Archaeologia Britannica&quot;, which was mainly recorded in the field from native speakers in the early 1700s, and his unpublished field notebook are seen as important sources of Cornish vocabulary, some of which are not found in any other source. &quot;Archaeologia Britannica&quot; also features a complete version of a traditional folk tale, &quot;John of Chyanhor&quot;, a short story about a man from St Levan who goes far to the east seeking work, eventually returning home after three years to find that his wife has borne him a child during his absence.

In 1776, William Bodinar, who describes himself as having learned Cornish from old fishermen when he was a boy, wrote a letter to Daines Barrington in Cornish, with an English translation, which was probably the last prose written in the traditional language. In his letter, he describes the sociolinguistics of the Cornish language at the time, stating that there are no more than four or five old people in his village who can still speak Cornish, concluding with the remark that Cornish is no longer known by young people. However, the last recorded traditional Cornish literature may have been the &quot;Cranken Rhyme&quot;, a corrupted version of a verse or song published in the late 19th century by John Hobson Matthews, recorded orally by John Davey (or Davy) of Boswednack, of uncertain date but probably originally composed during the last years of the traditional language. Davey had traditional knowledge of at least some Cornish. John Kelynack (1796–1885), a fisherman of Newlyn, was sought by philologists for old Cornish words and technical phrases in the 19th century.

=== Decline of Cornish speakers between 1300 and 1800 ===
It is difficult to state with certainty when Cornish ceased to be spoken, due to the fact that its last speakers were of relatively low social class and that the definition of what constitutes &quot;a living language&quot; is not clear cut. Peter Pool argues that by 1800 nobody was using Cornish as a daily language and no evidence exists of anyone capable of conversing in the language at that date. However, passive speakers, semi-speakers and rememberers, who retain some competence in the language despite not being fluent nor using the language in daily life, generally survive even longer.

The traditional view that Dolly Pentreath (1692–1777) was the last native speaker of Cornish has been challenged, and in the 18th and 19th centuries there was academic interest in the language and in attempting to find the last speaker of Cornish. It has been suggested that, whereas Pentreath was probably the last &quot;monolingual&quot; speaker, the last &quot;native&quot; speaker may have been John Davey of Zennor, who died in 1891. However, although it is clear Davey possessed some traditional knowledge in addition to having read books on Cornish, accounts differ of his competence in the language. Some contemporaries stated he was able to converse on certain topics in Cornish whereas others affirmed they had never heard him claim to be able to do so. Robert Morton Nance, who reworked and translated Davey&#x27;s Cranken Rhyme, remarked, &quot;There can be no doubt, after the evidence of this rhyme, of what there was to lose by neglecting John Davey.&quot;

The search for the last speaker is hampered by a lack of transcriptions or audio recordings, so that it is impossible to tell from this distance whether the language these people were reported to be speaking was Cornish, or English with a heavy Cornish substratum, nor what their level of fluency was. Nevertheless, this academic interest, along with the beginning of the Celtic Revival in the late 19th century, provided the groundwork for a Cornish language revival movement.

Notwithstanding the uncertainty over who was the last speaker of Cornish, researchers have posited the following numbers for the prevalence of the language between 1050 and 1800.

=== Revived Cornish ===

In 1904, the Celtic language scholar and Cornish cultural activist Henry Jenner published &quot;A Handbook of the Cornish Language&quot;. The publication of this book is often considered to be the point at which the revival movement started. Jenner wrote about the Cornish language in 1905, &quot;one may fairly say that most of what there was of it has been preserved, and that it has been continuously preserved, for there has never been a time when there were not some Cornishmen who knew some Cornish.&quot;

The revival focused on reconstructing and standardising the language, including coining new words for modern concepts, and creating educational material in order to teach Cornish to others. In 1929 Robert Morton Nance published his Unified Cornish () system, based on the Middle Cornish literature while extending the attested vocabulary with neologisms and forms based on Celtic roots also found in Breton and Welsh, publishing a dictionary in 1938. Nance&#x27;s work became the basis of revived Cornish () for most of the 20th century. During the 1970s, criticism of Nance&#x27;s system, including the inconsistent orthography and unpredictable correspondence between spelling and pronunciation, as well as on other grounds such as the archaic basis of Unified and a lack of emphasis on the spoken language, resulted in the creation of several rival systems. In the 1980s, Ken George published a new system, (&#x27;Common Cornish&#x27;), based on a reconstruction of the phonological system of Middle Cornish, but with an approximately morphophonemic orthography. It was subsequently adopted by the Cornish Language Board and was the written form used by a reported 54.5% of all Cornish language users according to a survey in 2008, but was heavily criticised for a variety of reasons by Jon Mills and Nicholas Williams, including making phonological distinctions that they state were not made in the traditional language , failing to make distinctions that they believe &quot;were&quot; made in the traditional language at this time, and the use of an orthography that deviated too far from the traditional texts and Unified Cornish. Also during this period, Richard Gendall created his Modern Cornish system (also known as Revived Late Cornish), which used Late Cornish as a basis, and Nicholas Williams published a revised version of Unified; however neither of these systems gained the popularity of Unified or Kemmyn.

The revival entered a period of factionalism and public disputes, with each orthography attempting to push the others aside. By the time that Cornish was recognised by the UK government under the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in 2002, it had become recognised that the existence of multiple orthographies was unsustainable with regards to using the language in education and public life, as none had achieved a wide consensus. A process of unification was set about which resulted in the creation of the public-body Cornish Language Partnership in 2005 and agreement on a Standard Written Form in 2008. In 2010 a new milestone was reached when UNESCO altered its classification of Cornish, stating that its previous label of &quot;extinct&quot; was no longer accurate.

== Geographic distribution and number of speakers ==

Speakers of Cornish reside primarily in Cornwall, which has a population of 563,600 (2017 estimate). There are also some speakers living outside Cornwall, particularly in the countries of the Cornish diaspora, as well as in other Celtic nations. Estimates of the number of Cornish speakers vary according to the definition of a speaker, and is difficult to determine accurately due to the individualised nature of language take-up. Nevertheless, there is recognition that the number of Cornish speakers is growing. From before the 1980s to the end of the 20th century there was a sixfold increase in the number of speakers to around 300. One figure for the number of people who know a few basic words, such as knowing that &quot;Kernow&quot; means &quot;Cornwall&quot;, was 300,000; the same survey gave the number of people able to have simple conversations as 3,000.

The Cornish Language Strategy project commissioned research to provide quantitative and qualitative evidence for the number of Cornish speakers: due to the success of the revival project it was estimated that 2,000 people were fluent (surveyed in spring 2008), an increase from the estimated 300 people who spoke Cornish fluently suggested in a study by Kenneth MacKinnon in 2000.&lt;ref name=&quot;BBC BBC/British Council&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Jenefer Lowe of the Cornish Language Partnership said in an interview with the BBC in 2010 that there were around 300 fluent speakers. Bert Biscoe, a councillor and bard, in a statement to the &quot;Western Morning News&quot; in 2014 said there were &quot;several hundred fluent speakers&quot;. Cornwall Council estimated in 2015 that there were 300–400 fluent speakers who used the language regularly, with 5,000 people having a basic conversational ability in the language.

A report on the 2011 Census published in 2013 by the Office for National Statistics placed the number of speakers at somewhere between 325 and 625. In 2017 the ONS released data based on the 2011 Census that placed the number of speakers at 557 people in England and Wales who declared Cornish to be their main language, 464 of whom lived in Cornwall. The 2021 census listed the number of Cornish speakers at 563.

A study that appeared in 2018 established the number of people in Cornwall with at least minimal skills in Cornish, such as the use of some words and phrases, to be more than 3,000, including around 500 estimated to be fluent.

The Institute of Cornish Studies at the University of Exeter is working with the Cornish Language Partnership to study the Cornish language revival of the 20th century, including the growth in number of speakers.

== Legal status and recognition ==
In 2002, Cornish was recognized by the UK government under Part II of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. UNESCO&#x27;s &quot;Atlas of World Languages&quot; classifies Cornish as &quot;critically endangered&quot;. UNESCO has said that a previous classification of &#x27;extinct&#x27; &quot;does not reflect the current situation for Cornish&quot; and is &quot;no longer accurate&quot;.

===Within the UK===
Cornwall Council&#x27;s policy is to support the language, in line with the European Charter. A motion was passed in November 2009 in which the council promoted the inclusion of Cornish, as appropriate and where possible, in council publications and on signs. This plan has drawn some criticism. In October 2015, the council announced that staff would be encouraged to use &quot;basic words and phrases&quot; in Cornish when dealing with the public. In 2021 Cornwall Council prohibited a marriage ceremony from being conducted in Cornish as the Marriage Act 1949 only allowed for marriage ceremonies in English or Welsh.

In 2014, the Cornish people were recognised by the UK Government as a national minority under the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities. The FCNM provides certain rights and protections to a national minority with regard to their minority language.

In 2016, British government funding for the Cornish language ceased, and responsibility transferred to Cornwall Council.

== Orthography ==
=== Old Cornish orthography ===
Until around the middle of the 11th century, Old Cornish scribes used a traditional spelling system shared with Old Breton and Old Welsh, based on the pronunciation of British Latin. By the time of the , usually dated to around 1100, Old English spelling conventions, such as the use of thorn (Þ, þ) and eth (Ð, ð) for dental fricatives, and wynn (Ƿ, ƿ) for /w/, had come into use, allowing documents written at this time to be distinguished from Old Welsh, which rarely uses these characters, and Old Breton, which does not use them at all. Old Cornish features include using initial ⟨ch⟩, ⟨c⟩, or ⟨k⟩ for /k/, and, in internal and final position, ⟨p⟩, ⟨t⟩, ⟨c⟩, ⟨b⟩, ⟨d⟩, and ⟨g⟩ are generally used for the phonemes /b/, /d/, /ɡ/, /β/, /ð/, and /ɣ/ respectively, meaning that the results of Brittonic lenition are not usually apparent from the orthography at this time.

=== Middle Cornish orthography ===
Middle Cornish orthography has a significant level of variation, and shows influence from Middle English spelling practices. Yogh (Ȝ ȝ) is used in certain Middle Cornish texts, where it is used to represent a variety of sounds, including the dental fricatives /θ/ and /ð/, a usage which is unique to Middle Cornish and is never found in Middle English. Middle Cornish scribes tend to use ⟨c⟩ for /k/ before back vowels, and ⟨k⟩ for /k/ before front vowels, though this is not always true, and this rule is less consistent in certain texts. Middle Cornish scribes almost universally use ⟨wh⟩ to represent /ʍ/ (or /hw/), as in Middle English. Middle Cornish, especially towards the end of this period, tends to use orthographic ⟨g⟩ and ⟨b⟩ in word-final position in stressed monosyllables, and ⟨k⟩ and ⟨p⟩ in word-final position in unstressed final syllables, to represent the reflexes of late Brittonic /ɡ/ and /b/, respectively.

=== Late Cornish orthography ===
Written sources from this period are often spelled following English spelling conventions since many of the writers of the time had not been exposed to Middle Cornish texts or the Cornish orthography within them. Around 1700, Edward Lhuyd visited Cornwall, introducing his own partly phonetic orthography that he used in his , which was adopted by some local writers, leading to the use of some Lhuydian features such as the use of circumflexes to denote long vowels, ⟨k⟩ before front vowels, word-final ⟨i⟩, and the use of ⟨dh⟩ to represent the voiced dental fricative /ð/.

=== Revived Cornish orthography ===
After the publication of Jenner&#x27;s &quot;Handbook of the Cornish Language&quot;, the earliest revivalists used Jenner&#x27;s orthography, which was influenced by Lhuyd&#x27;s system. This system was abandoned following the development by Nance of a &quot;unified spelling&quot;, later known as Unified Cornish, a system based on a standardization of the orthography of the early Middle Cornish texts. Nance&#x27;s system was used by almost all Revived Cornish speakers and writers until the 1970s. Criticism of Nance&#x27;s system, particularly the relationship of spelling to sounds and the phonological basis of Unified Cornish, resulted in rival orthographies appearing by the early 1980s, including Gendal&#x27;s Modern Cornish, based on Late Cornish native writers and Lhuyd, and Ken George&#x27;s Kernewek Kemmyn, a mainly morphophonemic orthography based on George&#x27;s reconstruction of Middle Cornish , which features a number of orthographic, and phonological, distinctions not found in Unified Cornish. Kernewek Kemmyn is characterised by the use of universal ⟨k⟩ for /k/ (instead of ⟨c⟩ before back vowels as in Unified); ⟨hw⟩ for /hw/, instead of ⟨wh⟩ as in Unified; and ⟨y⟩, ⟨oe⟩, and ⟨eu⟩ to represent the phonemes /ɪ/, /o/, and /œ/ respectively, which are not found in Unified Cornish. Criticism of all of these systems, especially Kernewek Kemmyn, by Nicolas Williams, resulted in the creation of Unified Cornish Revised, a modified version of Nance&#x27;s orthography, featuring: an additional phoneme not distinguished by Nance, &quot;ö in German &quot;, represented in the UCR orthography by ⟨ue⟩; replacement of ⟨y⟩ with ⟨e⟩ in many words; internal ⟨h⟩ rather than ⟨gh⟩; and use of final ⟨b⟩, ⟨g⟩, and ⟨dh⟩ in stressed monosyllables. A Standard Written Form, intended as a compromise orthography for official and educational purposes, was introduced in 2008, although a number of previous orthographic systems remain in use and, in response to the publication of the SWF, another new orthography, Kernowek Standard, was created, mainly by Nicholas Williams and Michael Everson, which is proposed as an amended version of the Standard Written Form.

== Phonology ==

The phonological system of Old Cornish, inherited from Proto-Southwestern Brittonic and originally differing little from Old Breton and Old Welsh, underwent various changes during its Middle and Late phases, eventually resulting in several characteristics not found in the other Brittonic languages. The first sound change to distinguish Cornish from both Breton and Welsh, the assibilation of the dental stops and in medial and final position, had begun by the time of the , or earlier. This change, and the subsequent, or perhaps dialectical, palatalization (or occasional rhotacization in a few words) of these sounds, results in orthographic forms such as Middle Cornish &#x27;father&#x27;, Late Cornish (Welsh ), Middle Cornish &#x27;believe&#x27;, Late Cornish (Welsh ), and Middle Cornish &#x27;leave&#x27;, Late Cornish (Welsh ). A further characteristic sound change, pre-occlusion, occurred during the 16th century, resulting in the nasals and being realised as and respectively in stressed syllables, and giving Late Cornish forms such as &#x27;head&#x27; (Welsh ) and &#x27;crooked&#x27; (Welsh ).

As a revitalised language, the phonology of contemporary spoken Cornish is based on a number of sources, including various reconstructions of the sound system of middle and early modern Cornish based on an analysis of internal evidence such as the orthography and rhyme used in the historical texts, comparison with the other Brittonic languages Breton and Welsh, and the work of the linguist Edward Lhuyd, who visited Cornwall in 1700 and recorded the language in a partly phonetic orthography.

== Vocabulary ==
Cornish is a Celtic language, and the majority of its vocabulary, when usage frequency is taken into account, at every documented stage of its history is inherited direct from Proto-Celtic, either through the ancestral Proto-Indo-European language, or through vocabulary borrowed from unknown substrate language(s) at some point in the development of the Celtic proto-language from PIE. Examples of the PIE &gt; PCelt. development are various terms related to kinship and people, including &#x27;mother&#x27;, &#x27;aunt, mother&#x27;s sister&#x27;, &#x27;sister&#x27;, &#x27;son&#x27;, &#x27;man&#x27;, &#x27;person, human&#x27;, and &#x27;people&#x27;, and words for parts of the body, including &#x27;hand&#x27; and &#x27;tooth&#x27;. Inherited adjectives with an Indo-European etymology include &#x27;new&#x27;, &#x27;broad, wide&#x27;, &#x27;red&#x27;, &#x27;old&#x27;, &#x27;young&#x27;, and &#x27;alive, living&#x27;.

Several Celtic or Brittonic words cannot be reconstructed to Proto-Indo-European, and are suggested to have been borrowed from unknown substrate language(s) at an early stage, such as Proto-Celtic or Proto-Brittonic. Proposed examples in Cornish include &#x27;beer&#x27; and &#x27;badger&#x27;.

Other words in Cornish inherited direct from Proto-Celtic include a number of toponyms, for example &#x27;hill&#x27;, &#x27;fort&#x27;, and &#x27;land&#x27;, and a variety of animal names such as &#x27;mouse&#x27;, &#x27;wether&#x27;, &#x27;pigs&#x27;, and &#x27;bull&#x27;.

During the Roman occupation of Britain a large number (around 800) of Latin loan words entered the vocabulary of Common Brittonic, which subsequently developed in a similar way to the inherited lexicon. These include &#x27;arm&#x27; (from British Latin ), &#x27;net&#x27; (from ), and &#x27;cheese&#x27; (from ).

A substantial number of loan words from English and to a lesser extent French entered the Cornish language throughout its history. Whereas only 5% of the vocabulary of the Old Cornish Vocabularium Cornicum is thought to be borrowed from English, and only 10% of the lexicon of the early modern Cornish writer William Rowe, around 42% of the vocabulary of the whole Cornish corpus is estimated to be English loan words, without taking frequency into account. (However, when frequency &quot;is&quot; taken into account, this figure for the entire corpus drops to 8%.) The many English loanwords, some of which were sufficiently well assimilated to acquire native Cornish verbal or plural suffixes or be affected by the mutation system, include &#x27;to read&#x27;, &#x27;to understand&#x27;, &#x27;way&#x27;, &#x27;boot&#x27; and &#x27;art&#x27;.

Many Cornish words, such as mining and fishing terms, are specific to the culture of Cornwall. Examples include &#x27;mine waste&#x27; and &#x27;to mend fishing nets&#x27;. and are different types of pastries. is a &#x27;traditional Cornish dance get-together&#x27; and is a specific kind of ceremonial dance that takes place in Cornwall. Certain Cornish words may have several translation equivalents in English, so for instance may be translated into English as either &#x27;book&#x27; or &#x27;volume&#x27; and can mean either &#x27;hand&#x27; or &#x27;fist&#x27;.
As in other Celtic languages, Cornish lacks a number of verbs commonly found in other languages, including modals and psych-verbs; examples are &#x27;have&#x27;, &#x27;like&#x27;, &#x27;hate&#x27;, &#x27;prefer&#x27;, &#x27;must/have to&#x27; and &#x27;make/compel to&#x27;. These functions are instead fulfilled by periphrastic constructions involving a verb and various prepositional phrases.

== Grammar ==

The grammar of Cornish shares with other Celtic languages a number of features which, while not unique, are unusual in an Indo-European context. The grammatical features most unfamiliar to English speakers of the language are the initial consonant mutations, the verb–subject–object word order, inflected prepositions, fronting of emphasised syntactic elements and the use of two different forms for &#x27;to be&#x27;.

=== Morphology ===
==== Mutations ====
Cornish has initial consonant mutation: The first sound of a Cornish word may change according to grammatical context. As in Breton, there are four types of mutation in Cornish (compared with three in Welsh, two in Irish and Manx and one in Scottish Gaelic). These changes apply to only certain letters (sounds) in particular grammatical contexts, some of which are given below:

*Lenition or &quot;soft&quot; mutation:
**Feminine singular nouns are lenited after &#x27;the&#x27;:
*** &#x27;cat&#x27; &gt; &#x27;the cat&#x27;
*Spirantization or &quot;aspirate&quot; mutation:
**Nouns are spirantized after &#x27;my&#x27;:
*** &#x27;father&#x27; &gt; &#x27;my father&#x27;
*Provection or &quot;hard&quot; mutation:
**Verbs are provected after the verbal particle (approximately English &quot;-ing&quot;):
*** &#x27;see&#x27; &gt; &#x27;seeing&#x27;
*Lenition followed by provection (usually), or &quot;mixed&quot; mutation:
**Type 1 mixed mutation:
***Occurs after the affirmative particle :
**** &gt; &#x27;I see&#x27;
**Type 2 mixed mutation:
***Occurs after 2nd person singular infixed pronoun :
**** &#x27;hand&#x27; &gt; &#x27;in thy hand&#x27;

==== Articles ====
Cornish has no indefinite article. can either mean &#x27;harbour&#x27; or &#x27;a harbour&#x27;. In certain contexts, can be used, with the meaning &#x27;a certain, a particular&#x27;, e.g. &#x27;a certain harbour&#x27;. There is, however, a definite article &#x27;the&#x27;, which is used for all nouns regardless of their gender or number, e.g. &#x27;the harbour&#x27;.

==== Nouns ====
Cornish nouns belong to one of two grammatical genders, masculine and feminine, but are not inflected for case. Nouns may be singular or plural. Plurals can be formed in various ways, depending on the noun:

*Vowel change:
** &#x27;hole&#x27; &gt; &#x27;holes&#x27;
*Addition of a specific plural suffix:
** &#x27;angel&#x27; &gt; &#x27;angels&#x27;
** &#x27;father&#x27; &gt; &#x27;fathers&#x27;
** &#x27;peddler&#x27; &gt; &#x27;peddlers&#x27;
*Suppletion:
** &#x27;man&#x27; &gt; &#x27;men, people&#x27;

Some nouns are collective or mass nouns. Singulatives can be formed from collective nouns by the addition of the suffix ⫽-enn⫽ (SWF &quot;-en&quot;):

* &#x27;grass&#x27; &gt; &#x27;a blade of grass&#x27;
* &#x27;willow-trees&#x27; &gt; &#x27;a willow tree&#x27;

==== Verbs ====
Verbs are conjugated for person, number, tense and mood. For example, the verbal noun &#x27;see&#x27; has derived forms such as 1st person singular present indicative &#x27;I see&#x27;, 3rd person plural imperfect indicative &#x27;they saw&#x27;, and 2nd person singular imperative &#x27;see!&#x27; Grammatical categories can be indicated either by inflection of the main verb, or by the use of auxiliary verbs such as &#x27;be&#x27; or &#x27;do&#x27;.

==== Prepositions ====
Cornish uses inflected (or conjugated) prepositions: Prepositions are inflected for person and number. For example, (with, by) has derived forms such as &#x27;with me&#x27;, &#x27;with him&#x27;, and &#x27;with you (plural)&#x27;.

=== Syntax ===
Word order in Cornish is somewhat fluid and varies depending on several factors such as the intended element to be emphasised and whether a statement is negative or affirmative. In a study on Cornish word order in the play Bewnans Meriasek (), Ken George has argued that the most common word order in main clauses in Middle Cornish was, in affirmative statements, SVO, with the verb in the third person singular:

When affirmative statements are in the less common VSO order, they usually begin with an adverb or other element, followed by an affirmative particle, with the verb inflected for person and tense:

In negative statements, the order was usually VSO, with an initial negative particle and the verb conjugated for person and tense:

A similar structure is used for questions:

Elements can be fronted for emphasis:

Sentences can also be constructed periphrastically using auxiliary verbs such as &#x27;be, exist&#x27;:

As Cornish lacks verbs such as &#x27;to have&#x27;, possession can also be indicated in this way:

Enquiring about possession is similar, using a different interrogative form of :

Nouns usually precede the adjective, unlike in English:

Some adjectives usually precede the noun, however:

== Culture ==

The Celtic Congress and Celtic League are groups that advocate cooperation amongst the Celtic Nations in order to protect and promote Celtic languages and cultures, thus working in the interests of the Cornish language.

There have been films such as , some televised, made entirely, or significantly, in Cornish. Some businesses use Cornish names.

Cornish has significantly and durably affected Cornwall&#x27;s place-names as well as Cornish surnames and knowledge of the language helps the understanding of these ancient meanings. Cornish names are adopted for children, pets, houses and boats.

There is Cornish literature, including spoken poetry and song, as well as traditional Cornish chants historically performed in marketplaces during religious holidays and public festivals and gatherings.

There are periodicals solely in the language, such as the monthly , and . BBC Radio Cornwall has a news broadcast in Cornish and sometimes has other programmes and features for learners and enthusiasts. Local newspapers such as the &quot;Western Morning News&quot; have articles in Cornish, and newspapers such as &quot;The Packet&quot;, &quot;The West Briton&quot;, and &quot;The Cornishman&quot; have also been known to have Cornish features. There is an online radio and TV service in Cornish called , publishing a one-hour podcast each week, based on a magazine format. It includes music in Cornish as well as interviews and features.

The language has financial sponsorship from sources including the Millennium Commission. A number of language organisations exist in Cornwall: (Our Language), the Cornish sub-group of the European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages, , (the Cornish Language Board) and (the Cornish Language Fellowship).

There are ceremonies, some ancient, some modern, that use the language or are entirely in the language.

=== Cultural events ===

Cornwall has had cultural events associated with the language, including the international Celtic Media Festival, hosted in St Ives in 1997. The Old Cornwall Society has promoted the use of the language at events and meetings. Two examples of ceremonies that are performed in both the English and Cornish languages are Crying the Neck and the annual mid-summer bonfires.

Since 1969, there have been three full performances of the &quot;Ordinalia&quot;, originally written in the Cornish language, the most recent of which took place at the plen-an-gwary in St Just in September 2021. While significantly adapted from the original, as well as using mostly English-speaking actors, the plays used sizable amounts of Cornish, including a character who spoke only in Cornish and another who spoke both English and Cornish. The event drew thousands over two weeks, also serving as a celebration of Celtic culture. The next production, scheduled for 2024, could, in theory, be entirely in Cornish, without English, if assisted by a professional linguist.

Outside of Cornwall, efforts to revive the Cornish language and culture through community events are occurring in Australia. A biennial festival, Kernewek Lowender, takes place in South Australia, where both cultural displays and language lessons are offered.

=== Study and teaching ===
Cornish is taught in some schools; it was previously taught at degree level at the University of Wales, though the only existing course in the language at university level is as part of a course in Cornish studies at the University of Exeter. In March 2008 a course in the language was started as part of the Celtic Studies curriculum at the University of Vienna, Austria.
The University of Cambridge offers courses in Cornish through its John Trim Resources Centre, which is part of the university&#x27;s Language Centre. In addition, the Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic (which is part of the Faculty of English) also carries out research into the Cornish language.

In 2015 a university-level course aiming at encouraging and supporting practitioners working with young children to introduce the Cornish language into their settings was launched. The &quot;Cornish Language Practice Project (Early Years)&quot; is a level 4 course approved by Plymouth University and run at Cornwall College. The course is not a Cornish-language course but students will be assessed on their ability to use the Cornish language constructively in their work with young children. The course will cover such topics as &quot;Understanding Bilingualism&quot;, &quot;Creating Resources&quot; and &quot;Integrating Language and Play&quot;, but the focus of the language provision will be on Cornish. A non-accredited specialist Cornish-language course has been developed to run alongside the level 4 course for those who prefer tutor support to learn the language or develop their skills for use with young children.

Cornwall&#x27;s first Cornish-language crèche, , was established in 2010 at Cornwall College, Camborne. The nursery teaches children aged between two and five years alongside their parents to ensure the language is also spoken in the home.

A number of dictionaries are available in the various orthographies, including &quot;A Learners&#x27; Cornish Dictionary in the Standard Written Form&quot; by Steve Harris (ed.), by Ken George, by Nicholas Williams and &quot;A Practical Dictionary of Modern Cornish&quot; by Richard Gendall. Course books include the three-part series, , and , as well as the more recent and . Several online dictionaries are now available, including one organised by An Akademi Kernewek in SWF.

Classes and conversation groups for adults are available at several locations in Cornwall as well as in London, Cardiff and Bristol. Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic a number of conversation groups entitled have been held online, advertised through Facebook and other media. A surge in interest, not just from people in Cornwall but from all over the world, has meant that extra classes have been organised.

=== Cornish studies ===
William Scawen produced a manuscript on the declining Cornish language that continually evolved until he died in 1689, aged 89. He was one of the first to realise the language was dying out and wrote detailed manuscripts which he started working on when he was 78. The only version that was ever published was a short first draft but the final version, which he worked on until his death, is a few hundred pages long. At the same time a group of scholars led by John Keigwin (nephew of William Scawen) of Mousehole tried to preserve and further the Cornish language and chose to write in Cornish. One of their number, Nicholas Boson, tells how he had been discouraged from using Cornish to servants by his mother. This group left behind a large number of translations of parts of the Bible, proverbs and songs. They were contacted by the Welsh linguist Edward Lhuyd, who came to Cornwall to study the language.

Early Modern Cornish was the subject of a study published by Lhuyd in 1707, and differs from the medieval language in having a considerably simpler structure and grammar. Such differences included sound changes and more frequent use of auxiliary verbs. The medieval language also possessed two additional tenses for expressing past events and an extended set of possessive suffixes.

John Whitaker, the Manchester-born rector of Ruan Lanihorne, studied the decline of the Cornish language. In his 1804 work &quot;the Ancient Cathedral of Cornwall&quot; he concluded that: &quot;[T]he English Liturgy, was not desired by the Cornish, but forced upon them by the tyranny of England, at a time when the English language was yet unknown in Cornwall. This act of tyranny was at once gross barbarity to the Cornish people, and a death blow to the Cornish language.&quot;

Robert Williams published the first comprehensive Cornish dictionary in 1865, the . As a result of the discovery of additional ancient Cornish manuscripts, 2000 new words were added to the vocabulary by Whitley Stokes in &quot;A Cornish Glossary&quot;. William C. Borlase published &quot;Proverbs and Rhymes in Cornish&quot; in 1866 while &quot;A Glossary of Cornish Names&quot; was produced by John Bannister in the same year. Frederick Jago published his &quot;English–Cornish Dictionary&quot; in 1882.

In 2002, the Cornish language gained new recognition because of the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages. Conversely, along with government provision was the governmental basis of &quot;New Public Management&quot;, measuring quantifiable results as means of determining effectiveness. This put enormous pressure on finding a single orthography that could be used in unison. The revival of Cornish required extensive rebuilding. The Cornish orthographies that were reconstructed may be considered versions of Cornish because they are not traditional sociolinguistic variations. In the middle-to-late twentieth century, the debate over Cornish orthographies angered more people because several language groups received public funding. This caused other groups to sense favouritism as playing a role in the debate.

A governmental policymaking structure called New Public Management (NPM) has helped the Cornish language by managing public life of the Cornish language and people. In 2007, the Cornish Language Partnership MAGA represents separate divisions of government and their purpose is to further enhance the Cornish Language Developmental Plan. MAGA established an Ad-Hoc Group, which resulted in three orthographies being presented. The relations for the Ad-Hoc Group were to obtain consensus among the three orthographies and then develop a &quot;single written form&quot;. The result was creating a new form of Cornish, which had to be natural for both new learners and skilled speakers.

=== Literature ===
==== Recent Modern Cornish literature ====
In 1981, the Breton library edited (Passion of our lord), a 15th-century Cornish poem. The first complete translation of the Bible into Cornish, translated from English, was published in 2011. Another Bible translation project translating from original languages is underway. The New Testament and Psalms were made available online on YouVersion (Bible.com) and Bibles.org in July 2014 by the Bible Society.

A few small publishers produce books in Cornish which are stocked in some local bookshops, as well as in Cornish branches of Waterstones and WH Smith, although publications are becoming increasingly available on the Internet. Printed copies of these may also be found from Amazon. The Truro Waterstones hosts the annual literary awards, established by to recognise publications relating to Cornwall or in the Cornish language. In recent years, a number of Cornish translations of literature have been published, including &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; (2009), &quot;Around the World in Eighty Days&quot; (2009), &quot;Treasure Island&quot; (2010), &quot;The Railway Children&quot; (2012), &quot;Hound of the Baskervilles&quot; (2012), &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (2012), &quot;The Wind in the Willows&quot; (2013), &quot;Three Men in a Boat&quot; (2013), &quot;Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking-Glass&quot; (2014), and &quot;A Christmas Carol&quot; (which won the 2012 award for Cornish Language books), as well as original Cornish literature such as &quot;&quot; (&quot;The Lyonesse Stone&quot;) by Craig Weatherhill. Literature aimed at children is also available, such as (&quot;Where&#x27;s Spot?&quot;), (&quot;The Beast of Bodmin Moor&quot;), three &quot;Topsy and Tim&quot; titles, two &quot;Tintin&quot; titles and (&quot;Briallen and the Alien&quot;), which won the 2015 award for Cornish Language books for children. In 2014 , Nicholas Williams&#x27;s translation of J. R. R. Tolkien&#x27;s &quot;The Hobbit&quot;, was published.

 is a monthly magazine published entirely in the Cornish language. Members contribute articles on various subjects. The magazine is produced by Graham Sandercock who has been its editor since 1976.

=== Media ===
In 1983 BBC Radio Cornwall started broadcasting around two minutes of Cornish every week. In 1987, however, they gave over 15 minutes of airtime on Sunday mornings for a programme called (&#x27;Holdall&#x27;), presented by John King, running until the early 1990s. It was eventually replaced with a five-minute news bulletin called (&#x27;The News&#x27;). The bulletin was presented every Sunday evening for many years by Rod Lyon, then Elizabeth Stewart, and currently a team presents in rotation. Pirate FM ran short bulletins on Saturday lunchtimes from 1998 to 1999. In 2006, Matthew Clarke who had presented the Pirate FM bulletin, launched a web-streamed news bulletin called (&#x27;Weekly News&#x27;), which in 2008 was merged into a new weekly magazine podcast (RanG).

Cornish television shows have included a 1982 series by Westward Television with each episode containing a three-minute lesson in Cornish. , an eight-episode series produced by Television South West and broadcast between June and July 1984, later on S4C from May to July 1985, and as a schools programme in 1986. Also by Television South West were two bilingual programmes on Cornish Culture called .
In 2016 Kelly&#x27;s Ice Cream of Bodmin introduced a light hearted television commercial in the Cornish language and this was repeated in 2017.

The first episode from the third season of the US television program &quot;Deadwood&quot; features a conversation between miners, purportedly in the Cornish language, but really in Irish. One of the miners is then shot by thugs working for businessman George Hearst who justify the murder by saying, &quot;He come at me with his foreign gibberish.&quot;

A number of Cornish language films have been made, including &quot;Hwerow Hweg&quot;, a 2002 drama film written and directed by Hungarian film-maker Antal Kovacs and &quot;Trengellick Rising&quot;, a short film written and directed by Guy Potter.

Screen Cornwall works with Cornwall Council to commission a short film in the Cornish language each year, with their FilmK competition. Their website states &quot;FylmK is an annual contemporary Cornish language short film competition, producing an imaginative and engaging film, in any genre, from distinctive and exciting filmmakers&quot;.

A monthly half-hour online TV show began in 2017 called (The Month). It contained news items about cultural events and more mainstream news stories all through Cornish. It also ran a cookery segment called &quot;&quot; (&#x27;Esther&#x27;s Kitchen&#x27;).

=== Music ===
English composer Peter Warlock wrote a Christmas carol in Cornish (setting words by Henry Jenner). The Cornish electronic musician Aphex Twin has used Cornish names for track titles, most notably on his &quot;Drukqs&quot; album.

Several traditional Cornish folk songs have been collected and can be sung to various tunes. These include &quot;, &quot;, and &quot;&quot;.

In 2018, the singer Gwenno Saunders released an album in Cornish, entitled , saying: &quot;I speak Cornish with my son: if you&#x27;re comfortable expressing yourself in a language, you want to share it.&quot;

=== Place-names and surnames ===


The Cornish language features in the toponymy of Cornwall, with a significant contrast between English place-names prevalent in eastern Cornwall and Cornish place-names to the west of the Camel-Fowey river valleys, where English place-names are much less common. Hundreds of Cornish family names have an etymology in the Cornish language, the majority of which are derived from Cornish place-names. Long before the agreement of the Standard Written Form of Cornish in the 21st century, Late Cornish orthography in the Early Modern period usually followed Welsh to English transliteration, phonetically rendering C for K, I for Y, U for W, and Z for S. This meant that place names were adopted into English with spellings such as &#x27;Porthcurno&#x27; and &#x27;Penzance&#x27;; they are written and in the Standard Written Form of Cornish, agreed upon in 2008. Likewise words such as (&#x27;island&#x27;) can be found spelled as &quot;&quot; as at Ince Castle. These apparent mistransliterations can, however, reveal an insight into how names and places were actually pronounced, explaining, for example, how anglicised is still pronounced [ˈlansǝn] with emphasis on the first element, perhaps from Cornish , though the &quot;Concise Oxford Dictionary of English Place-Names&quot; considers this unlikely.

The following tables present some examples of Cornish place names and surnames and their anglicised versions:


== Samples ==
From the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:

From , the Cornish anthem:

From the wrestler&#x27;s oath:

== See also ==

* Anglo-Cornish, the Cornish dialect of the English language
* Bible translations into Cornish
* Breton language
* List of Celtic-language media
* The Cornish Language Council ()
* European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages
* Language revival
** Irish language revival
** Manx, another Celtic language subject to revival efforts
* Languages in the United Kingdom
* Cornish literature
* List of topics related to Cornwall

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* Bruch, Benjamin; Bock, Albert (2008) &quot;An Outline of the Standard Written Form of Cornish&quot;. Cornish Language Partnership
* Hodge, Pol (2001) &quot;Cornish Names&quot;. Truro: Dyllansow Fentenwynn 
* Jago, F. W. P., &quot;A Cornish Dictionary&quot; (1887) English Cornish dictionary
* Jenner, Henry, 
* Ellis, Peter B. (1971) &quot;The Story of the Cornish Language&quot;. 32 p. Truro: Tor Mark Press
* Ellis, Peter B. (1974) &quot;The Cornish Language and its Literature&quot;. ix, 230 p. London: Routledge &amp; Kegan Paul
* Everson, Michael (2007) &quot;A Proposed Standard Written Form of Cornish&quot;. Cornish Language Partnership Process
* Ferdinand, Siarl (2013). Brief History of the Cornish language, its Revival and its Current Situation. &quot;E-Keltoi&quot;, Vol. 2, 2 Dec pp. 199–227 
* Jackson, Kenneth (1953) &quot;Language and History in Early Britain: A chronological survey of the Brittonic languages, first to twelfth century a.D.&quot; Edinburgh Uuniverty Ppress; 2nd ed. Dublin: Four Courts Press (1994) has a new introduction by William Gillies
* Norris, Edwin, Sketch of Cornish grammar (1859) 
* Sandercock, Graham (1996) &quot;A Very Brief History of the Cornish Language&quot;. Hayle: 
* Stokes, Whitley, 
* Weatherhill, Craig (1995) &quot;Cornish Place Names &amp; Language&quot;. Wilmslow: Sigma Press (reissued in 1998, 2000 ; second revised edition 2007 )
* Weatherhill, Craig (2009) &quot;Concise Dictionary of Cornish Place-names&quot;; edited by Michael Everson. Westport, Co. Mayo: Evertype 
* Williams, G. P, The preverbal particle Re in Cornish (1908)

== External links ==

* A Handbook of the Cornish Language, by Henry Jenner A Project Gutenberg eBook
* Cornish Language Partnership website
* Endangered Languages Project: Cornish
* A Cornish Internet radio station in nascent state featuring weekly podcasts in Cornish
* Spellyans – Standard Written Form Cornish discussion list
* UdnFormScrefys&#x27; site for the proposed compromise orthography, Kernowek Standard
* List of localised software in Cornish
* – A Taste of Cornish – basic Cornish lessons hosted by BBC Cornwall
* Cornish Language Fellowship
* Lyver Pysadow Kemyn (1980) Portions of the Book of Common Prayer in Cornish
* Cornish today by Kenneth MacKinnon – from the BBC
* Bibel Kernewek Cornish Bible Translation Project
* An Index to the Historical Place Names of Cornwall
* A review of the Cornish revival
* Cornish language Sayings and Phrases

=== Dictionaries ===
* Gerlyver kernewek (Cornish dictionary)
* An English-Cornish Glossary in the Standard Written Form – Cornish Language Partnership
* &quot;: a Dictionary of the Ancient Celtic Language of Cornwall&quot; by Robert Williams, Llandovery, 1865.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="0" end="7" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598326" start="9" end="30" title="Standard Written Form" label="Standard Written Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612853" start="44" end="66" title="Southwestern Brittonic language" label="Southwestern Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="83" end="105" title="Celtic language family" label="Celtic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="118" end="123" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="128" end="134" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="166" end="182" title="Common Brittonic" label="Common Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="218" end="231" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="363" end="371" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="448" end="469" title="mutually intelligible" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="578" end="603" title="vernacular" label="common community language"/>
<link wikidata="Q38058796" start="771" end="778" title="extinct language" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494910" start="829" end="852" title="last speaker of the Cornish language" label="end of the 18th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171857" start="981" end="990" title="Cornish language revival" label="A revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1038" end="1044" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q335214" start="1074" end="1095" title="Critically endangered language" label="critically endangered"/>
<link wikidata="Q125421" start="1224" end="1239" title="second language" label="second-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="1335" end="1349" title="first language" label="first language"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="1394" end="1445" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q900642" start="1609" end="1628" title="Cornish literature" label="works of literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q3892190" start="1740" end="1753" title="music of Cornwall" label="Cornish music"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="1755" end="1771" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="1865" end="1874" title="multilingualism" label="bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="1991" end="1999" title="day care" label="day care"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612853" start="2051" end="2073" title="Southwestern Brittonic languages" label="Southwestern Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="2100" end="2114" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="2130" end="2152" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="2183" end="2196" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2238" end="2243" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="2245" end="2251" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="2253" end="2260" title="Cumbric" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q856383" start="2274" end="2281" title="Pictish" label="Pictish"/>
<link wikidata="Q38058796" start="2309" end="2316" title="extinct language" label="extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="2318" end="2333" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="2335" end="2340" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="2345" end="2349" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="2375" end="2383" title="Goidelic languages" label="Goidelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185261" start="2411" end="2422" title="Joseph Loth" label="Joseph Loth"/>
<link wikidata="Q128783" start="2607" end="2615" title="Quiberon" label="Quiberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q239908" start="2633" end="2650" title="Saint-Pol-de-Léon" label="Saint-Pol-de-Léon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058259" start="2667" end="2682" title="Kenneth H. Jackson" label="Kenneth Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="2968" end="2984" title="Common Brittonic" label="Common Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="3024" end="3038" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q277399" start="3050" end="3066" title="British Iron Age" label="British Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="3071" end="3083" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman period"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435247" start="3100" end="3130" title="Anglo-Saxon settlement of Britain" label="westward Anglo-Saxon expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="3201" end="3206" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23066" start="3211" end="3218" title="Cumbria" label="Cumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429157" start="3276" end="3293" title="Battle of Deorham" label="Battle of Deorham"/>
<link wikidata="Q593069" start="3312" end="3328" title="Western Brittonic languages" label="western dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="3353" end="3365" title="Welsh language" label="modern Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q35965" start="3386" end="3393" title="Cumbric language" label="Cumbric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612853" start="3401" end="3423" title="Southwestern Brittonic languages" label="Southwestern Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="3532" end="3540" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q105313" start="3686" end="3692" title="Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="3833" end="3841" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="3875" end="3880" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132324" start="4127" end="4132" title="Gloss (annotation)" label="gloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="4138" end="4143" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="4144" end="4154" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q102851" start="4161" end="4169" title="Boethius" label="Boethius"/>
<link wikidata="Q22000415" start="4286" end="4299" title="Andrew Breeze" label="Andrew Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936684" start="4459" end="4478" title="Bodmin manumissions" label="Bodmin manumissions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="4499" end="4510" title="Manumission" label="manumittors"/>
<link wikidata="Q271377" start="4667" end="4684" title="Ælfric of Eynsham" label="Ælfric of Eynsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q137651" start="4784" end="4810" title="Genesis creation narrative" label="Genesis creation narrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="4982" end="4991" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q983409" start="5052" end="5064" title="Edward Lhuyd" label="Edward Lhuyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q504546" start="5338" end="5350" title="assibilation" label="assibilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259437" start="5354" end="5365" title="dental stop" label="dental stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q900642" start="5821" end="5839" title="Cornish literature" label="Cornish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697669" start="6148" end="6163" title="Glasney College" label="Glasney College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025788" start="6169" end="6175" title="Penryn, Cornwall" label="Penryn"/>
<link wikidata="Q208628" start="6207" end="6221" title="Hagiography" label="hagiographical"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667001" start="6248" end="6256" title="Meriasek" label="Meriasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463930" start="6287" end="6289" title="Saint Kea" label="Ke"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665654" start="6372" end="6378" title="Tewdwr Mawr" label="Tewdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q101978" start="6517" end="6522" title="House of Tudor" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q675493" start="6529" end="6538" title="Henry VII of England" label="Henry VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="6542" end="6552" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q743506" start="7180" end="7193" title="Edmund Bonner" label="Bishop Bonner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3948779" start="7283" end="7291" title="St Allen" label="St Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691620" start="7297" end="7303" title="Crowan" label="Crowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241640" start="7457" end="7470" title="Andrew Boorde" label="Andrew Boorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4676703" start="7537" end="7559" title="Act of Uniformity 1549" label="Act of Uniformity 1549"/>
<link wikidata="Q499763" start="7822" end="7843" title="Prayer Book Rebellion" label="Prayer Book Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q500395" start="7923" end="7948" title="Cornish rebellion of 1497" label="Cornish rebellion of 1497"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184142" start="8303" end="8317" title="Philip Nichols" label="Philip Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q548910" start="8321" end="8335" title="Nicholas Udall" label="Nicholas Udall"/>
<link wikidata="Q199894" start="8444" end="8458" title="Thomas Cranmer" label="Thomas Cranmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="8570" end="8575" title="Latin language" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957789" start="8620" end="8636" title="Anthony Fletcher" label="Anthony Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772887" start="8962" end="8982" title="Anthony Kingston" label="Sir Anthony Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="9323" end="9331" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="9471" end="9476" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1727806" start="9693" end="9715" title="Peter Berresford Ellis" label="Peter Berresford Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018164" start="9845" end="9859" title="William Scawen" label="William Scawen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171857" start="9962" end="9978" title="Cornish alphabet" label="Cornish alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="10021" end="10029" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903164" start="10111" end="10124" title="Cornish Bible" label="Cornish Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q11770318" start="10154" end="10165" title="Mark Stoyle" label="Mark Stoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212501" start="10526" end="10533" title="Penwith" label="Penwith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212491" start="10538" end="10545" title="Kerrier" label="Kerrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324618" start="10685" end="10698" title="Richard Carew (antiquary)" label="Richard Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141254" start="11243" end="11252" title="Sardine" label="pilchards"/>
<link wikidata="Q110323857" start="11385" end="11420" title="Archæologia Britannica" label="&amp;quot;Archaeologia Britannica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q751813" start="11797" end="11805" title="St Levan" label="St Levan"/>
<link wikidata="Q667280" start="12084" end="12101" title="Daines Barrington" label="Daines Barrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182190" start="12562" end="12575" title="Cranken Rhyme" label="Cranken Rhyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q28360871" start="12660" end="12680" title="John Hobson Matthews" label="John Hobson Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328341" start="12701" end="12711" title="John Davey (Cornish speaker)" label="John Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948328" start="12725" end="12735" title="Boswednack" label="Boswednack"/>
<link wikidata="Q40634" start="12961" end="12973" title="Philology" label="philologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437124" start="13509" end="13525" title="Passive speaker (language)" label="passive speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311707" start="13527" end="13539" title="semi-speaker" label="semi-speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311707" start="13545" end="13555" title="rememberer" label="rememberer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3034030" start="13722" end="13737" title="Dolly Pentreath" label="Dolly Pentreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6494910" start="13758" end="13788" title="Last speaker of the Cornish language" label="last native speaker of Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328341" start="14095" end="14105" title="John Davey (Cornish speaker)" label="John Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395749" start="14460" end="14479" title="Robert Morton Nance" label="Robert Morton Nance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14922" end="14932" title="stratum (linguistics)#Substratum" label="substratum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672822" start="15041" end="15055" title="Celtic Revival" label="Celtic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710684" start="15420" end="15432" title="Henry Jenner" label="Henry Jenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395749" start="16064" end="16083" title="Robert Morton Nance" label="Robert Morton Nance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618048" start="16098" end="16113" title="Unified Cornish" label="Unified Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395643" start="16741" end="16751" title="Ken George" label="Ken George"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033526" start="16904" end="16930" title="phonemic orthography" label="morphophonemic orthography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778541" start="17170" end="17187" title="Nicholas Williams (poet)" label="Nicholas Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618066" start="17528" end="17543" title="Richard Gendall" label="Richard Gendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617932" start="18330" end="18358" title="Cornish Language Partnership" label="Cornish Language Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598326" start="18386" end="18407" title="Standard Written Form" label="Standard Written Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="18678" end="18686" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171848" start="18830" end="18846" title="Cornish diaspora" label="Cornish diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="18868" end="18882" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388053" start="19862" end="19879" title="Kenneth MacKinnon" label="Kenneth MacKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617932" start="19974" end="20002" title="Cornish Language Partnership" label="Cornish Language Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q25685206" start="20089" end="20100" title="Bert Biscoe" label="Bert Biscoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988083" start="20153" end="20173" title="Western Morning News" label="Western Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="20249" end="20265" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="20484" end="20514" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="20591" end="20594" title="Office for National Statistics" label="ONS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="21114" end="21134" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="21397" end="21448" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="21450" end="21456" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774189" start="21751" end="21767" title="Cornwall Council" label="Cornwall Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772829" start="22296" end="22313" title="Marriage Act 1949" label="Marriage Act 1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q506020" start="22471" end="22533" title="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities" label="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832963" start="22988" end="23001" title="British Latin" label="British Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49043" start="23107" end="23112" title="Thorn (letter)" label="thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q9993" start="23124" end="23127" title="eth" label="eth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377956" start="23139" end="23155" title="dental fricative" label="dental fricative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145858" start="23162" end="23166" title="wynn" label="wynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q935716" start="23623" end="23631" title="lenition" label="lenition"/>
<link wikidata="Q423449" start="23853" end="23857" title="Yogh" label="Yogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11175" start="25123" end="25133" title="circumflex" label="circumflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618048" start="25601" end="25616" title="Unified Cornish" label="Unified Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618036" start="26024" end="26038" title="Modern Cornish" label="Modern Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697791" start="26110" end="26125" title="Kernewek Kemmyn" label="Kernewek Kemmyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q661093" start="26136" end="26150" title="Morphophonology" label="morphophonemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598326" start="27066" end="27087" title="Standard Written Form" label="Standard Written Form"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394229" start="27327" end="27344" title="Kernowek Standard" label="Kernowek Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q504546" start="27874" end="27886" title="assibilation" label="assibilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207874" start="28041" end="28055" title="palatalization (sound change)" label="palatalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q27794621" start="28071" end="28084" title="rhotacism" label="rhotacization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239267" start="28373" end="28386" title="pre-stopped consonant" label="pre-occlusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="28612" end="28632" title="language revitalization" label="revitalised language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210319" start="28730" end="28745" title="Linguistic reconstruction" label="reconstructions"/>
<link wikidata="Q950464" start="28907" end="28917" title="Comparative method" label="comparison"/>
<link wikidata="Q983409" start="29000" end="29012" title="Edward Lhuyd" label="Edward Lhuyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q653649" start="29297" end="29309" title="Proto-Celtic language" label="Proto-Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="29340" end="29359" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="30564" end="30570" title="sheep" label="wether"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832963" start="30858" end="30871" title="British Latin" label="British Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2108642" start="32663" end="32675" title="periphrasis" label="periphrastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q557863" start="32996" end="33014" title="consonant mutation" label="consonant mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q166097" start="33021" end="33040" title="verb–subject–object" label="verb–subject–object"/>
<link wikidata="Q6030179" start="33053" end="33074" title="inflected preposition" label="inflected preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q557863" start="33237" end="33255" title="consonant mutation" label="consonant mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="33418" end="33423" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="33432" end="33437" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="33442" end="33446" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="33458" end="33473" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q935716" start="33598" end="33606" title="Lenition" label="Lenition"/>
<link wikidata="Q935716" start="33744" end="33758" title="Spirantization" label="Spirantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408267" start="33890" end="33900" title="Provection" label="Provection"/>
<link wikidata="Q103184" start="34412" end="34419" title="article (grammar)" label="article"/>
<link wikidata="Q162378" start="34810" end="34828" title="grammatical gender" label="grammatical gender"/>
<link wikidata="Q128234" start="34881" end="34885" title="grammatical case" label="case"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="35573" end="35583" title="grammatical conjugation" label="conjugated"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="35588" end="35594" title="Grammatical person" label="person"/>
<link wikidata="Q104083" start="35596" end="35602" title="grammatical number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q177691" start="35604" end="35609" title="grammatical tense" label="tense"/>
<link wikidata="Q184932" start="35614" end="35618" title="grammatical mood" label="mood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350145" start="35637" end="35648" title="verbal noun" label="verbal noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q318917" start="36053" end="36062" title="inflected language" label="inflected"/>
<link wikidata="Q474628" start="36067" end="36077" title="grammatical conjugation" label="conjugated"/>
<link wikidata="Q134316" start="36079" end="36090" title="preposition" label="preposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="36651" end="36654" title="Subject–verb–object" label="SVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q166097" start="36945" end="36948" title="Verb–subject–object" label="VSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993063" start="37528" end="37543" title="Celtic Congress" label="Celtic Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q226050" start="37548" end="37561" title="Celtic League (political organisation)" label="Celtic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171860" start="37960" end="37976" title="Cornish surnames" label="Cornish surnames"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401225" start="38401" end="38419" title="BBC Radio Cornwall" label="BBC Radio Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988083" start="38565" end="38585" title="Western Morning News" label="Western Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986593" start="39033" end="39054" title="Millennium Commission" label="Millennium Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q510191" start="39155" end="39196" title="European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages" label="European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055533" start="39490" end="39511" title="Celtic Media Festival" label="Celtic Media Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q724182" start="39523" end="39530" title="St Ives, Cornwall" label="St Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440865" start="39544" end="39564" title="Old Cornwall Society" label="Old Cornwall Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190486" start="39718" end="39733" title="Crying the Neck" label="Crying the Neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697773" start="39836" end="39845" title="Ordinalia" label="Ordinalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200599" start="39940" end="39953" title="plen-an-gwary" label="plen-an-gwary"/>
<link wikidata="Q941861" start="39957" end="39964" title="St Just in Penwith" label="St Just"/>
<link wikidata="Q16320185" start="40293" end="40307" title="Celts (modern)" label="Celtic culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072029" start="40821" end="40840" title="University of Wales" label="University of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="40959" end="40979" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q165980" start="41080" end="41100" title="University of Vienna" label="University of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="41115" end="41138" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260149" start="41278" end="41321" title="Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic, University of Cambridge" label="Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7268640" start="41668" end="41675" title="Qualifications and Credit Framework" label="level 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1711558" start="41695" end="41714" title="Plymouth University" label="Plymouth University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171960" start="41726" end="41742" title="Cornwall College (England)" label="Cornwall College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455871" start="42385" end="42391" title="day care" label="crèche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774403" start="42440" end="42448" title="Camborne" label="Camborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395643" start="42769" end="42779" title="Ken George" label="Ken George"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618066" start="42862" end="42877" title="Richard Gendall" label="Richard Gendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="43171" end="43177" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="43179" end="43186" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="43191" end="43198" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018164" start="43508" end="43522" title="William Scawen" label="William Scawen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242655" start="43970" end="43982" title="John Keigwin" label="John Keigwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025095" start="44126" end="44140" title="Nicholas Boson" label="Nicholas Boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q983409" start="44361" end="44373" title="Edward Lhuyd" label="Edward Lhuyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182731" start="44804" end="44817" title="John Whitaker (historian)" label="John Whitaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375700" start="44849" end="44863" title="Ruan Lanihorne" label="Ruan Lanihorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279134" start="45489" end="45503" title="Whitley Stokes (scholar)" label="Whitley Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496477" start="45714" end="45728" title="Fred W. P. Jago" label="Frederick Jago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617932" start="46799" end="46832" title="Cornish Language Partnership" label="Cornish Language Partnership MAGA"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="47380" end="47386" title="Brittany" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903164" start="47473" end="47510" title="Bible translations into Cornish" label="translation of the Bible into Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="47647" end="47660" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q41064" start="47665" end="47671" title="Psalms" label="Psalms"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927908" start="47702" end="47712" title="YouVersion" label="YouVersion"/>
<link wikidata="Q180803" start="48061" end="48066" title="Truro" label="Truro"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="48304" end="48341" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219561" start="48362" end="48393" title="Around the World in Eighty Days" label="Around the World in Eighty Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q185118" start="48414" end="48429" title="Treasure Island" label="Treasure Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q969970" start="48450" end="48470" title="The Railway Children" label="The Railway Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q45192" start="48491" end="48516" title="Hound of the Baskervilles" label="Hound of the Baskervilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q213019" start="48537" end="48558" title="The War of the Worlds" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q936276" start="48579" end="48602" title="The Wind in the Willows" label="The Wind in the Willows"/>
<link wikidata="Q955910" start="48623" end="48642" title="Three Men in a Boat" label="Three Men in a Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="48663" end="48712" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice in Wonderland and Through the Looking-Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q62879" start="48737" end="48754" title="A Christmas Carol" label="A Christmas Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q508541" start="48887" end="48895" title="Lyonesse" label="Lyonesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q21209155" start="48912" end="48929" title="Craig Weatherhill" label="Craig Weatherhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972398" start="49007" end="49011" title="Spot the Dog" label="Spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304537" start="49073" end="49086" title="Topsy and Tim" label="Topsy and Tim"/>
<link wikidata="Q744536" start="49111" end="49117" title="The Adventures of Tintin" label="Tintin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778541" start="49249" end="49266" title="Nicholas Williams (poet)" label="Nicholas Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="49289" end="49305" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q74287" start="49319" end="49329" title="The Hobbit" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401225" start="49574" end="49592" title="BBC Radio Cornwall" label="BBC Radio Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q478615" start="49760" end="49767" title="Holdall" label="Holdall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356289" start="49988" end="49996" title="Rod Lyon" label="Rod Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197792" start="50065" end="50074" title="Pirate FM" label="Pirate FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258591" start="50400" end="50419" title="Westward Television" label="Westward Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696977" start="50521" end="50542" title="Television South West" label="Television South West"/>
<link wikidata="Q426637" start="50594" end="50597" title="S4C" label="S4C"/>
<link wikidata="Q889888" start="50779" end="50785" title="Bodmin" label="Bodmin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050603" start="50966" end="50974" title="Deadwood (TV series)" label="Deadwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="51072" end="51077" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q561826" start="51143" end="51156" title="George Hearst" label="George Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952128" start="51313" end="51324" title="Hwerow Hweg" label="Hwerow Hweg"/>
<link wikidata="Q111940025" start="51418" end="51436" title="Trengellick Rising" label="Trengellick Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086964" start="51481" end="51491" title="Guy Potter" label="Guy Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q934413" start="52125" end="52138" title="Peter Warlock" label="Peter Warlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q223161" start="52239" end="52249" title="Aphex Twin" label="Aphex Twin"/>
<link wikidata="Q285553" start="52317" end="52323" title="Drukqs" label="Drukqs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050580" start="52500" end="52515" title="Gwenno Saunders" label="Gwenno Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="52763" end="52771" title="toponymy" label="toponymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598326" start="53158" end="53190" title="Standard Written Form" label="Standard Written Form of Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="53244" end="53256" title="Early Modern" label="Early Modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228615" start="53674" end="53685" title="Ince Castle" label="Ince Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="54168" end="54205" title="Universal Declaration of Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354339" start="54245" end="54260" title="Cornish wrestling" label="wrestler&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299229" start="54286" end="54299" title="Anglo-Cornish" label="Anglo-Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903164" start="54347" end="54378" title="Bible translations into Cornish" label="Bible translations into Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="54381" end="54396" title="Breton language" label="Breton language"/>
<link wikidata="Q390043" start="54399" end="54428" title="List of Celtic-language media" label="List of Celtic-language media"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618018" start="54431" end="54459" title="The Cornish Language Council" label="The Cornish Language Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="54465" end="54516" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q844244" start="54519" end="54535" title="Language revival" label="Language revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4153218" start="54539" end="54561" title="Gaelic revival" label="Irish language revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="54565" end="54569" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217446" start="54624" end="54655" title="Languages in the United Kingdom" label="Languages in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q900642" start="54658" end="54676" title="Cornish literature" label="Cornish literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q20979640" start="54679" end="54713" title="List of topics related to Cornwall" label="List of topics related to Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496477" start="54961" end="54975" title="Fred W. P. Jago" label="Jago, F. W. P."/>
<link wikidata="Q1727806" start="55164" end="55179" title="Peter Berresford Ellis" label="Ellis, Peter B."/>
<link wikidata="Q1508259" start="55259" end="55285" title="Routledge" label="Routledge &amp;amp; Kegan Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q285609" start="56241" end="56256" title="Michael Everson" label="Michael Everson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22673" start="56429" end="56446" title="Project Gutenberg" label="Project Gutenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="57034" end="57037" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4617932" start="57339" end="57367" title="Cornish Language Partnership" label="Cornish Language Partnership"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6132" wikidata="Q652567" url="?curid=6132" title="Complexity theory">
<text>Complexity theory may refer to:

==Science and technology==
* Computational complexity theory, a field in theoretical computer science and mathematics
* Complex systems theory, the study of the complexity in context of complex systems
* Assembly theory, a way of characterizing extraterrestrial molecular complexity to assess the probability of the presence of life

==Other uses==
* Complexity economics, the application of complexity theory to economics
* Complexity theory and organizations, the application of complexity theory to strategy

==See also==
* Computational complexity
* Complexity (disambiguation)
* Systems theory
* Complex adaptive system, a special case of complex systems
* Complex network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652567" start="0" end="17" title="Complexity theory" label="Complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="62" end="93" title="Computational complexity theory" label="Computational complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q854457" start="219" end="234" title="complex systems" label="complex systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q107556073" start="237" end="252" title="Assembly theory" label="Assembly theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156626" start="384" end="404" title="Complexity economics" label="Complexity economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156629" start="458" end="493" title="Complexity theory and organizations" label="Complexity theory and organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157286" start="560" end="584" title="Computational complexity" label="Computational complexity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156623" start="587" end="614" title="Complexity (disambiguation)" label="Complexity (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q269699" start="617" end="631" title="Systems theory" label="Systems theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q581233" start="634" end="657" title="Complex adaptive system" label="Complex adaptive system"/>
<link wikidata="Q665189" start="695" end="710" title="Complex network" label="Complex network"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6134" wikidata="Q192082" url="?curid=6134" title="Charybdis">
<text>Charybdis (; , ; , ) is a sea monster in Greek mythology. Charybdis, along with the sea monster Scylla, appears as a challenge to epic characters such as Odysseus, Jason, and Aeneas. Scholarship locates her in the Strait of Messina.

The idiom &quot;between Scylla and Charybdis&quot; has come to mean being forced to choose between two similarly dangerous situations.

==Description==

The sea monster Charybdis was believed to live under a small rock on one side of a narrow channel. Opposite her was Scylla, another sea monster, who lived inside a much larger rock. The sides of the strait were within an arrow-shot of each other, and sailors attempting to avoid one of them would come in reach of the other. To be &quot;between Scylla and Charybdis&quot; therefore means to be presented with two opposite dangers, the task being to find a route that avoids both. Three times a day, Charybdis swallowed a huge amount of water, before belching it back out again, creating large whirlpools capable of dragging a ship underwater. In some variations of the story, Charybdis was simply a large whirlpool instead of a sea monster.

Through the descriptions of Greek mythical chroniclers and Greek historians such as Thucydides, modern scholars generally agree that Charybdis was said to have been located in the Strait of Messina, off the coast of Sicily and opposite a rock on the mainland identified with Scylla. A whirlpool does exist there, caused by currents meeting, but it is dangerous only to small craft in extreme conditions.

== Family ==
Another myth makes Charybdis the daughter of Poseidon and Gaia and living as a loyal servant to her father.

==Mythology==

=== Origin ===
Charybdis aided her father Poseidon in his feud with her paternal uncle Zeus and, as such, helped him engulf lands and islands in water. Zeus, angry over the land she stole from him, sent her to the bottom of the sea with a thunderbolt; from the sea bed, she drank the water from the sea thrice a day, creating whirlpools. She lingered on a rock with Scylla facing her directly on another rock, making a strait.

In some myths, Charybdis was a voracious woman who stole oxen from Heracles, and was hurled by the thunderbolt of Zeus into the sea, where she retained her voracious nature.

===The &quot;Odyssey&quot;===
 Odysseus faced both Charybdis and Scylla while rowing through a narrow channel. He ordered his men to avoid Charybdis, thus forcing them to pass near Scylla, which resulted in the deaths of six of his men. Later, stranded on a raft, Odysseus was swept back through the strait and passed near Charybdis. His raft was sucked into her maw, but he survived by clinging to a fig tree growing on a rock over her lair. On the next outflow of water, when his raft was expelled, Odysseus recovered it and paddled away safely.

===Jason and the Argonauts===
The Argonauts were able to avoid both dangers because Hera ordered the Nereid Thetis to guide them through the perilous passage.
===The &quot;Aeneid&quot;===
In the &quot;Aeneid&quot;, the Trojans are warned by Helenus of Scylla and Charybdis, and are advised to avoid them by sailing around Pachynus point (Cape Passero) rather than risk the strait. Later, however, they find themselves passing Etna, and have to row for their lives to escape Charybdis.

===Aesop===
Aristotle mentions in his &quot;Meteorologica&quot; that Aesop once teased a ferryman by telling him a myth concerning Charybdis. With one gulp of the sea, she brought the mountains to view; islands appeared after the next. The third is yet to come and will dry the sea altogether, thus depriving the ferryman of his livelihood.

==See also==
*Icefalls

==Notes==
==References==
*Apollonius Rhodius, &quot;Argonautica&quot; translated by Robert Cooper Seaton (1853–1915), R. C. Loeb Classical Library Volume 001. London, William Heinemann Ltd, 1912. Online version at the Topos Text Project.
*Apollonius Rhodius, &quot;Argonautica&quot;. George W. Mooney. London. Longmans, Green. 1912. Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.
*Homer, &quot;The Odyssey&quot; with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919. . Online version at the Perseus Digital Library. Greek text available from the same website.
*Maurus Servius Honoratus, &quot;In Vergilii carmina comentarii. Servii Grammatici qui feruntur in Vergilii carmina commentarii;&quot; recensuerunt Georgius Thilo et Hermannus Hagen. Georgius Thilo. Leipzig. B. G. Teubner. 1881. Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

==Further reading==
*Smith, William; &quot;Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology&quot;, London (1873). &quot;Scylla&quot; 1.

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192082" start="0" end="9" title="Charybdis" label="Charybdis"/>
<link wikidata="Q920028" start="26" end="37" title="sea monster" label="sea monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="41" end="56" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q193115" start="96" end="102" title="Scylla" label="Scylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="154" end="162" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="164" end="169" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q82732" start="175" end="181" title="Aeneas" label="Aeneas"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="214" end="231" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330140" start="250" end="278" title="between Scylla and Charybdis" label="between Scylla and Charybdis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193115" start="503" end="509" title="Scylla" label="Scylla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330140" start="724" end="752" title="between Scylla and Charybdis" label="between Scylla and Charybdis"/>
<link wikidata="Q607538" start="1092" end="1101" title="whirlpool" label="whirlpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q41683" start="1213" end="1223" title="Thucydides" label="Thucydides"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="1309" end="1326" title="Strait of Messina" label="Strait of Messina"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="1336" end="1341" title="coast" label="coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460" start="1345" end="1351" title="Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="1592" end="1600" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93172" start="1605" end="1609" title="Gaia (mythology)" label="Gaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="2166" end="2174" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q47231" start="2305" end="2313" title="Odysseus" label="Odysseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q165510" start="2857" end="2866" title="Argonauts" label="Argonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q38012" start="2907" end="2911" title="Hera" label="Hera"/>
<link wikidata="Q54230" start="2924" end="2930" title="Nereid" label="Nereid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="2931" end="2937" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q60220" start="3024" end="3030" title="Aeneid" label="Aeneid"/>
<link wikidata="Q729332" start="3064" end="3071" title="Helenus" label="Helenus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034750" start="3161" end="3173" title="Cape Passero" label="Cape Passero"/>
<link wikidata="Q134705" start="3192" end="3202" title="Strait of Messina" label="the strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q16990" start="3249" end="3253" title="Mount Etna" label="Etna"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="3321" end="3330" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q43423" start="3378" end="3383" title="Aesop" label="Aesop"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680031" start="3389" end="3406" title="Aesop and the Ferryman" label="teased a ferryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313329" start="3665" end="3673" title="Charybdis Icefalls" label="Icefalls"/>
<link wikidata="Q192638" start="3701" end="3719" title="Apollonius of Rhodes" label="Apollonius Rhodius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="4062" end="4067" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q35160" start="4069" end="4092" title="Odyssey" label="&amp;quot;The Odyssey&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q355350" start="4333" end="4357" title="Maurus Servius Honoratus" label="Maurus Servius Honoratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q559411" start="4630" end="4644" title="William Smith (lexicographer)" label="Smith, William"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210336" start="4652" end="4705" title="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology" label="Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6136" wikidata="Q2025" url="?curid=6136" title="Carbon monoxide">
<text>Carbon monoxide (chemical formula CO) is a poisonous, flammable gas that is colorless, odorless, tasteless, and slightly less dense than air. Carbon monoxide consists of one carbon atom and one oxygen atom connected by a triple bond. It is the simplest carbon oxide. In coordination complexes, the carbon monoxide ligand is called &quot;carbonyl&quot;. It is a key ingredient in many processes in industrial chemistry.

The most common source of carbon monoxide is the partial combustion of carbon-containing compounds. Numerous environmental and biological sources generate carbon monoxide. In industry, carbon monoxide is important in the production of many compounds, including drugs, fragrances, and fuels. Upon emission into the atmosphere, carbon monoxide affects several processes that contribute to climate change.

Indoors CO is one of the most acutely toxic contaminants affecting indoor air quality. CO may be emitted from tobacco smoke and generated from malfunctioning fuel burning stoves (wood, kerosene, natural gas, propane) and fuel burning heating systems (wood, oil, natural gas) and from blocked flues connected to these appliances. Carbon monoxide poisoning is the most common type of fatal air poisoning in many countries.

Carbon monoxide has important biological roles across phylogenetic kingdoms. It is produced by many organisms, including humans. In mammalian physiology, carbon monoxide is a classical example of hormesis where low concentrations serve as an endogenous neurotransmitter (gasotransmitter) and high concentrations are toxic resulting in carbon monoxide poisoning. It is isoelectronic with both cyanide anion CN− and molecular nitrogen N2.

==Physical and chemical properties==
Carbon monoxide is the simplest oxocarbon and is isoelectronic with other triply bonded diatomic species possessing 10 valence electrons, including the cyanide anion, the nitrosonium cation, boron monofluoride and molecular nitrogen. It has a molar mass of 28.0, which, according to the ideal gas law, makes it slightly less dense than air, whose average molar mass is 28.8.

The carbon and oxygen are connected by a triple bond that consists of a net two pi bonds and one sigma bond. The bond length between the carbon atom and the oxygen atom is 112.8 pm. This bond length is consistent with a triple bond, as in molecular nitrogen (N2), which has a similar bond length (109.76 pm) and nearly the same molecular mass. Carbon–oxygen double bonds are significantly longer, 120.8 pm in formaldehyde, for example. The boiling point (82 K) and melting point (68 K) are very similar to those of N2 (77 K and 63 K, respectively). The bond-dissociation energy of 1072 kJ/mol is stronger than that of N2 (942 kJ/mol) and represents the strongest chemical bond known.

The ground electronic state of carbon monoxide is a singlet state since there are no unpaired electrons.

===Bonding and dipole moment===
The strength of the C-O bond in carbon monoxide is indicated by the high frequency of its vibration, 2143 cm−1. For comparison, organic carbonyls such as ketones and esters absorb at around 1700 cm−1.

Carbon and oxygen together have a total of 10 electrons in the valence shell. Following the octet rule for both carbon and oxygen, the two atoms form a triple bond, with six shared electrons in three bonding molecular orbitals, rather than the usual double bond found in organic carbonyl compounds. Since four of the shared electrons come from the oxygen atom and only two from carbon, one bonding orbital is occupied by two electrons from oxygen, forming a dative or dipolar bond. This causes a C←O polarization of the molecule, with a small negative charge on carbon and a small positive charge on oxygen. The other two bonding orbitals are each occupied by one electron from carbon and one from oxygen, forming (polar) covalent bonds with a reverse C→O polarization since oxygen is more electronegative than carbon. In the free carbon monoxide molecule, a net negative charge δ– remains at the carbon end and the molecule has a small dipole moment of 0.122 D.

The molecule is therefore asymmetric: oxygen is more electron dense than carbon and is also slightly positively charged compared to carbon being negative. 

Carbon monoxide has a computed fractional bond order of 2.6, indicating that the &quot;third&quot; bond is important but constitutes somewhat less than a full bond. Thus, in valence bond terms, –C≡O+ is the most important structure, while :C=O is non-octet, but has a neutral formal charge on each atom and represents the second most important resonance contributor. Because of the lone pair and divalence of carbon in this resonance structure, carbon monoxide is often considered to be an extraordinarily stabilized carbene. Isocyanides are compounds in which the O is replaced by an NR (R = alkyl or aryl) group and have a similar bonding scheme.

If carbon monoxide acts as a ligand, the polarity of the dipole may reverse with a net negative charge on the oxygen end, depending on the structure of the coordination complex.
See also the section &quot;&quot;Coordination chemistry&quot;&quot; below.

===Bond polarity and oxidation state===
Theoretical and experimental studies show that, despite the greater electronegativity of oxygen, the dipole moment points from the more-negative carbon end to the more-positive oxygen end. The three bonds are in fact polar covalent bonds that are strongly polarized. The calculated polarization toward the oxygen atom is 71% for the σ-bond and 77% for both π-bonds.

The oxidation state of carbon in carbon monoxide is +2 in each of these structures. It is calculated by counting all the bonding electrons as belonging to the more electronegative oxygen. Only the two non-bonding electrons on carbon are assigned to carbon. In this count, carbon then has only two valence electrons in the molecule compared to four in the free atom.

==Occurrence==

Carbon monoxide occurs in various natural and artificial environments. Photochemical degradation of plant matter for example generates an estimated 60 million tons/year. Typical concentrations in parts per million are as follows:

===Atmospheric presence===

Carbon monoxide (CO) is present in small amounts (about 80 ppb) in the Earth&#x27;s atmosphere. Most of the rest comes from chemical reactions with organic compounds emitted by human activities and natural origins due to photochemical reactions in the troposphere that generate about 5 × 1012 kilograms per year. Other natural sources of CO include volcanoes, forest and bushfires, and other miscellaneous forms of combustion such as fossil fuels. Small amounts are also emitted from the ocean, and from geological activity because carbon monoxide occurs dissolved in molten volcanic rock at high pressures in the Earth&#x27;s mantle. Because natural sources of carbon monoxide vary from year to year, it is difficult to accurately measure natural emissions of the gas.

Carbon monoxide has an indirect effect on radiative forcing by elevating concentrations of direct greenhouse gases, including methane and tropospheric ozone. CO can react chemically with other atmospheric constituents (primarily the hydroxyl radical, •OH) that would otherwise destroy methane. Through natural processes in the atmosphere, it is oxidized to carbon dioxide and ozone. Carbon monoxide is short-lived in the atmosphere (with an average lifetime of about one to two months), and spatially variable in concentration.

Due to its long lifetime in the mid-troposphere, carbon monoxide is also used as a tracer for pollutant plumes.

=== Astronomy ===
Beyond Earth, carbon monoxide is the second-most common diatomic molecule in the interstellar medium, after molecular hydrogen. Because of its asymmetry, this polar molecule produces far brighter spectral lines than the hydrogen molecule, making CO much easier to detect. Interstellar CO was first detected with radio telescopes in 1970. It is now the most commonly used tracer of molecular gas in general in the interstellar medium of galaxies, as molecular hydrogen can only be detected using ultraviolet light, which requires space telescopes. Carbon monoxide observations provide much of the information about the molecular clouds in which most stars form.

Beta Pictoris, the second brightest star in the constellation Pictor, shows an excess of infrared emission compared to normal stars of its type, which is caused by large quantities of dust and gas (including carbon monoxide) near the star.

In the atmosphere of Venus carbon monoxide occurs as a result of the photodissociation of carbon dioxide by electromagnetic radiation of wavelengths shorter than 169 nm. It has also been identified spectroscopically on the surface of Neptune&#x27;s moon Triton.

Solid carbon monoxide is a component of comets. The volatile or &quot;ice&quot; component of Halley&#x27;s Comet is about 15% CO. At room temperature and at atmospheric pressure, carbon monoxide is actually only metastable (see Boudouard reaction) and the same is true at low temperatures where CO and are solid, but nevertheless it can exist for billions of years in comets. There is very little CO in the atmosphere of Pluto, which seems to have been formed from comets. This may be because there is (or was) liquid water inside Pluto.

Carbon monoxide can react with water to form carbon dioxide and hydrogen:

:CO + H2O → + 

This is called the water-gas shift reaction when occurring in the gas phase, but it can also take place (very slowly) in an aqueous solution.
If the hydrogen partial pressure is high enough (for instance in an underground sea), formic acid will be formed:

:CO + H2O → HCOOH

These reactions can take place in a few million years even at temperatures such as found on Pluto.

== Pollution and health effects ==

=== Urban pollution ===
Carbon monoxide is a temporary atmospheric pollutant in some urban areas, chiefly from the exhaust of internal combustion engines (including vehicles, portable and back-up generators, lawnmowers, power washers, etc.), but also from incomplete combustion of various other fuels (including wood, coal, charcoal, oil, paraffin, propane, natural gas, and trash).

Large CO pollution events can be observed from space over cities.

==== Role in ground level ozone formation ====
Carbon monoxide is, along with aldehydes, part of the series of cycles of chemical reactions that form photochemical smog. It reacts with hydroxyl radical (•OH) to produce a radical intermediate •HOCO, which rapidly transfers its radical hydrogen to O2 to form peroxy radical (HO2•) and carbon dioxide (). Peroxy radical subsequently reacts with nitrogen oxide (NO) to form nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and hydroxyl radical. NO2 gives O(3P) via photolysis, thereby forming O3 following reaction with O2.
Since hydroxyl radical is formed during the formation of NO2, the balance of the sequence of chemical reactions starting with carbon monoxide and leading to the formation of ozone is:
:CO + 2O2 + hν → + O3
(where hν refers to the photon of light absorbed by the NO2 molecule in the sequence)

Although the creation of NO2 is the critical step leading to low level ozone formation, it also increases this ozone in another, somewhat mutually exclusive way, by reducing the quantity of NO that is available to react with ozone.

=== Indoor air pollution ===

Carbon monoxide is one of the most acutely toxic indoor air contaminants. Carbon monoxide may be emitted from tobacco smoke and generated from malfunctioning fuel burning stoves (wood, kerosene, natural gas, propane) and fuel burning heating systems (wood, oil, natural gas) and from blocked flues connected to these appliances. In developed countries the main sources of indoor CO emission come from cooking and heating devices that burn fossil fuels and are faulty, incorrectly installed or poorly maintained. Appliance malfunction may be due to faulty installation or lack of maintenance and proper use. In low- and middle-income countries the most common sources of CO in homes are burning biomass fuels and cigarette smoke.

==== Mining ====
Miners refer to carbon monoxide as &quot;whitedamp&quot; or the &quot;silent killer&quot;. It can be found in confined areas of poor ventilation in both surface mines and underground mines. The most common sources of carbon monoxide in mining operations are the internal combustion engine and explosives; however, in coal mines, carbon monoxide can also be found due to the low-temperature oxidation of coal. The idiom &quot;Canary in the coal mine&quot; pertained to an early warning of a carbon monoxide presence.

===Health effects===

Carbon monoxide poisoning is the most common type of fatal air poisoning in many countries. Acute exposure can also lead to long-term neurological effects such as cognitive and behavioural changes. Severe CO poisoning may lead to unconsciousness, coma and death. Chronic exposure to low concentrations of carbon monoxide may lead to lethargy, headaches, nausea, flu-like symptoms and neuropsychological and cardiovascular issues.

== Chemistry ==
Carbon monoxide has a wide range of functions across all disciplines of chemistry. The four premier categories of reactivity involve metal-carbonyl catalysis, radical chemistry, cation and anion chemistries.

===Coordination chemistry===


Most metals form coordination complexes containing covalently attached carbon monoxide. These derivatives, which are called metal carbonyls, tend to be more robust when the metal is in lower oxidation states. For example iron pentacarbonyl (Fe(CO)5) is an air-stable, distillable liquid. Nickel carbonyl is a metal carbonyl complex that forms by the direct combination of carbon monoxide with the metal:
: Ni + 4 CO → Ni(CO)4 (1 bar, 55 °C)
These volatile complexes are often highly toxic. Some metal–CO complexes are prepared by decarbonylation of organic solvents, not from CO. For instance, iridium trichloride and triphenylphosphine react in boiling 2-methoxyethanol or DMF to afford IrCl(CO)(PPh3)2.

As a ligand, CO binds through carbon, forming a kind of triple bond. The lone pair on the carbon atom donates electron density to form a M-CO sigma bond. The two π* orbitals on CO bind to filled metal orbitals. The effect is related to the Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson model. The effects of the quasi-triple M-C bond is reflected in the infrared spectrum of these complexes. Whereas free CO vibrates at 2143 cm-1, its complexes tend to absorb near 1950 cm-1.
===Organic and main group chemistry===
In the presence of strong acids, alkenes react with carboxylic acids. Hydrolysis of this species (an acylium ion) gives the carboxylic acid, a net process known as the Koch–Haaf reaction. In the Gattermann–Koch reaction, arenes are converted to benzaldehyde derivatives in the presence of CO, AlCl3, and HCl.

A mixture of hydrogen gas and CO reacts with alkenes to give aldehydes. The process requires the presence of metal catalysts.

With main group reagents, CO undergoes several noteworthy reactions. Chlorination of CO is the industrial route to the important compound phosgene. With borane CO forms the adduct H3BCO, which is isoelectronic with the acylium cation [H3CCO]+. CO reacts with sodium to give products resulting from C−C coupling such as sodium acetylenediolate 2·. It reacts with molten potassium to give a mixture of an organometallic compound, potassium acetylenediolate 2·, potassium benzenehexolate 6, and potassium rhodizonate 2·.

The compounds cyclohexanehexone or triquinoyl (C6O6) and cyclopentanepentone or leuconic acid (C5O5), which so far have been obtained only in trace amounts, can be regarded as polymers of carbon monoxide. At pressures exceeding 5 GPa, carbon monoxide converts to polycarbonyl, a solid polymer that is metastable at atmospheric pressure but is explosive.

==== Laboratory preparation ====
Carbon monoxide is conveniently produced in the laboratory by the dehydration of formic acid or oxalic acid, for example with concentrated sulfuric acid. Another method is heating an intimate mixture of powdered zinc metal and calcium carbonate, which releases CO and leaves behind zinc oxide and calcium oxide:

:Zn + CaCO3 → ZnO + CaO + CO

Silver nitrate and iodoform also afford carbon monoxide:

:CHI3 + 3AgNO3 + H2O → 3HNO3 + CO + 3AgI

Finally, metal oxalate salts release CO upon heating, leaving a carbonate as byproduct:

== Production ==
Thermal combustion is the most common source for carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is produced from the partial oxidation of carbon-containing compounds; it forms when there is not enough oxygen to produce carbon dioxide (), such as when operating a stove or an internal combustion engine in an enclosed space.

A large quantity of CO byproduct is formed during the oxidative processes for the production of chemicals. For this reason, the process off-gases have to be purified.

Many methods have been developed for carbon monoxide production.

===Industrial production===
A major industrial source of CO is producer gas, a mixture containing mostly carbon monoxide and nitrogen, formed by combustion of carbon in air at high temperature when there is an excess of carbon. In an oven, air is passed through a bed of coke. The initially produced equilibrates with the remaining hot carbon to give CO. The reaction of with carbon to give CO is described as the Boudouard reaction. Above 800 °C, CO is the predominant product:

: (g) + C (s) → 2 CO (g) (Δ&quot;H&quot;r = 170 kJ/mol)

Another source is &quot;water gas&quot;, a mixture of hydrogen and carbon monoxide produced via the endothermic reaction of steam and carbon:

:H2O (g) + C (s) → H2 (g) + CO (g) (Δ&quot;H&quot;r = 131 kJ/mol)

Other similar &quot;synthesis gases&quot; can be obtained from natural gas and other fuels.

Carbon monoxide can also be produced by high-temperature electrolysis of carbon dioxide with solid oxide electrolyzer cells. One method developed at DTU Energy uses a cerium oxide catalyst and does not have any issues of fouling of the catalyst.

:2 → 2 CO + O2

Carbon monoxide is also a byproduct of the reduction of metal oxide ores with carbon, shown in a simplified form as follows:

:MO + C → M + CO

Carbon monoxide is also produced by the direct oxidation of carbon in a limited supply of oxygen or air.

:2 C + O2 → 2 CO

Since CO is a gas, the reduction process can be driven by heating, exploiting the positive (favorable) entropy of reaction. The Ellingham diagram shows that CO formation is favored over in high temperatures.

==Use==

===Chemical industry===
Carbon monoxide is an industrial gas that has many applications in bulk chemicals manufacturing. Large quantities of aldehydes are produced by the hydroformylation reaction of alkenes, carbon monoxide, and H2. Hydroformylation is coupled to the Shell higher olefin process to give precursors to detergents.

Phosgene, useful for preparing isocyanates, polycarbonates, and polyurethanes, is produced by passing purified carbon monoxide and chlorine gas through a bed of porous activated carbon, which serves as a catalyst. World production of this compound was estimated to be 2.74 million tonnes in 1989.
:CO + Cl2 → COCl2
Methanol is produced by the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide. In a related reaction, the hydrogenation of carbon monoxide is coupled to C−C bond formation, as in the Fischer–Tropsch process where carbon monoxide is hydrogenated to liquid hydrocarbon fuels. This technology allows coal or biomass to be converted to diesel.

In the Cativa process, carbon monoxide and methanol react in the presence of a homogeneous iridium catalyst and hydroiodic acid to give acetic acid. This process is responsible for most of the industrial production of acetic acid.

===Metallurgy===
Carbon monoxide is a strong reductive agent and has been used in pyrometallurgy to reduce metals from ores since ancient times. Carbon monoxide strips oxygen off metal oxides, reducing them to pure metal in high temperatures, forming carbon dioxide in the process. Carbon monoxide is not usually supplied as is, in the gaseous phase, in the reactor, but rather it is formed in high temperature in presence of oxygen-carrying ore, or a carboniferous agent such as coke, and high temperature. The blast furnace process is a typical example of a process of reduction of metal from ore with carbon monoxide.

Likewise, blast furnace gas collected at the top of blast furnace, still contains some 10% to 30% of carbon monoxide, and is used as fuel on Cowper stoves and on Siemens-Martin furnaces on open hearth steelmaking.

===Proposed use as a rocket fuel ===
Carbon monoxide has been proposed for use as a fuel on Mars by NASA researcher Geoffrey Landis. Carbon monoxide/oxygen engines have been suggested for early surface transportation use as both carbon monoxide and oxygen can be straightforwardly produced from the carbon dioxide atmosphere of Mars by zirconia electrolysis, without using any Martian water resources to obtain hydrogen, which would be needed to make methane or any hydrogen-based fuel.

Landis also proposed manufacturing the fuel from the similar carbon dioxide atmosphere of Venus for a sample return mission, in combination with solar-powered UAVs and rocket balloon ascent.

==Biological and physiological properties==

===Physiology===

Carbon monoxide is a bioactive molecule which acts as a gaseous signaling molecule. It is naturally produced by many enzymatic and non-enzymatic pathways, the best understood of which is the catabolic action of heme oxygenase on the heme derived from hemoproteins such as hemoglobin. Following the first report that carbon monoxide is a normal neurotransmitter in 1993, carbon monoxide has received significant clinical attention as a biological regulator.

Because of carbon monoxide&#x27;s role in the body, abnormalities in its metabolism have been linked to a variety of diseases, including neurodegenerations, hypertension, heart failure, and pathological inflammation. In many tissues, carbon monoxide acts as anti-inflammatory, vasodilatory, and encouragers of neovascular growth. In animal model studies, carbon monoxide reduced the severity of experimentally induced bacterial sepsis, pancreatitis, hepatic ischemia/reperfusion injury, colitis, osteoarthritis, lung injury, lung transplantation rejection, and neuropathic pain while promoting skin wound healing. Therefore, there is significant interest in the therapeutic potential of carbon monoxide becoming pharmaceutical agent and clinical standard of care.

====Medicine====
Studies involving carbon monoxide have been conducted in many laboratories throughout the world for its anti-inflammatory and cytoprotective properties. These properties have the potential to be used to prevent the development of a series of pathological conditions including ischemia reperfusion injury, transplant rejection, atherosclerosis, severe sepsis, severe malaria, or autoimmunity. Many pharmaceutical drug delivery initiatives have developed methods to safely administer carbon monoxide, and subsequent controlled clinical trials have evaluated the therapeutic effect of carbon monoxide.

===Microbiology===
Microbiota may also utilize carbon monoxide as a gasotransmitter. Carbon monoxide sensing is a signaling pathway facilitated by proteins such as CooA. The scope of the biological roles for carbon monoxide sensing is still unknown.

The human microbiome produces, consumes, and responds to carbon monoxide. For example, in certain bacteria, carbon monoxide is produced via the reduction of carbon dioxide by the enzyme carbon monoxide dehydrogenase with favorable bioenergetics to power downstream cellular operations. In another example, carbon monoxide is a nutrient for methanogenic archaea which reduce it to methane using hydrogen.

Carbon monoxide has certain antimicrobial properties which have been studied to treat against infectious diseases.

====Food science====
Carbon monoxide is used in modified atmosphere packaging systems in the US, mainly with fresh meat products such as beef, pork, and fish to keep them looking fresh. The benefit is two-fold, carbon monoxide protects against microbial spoilage and it enhances the meat color for consumer appeal. The carbon monoxide combines with myoglobin to form carboxymyoglobin, a bright-cherry-red pigment. Carboxymyoglobin is more stable than the oxygenated form of myoglobin, oxymyoglobin, which can become oxidized to the brown pigment metmyoglobin. This stable red color can persist much longer than in normally packaged meat. Typical levels of carbon monoxide used in the facilities that use this process are between 0.4% and 0.5%.

The technology was first given &quot;generally recognized as safe&quot; (GRAS) status by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in 2002 for use as a secondary packaging system, and does not require labeling. In 2004, the FDA approved CO as primary packaging method, declaring that CO does not mask spoilage odor. The process is currently unauthorized in many other countries, including Japan, Singapore, and the European Union.

=== Weaponization ===
In ancient history, Hannibal executed Roman prisoners with coal fumes during the Second Punic War.

Carbon monoxide had been used for genocide during the Holocaust at some extermination camps, the most notable by gas vans in Chełmno, and in the Action T4 &quot;euthanasia&quot; program.

==History==
=== Prehistory ===
Humans have maintained a complex relationship with carbon monoxide since first learning to control fire circa 800,000 BC. Early humans probably discovered the toxicity of carbon monoxide poisoning upon introducing fire into their dwellings. The early development of metallurgy and smelting technologies emerging circa 6,000 BC through the Bronze Age likewise plagued humankind from carbon monoxide exposure. Apart from the toxicity of carbon monoxide, indigenous Native Americans may have experienced the neuroactive properties of carbon monoxide through shamanistic fireside rituals.

=== Ancient history ===
Early civilizations developed mythological tales to explain the origin of fire, such as Prometheus from Greek mythology who shared fire with humans. Aristotle (384–322 BC) first recorded that burning coals produced toxic fumes. Greek physician Galen (129–199 AD) speculated that there was a change in the composition of the air that caused harm when inhaled, and many others of the era developed a basis of knowledge about carbon monoxide in the context of coal fume toxicity. Cleopatra may have died from carbon monoxide poisoning.

=== Pre–industrial revolution ===
Georg Ernst Stahl mentioned &quot;carbonarii halitus&quot; in 1697 in reference to toxic vapors thought to be carbon monoxide. Friedrich Hoffmann conducted the first modern scientific investigation into carbon monoxide poisoning from coal in 1716. Herman Boerhaave conducted the first scientific experiments on the effect of carbon monoxide (coal fumes) on animals in the 1730s.

Joseph Priestley is considered to have first synthesized carbon monoxide in 1772. Carl Wilhelm Scheele similarly isolated carbon monoxide from charcoal in 1773 and thought it could be the carbonic entity making fumes toxic. Torbern Bergman isolated carbon monoxide from oxalic acid in 1775. Later in 1776, the French chemist produced CO by heating zinc oxide with coke, but mistakenly concluded that the gaseous product was hydrogen, as it burned with a blue flame. In the presence of oxygen, including atmospheric concentrations, carbon monoxide burns with a blue flame, producing carbon dioxide. Antoine Lavoisier conducted similar inconclusive experiments to Lassone in 1777. The gas was identified as a compound containing carbon and oxygen by William Cruickshank in 1800.

Thomas Beddoes and James Watt recognized carbon monoxide (as hydrocarbonate) to brighten venous blood in 1793. Watt suggested coal fumes could act as an antidote to the oxygen in blood, and Beddoes and Watt likewise suggested hydrocarbonate has a greater affinity for animal fiber than oxygen in 1796. In 1854, Adrien Chenot similarly suggested carbon monoxide to remove the oxygen from blood and then be oxidized by the body to carbon dioxide. The mechanism for carbon monoxide poisoning is widely credited to Claude Bernard whose memoirs beginning in 1846 and published in 1857 phrased, &quot;prevents arterials blood from becoming venous&quot;. Felix Hoppe-Seyler independently published similar conclusions in the following year.

===Advent of industrial chemistry===
Carbon monoxide gained recognition as an essential reagent in the 1900s. Three industrial processes illustrate its evolution in industry. In the Fischer–Tropsch process, coal and related carbon-rich feedstocks are converted into liquid fuels via the intermediacy of CO. Originally developed as part of the German war effort to compensate for their lack of domestic petroleum, this technology continues today. Also in Germany, a mixture of CO and hydrogen was found to combine with olefins to give aldehydes. This process, called hydroformylation, is used to produce many large scale chemicals such as surfactants as well as specialty compounds that are popular fragrances and drugs. For example, CO is used in the production of vitamin A. In a third major process, attributed to researchers at Monsanto, CO combines with methanol to give acetic acid. Most acetic acid is produced by the Cativa process. Hydroformylation and the acetic acid syntheses are two of myriad carbonylation processes.

==See also==
*
*

==References==
==External links==

* Global map of carbon monoxide distribution
* Explanation of the structure
* International Chemical Safety Card 0023
* CDC NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards: Carbon monoxide—National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
** Carbon Monoxide—NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic—CDC
** Carbon Monoxide Poisoning—Frequently Asked Questions—CDC
* External MSDS data sheet
* Carbon Monoxide Detector Placement
* Microscale Gas Chemistry Experiments with Carbon Monoxide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="0" end="15" title="Carbon monoxide" label="Carbon monoxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83147" start="17" end="33" title="chemical formula" label="chemical formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2025" start="34" end="36" title="Carbon monoxide" label="CO"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="174" end="180" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="194" end="200" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q177033" start="221" end="232" title="triple bond" label="triple bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778613" start="253" end="265" title="oxocarbon" label="carbon oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="270" end="290" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q193161" start="314" end="320" title="ligand" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q416523" start="337" end="345" title="metal carbonyl" label="carbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="477" end="487" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="716" end="724" title="Air pollution" label="emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="807" end="821" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q905504" start="891" end="909" title="indoor air quality" label="indoor air quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532617" start="1116" end="1120" title="flue" label="flue"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="1153" end="1178" title="Carbon monoxide poisoning" label="Carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058294" start="1442" end="1450" title="hormesis" label="hormesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="1499" end="1515" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q109544934" start="1517" end="1532" title="gasotransmitter" label="gasotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q274160" start="1562" end="1567" title="toxic" label="toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="1581" end="1606" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q899823" start="1614" end="1627" title="isoelectronic" label="isoelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="1638" end="1645" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="1670" end="1678" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778613" start="1753" end="1762" title="oxocarbon" label="oxocarbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q899823" start="1770" end="1783" title="isoelectronic" label="isoelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751859" start="1809" end="1817" title="diatomic" label="diatomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q55076544" start="1873" end="1880" title="cyanide" label="cyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500533" start="1892" end="1903" title="nitrosonium" label="nitrosonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946252" start="1912" end="1930" title="boron monofluoride" label="boron monofluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="1945" end="1953" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q145623" start="1964" end="1974" title="molar mass" label="molar mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q191785" start="2008" end="2021" title="ideal gas law" label="ideal gas law"/>
<link wikidata="Q177033" start="2138" end="2149" title="triple bond" label="triple bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q723069" start="2177" end="2184" title="pi bond" label="pi bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q306229" start="2194" end="2204" title="sigma bond" label="sigma bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q863695" start="2210" end="2221" title="bond length" label="bond length"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="2275" end="2277" title="picometre" label="pm"/>
<link wikidata="Q182854" start="2425" end="2439" title="molecular mass" label="molecular mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q161210" start="2506" end="2518" title="formaldehyde" label="formaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q863696" start="2650" end="2674" title="bond-dissociation energy" label="bond-dissociation energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4480008" start="2786" end="2792" title="ground state" label="ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q669532" start="2793" end="2809" title="electronic state" label="electronic state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296863" start="2834" end="2847" title="singlet state" label="singlet state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="3168" end="3177" title="electrons" label="electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="3185" end="3198" title="valence shell" label="valence shell"/>
<link wikidata="Q208348" start="3214" end="3224" title="octet rule" label="octet rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q177033" start="3274" end="3285" title="triple bond" label="triple bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q499548" start="3590" end="3602" title="dipolar bond" label="dipolar bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="3622" end="3634" title="Chemical polarity" label="polarization"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="3912" end="3927" title="electronegativity" label="electronegative"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="4059" end="4072" title="bond dipole moment" label="dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q40603" start="4082" end="4083" title="Debye" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q419257" start="4760" end="4767" title="carbene" label="carbene"/>
<link wikidata="Q421897" start="4769" end="4779" title="Isocyanide" label="Isocyanide"/>
<link wikidata="Q416523" start="4922" end="4928" title="Metal carbonyl" label="ligand"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="5049" end="5069" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5098" end="5132" title="#Coordination_chemistry" label="&amp;quot;Coordination chemistry&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="5404" end="5423" title="polar covalent bond" label="polar covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q306229" start="5520" end="5526" title="sigma bond" label="σ-bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q723069" start="5544" end="5551" title="pi bond" label="π-bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="5558" end="5573" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="6133" end="6150" title="parts per million" label="parts per million"/>
<link wikidata="Q27084" start="6255" end="6258" title="Parts per billion" label="ppb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="6267" end="6290" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="6344" end="6360" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q188651" start="6417" end="6430" title="photochemistry" label="photochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q40631" start="6448" end="6459" title="troposphere" label="troposphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="6556" end="6562" title="forest fires" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="6567" end="6575" title="bushfire" label="bushfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="6630" end="6641" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4364434" start="6823" end="6829" title="mantle (geology)" label="mantle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463606" start="7009" end="7026" title="radiative forcing" label="radiative forcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q167336" start="7065" end="7079" title="greenhouse gas" label="greenhouse gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="7093" end="7100" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q40631" start="7105" end="7117" title="troposphere" label="tropospheric"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="7118" end="7123" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="7200" end="7208" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="7209" end="7216" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="7324" end="7338" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q41872" start="7708" end="7727" title="interstellar medium" label="interstellar medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7735" end="7753" title="molecular hydrogen" label="molecular hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="7786" end="7800" title="polar molecule" label="polar molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q212111" start="7823" end="7836" title="spectral line" label="spectral line"/>
<link wikidata="Q184356" start="7939" end="7954" title="radio telescope" label="radio telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="8156" end="8172" title="space telescopes" label="space telescopes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272447" start="8245" end="8260" title="molecular cloud" label="molecular cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q16744" start="8276" end="8286" title="star formation" label="stars form"/>
<link wikidata="Q582547" start="8289" end="8302" title="Beta Pictoris" label="Beta Pictoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q10486" start="8351" end="8357" title="Pictor" label="Pictor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396651" start="8368" end="8395" title="infrared excess" label="excess of infrared emission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941" start="8537" end="8556" title="atmosphere of Venus" label="atmosphere of Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178674" start="8696" end="8698" title="nanometre" label="nm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359" start="8784" end="8790" title="Triton (moon)" label="Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="8833" end="8838" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306723" start="8845" end="8872" title="Volatile (astrogeology)" label="volatile or &amp;quot;ice&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="8886" end="8905" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q894998" start="9021" end="9039" title="Boudouard reaction" label="Boudouard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="9214" end="9219" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466348" start="9442" end="9466" title="water-gas shift reaction" label="water-gas shift reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="9651" end="9662" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="9961" end="9987" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="10364" end="10372" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="10436" end="10454" title="photochemical smog" label="photochemical smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q107429" start="10594" end="10600" title="peroxy" label="peroxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q424418" start="10679" end="10693" title="nitrogen oxide" label="nitrogen oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207895" start="10707" end="10723" title="nitrogen dioxide" label="nitrogen dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="11061" end="11067" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36933" start="11195" end="11200" title="ozone" label="ozone"/>
<link wikidata="Q905504" start="11436" end="11459" title="Indoor air quality" label="indoor air contaminants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532617" start="11679" end="11683" title="flue" label="flue"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="11719" end="11738" title="Developed country" label="developed countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q12748" start="11826" end="11837" title="fossil fuel" label="fossil fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="11997" end="12029" title="Developing country" label="low- and middle-income countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q128991" start="12081" end="12094" title="Biofuel" label="biomass fuels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995829" start="12175" end="12184" title="whitedamp" label="whitedamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764975" start="12559" end="12582" title="Canary in the coal mine" label="Canary in the coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="12673" end="12698" title="Carbon monoxide poisoning" label="Carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q416523" start="13253" end="13267" title="Metal carbonyl" label="metal-carbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q185056" start="13279" end="13286" title="Radical (chemistry)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="13298" end="13304" title="cation" label="cation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="13309" end="13314" title="anion" label="anion"/>
<link wikidata="Q238156" start="13377" end="13397" title="coordination complex" label="coordination complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q416523" start="13484" end="13499" title="metal carbonyls" label="metal carbonyls"/>
<link wikidata="Q412278" start="13581" end="13599" title="iron pentacarbonyl" label="iron pentacarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q414537" start="13648" end="13663" title="Nickel carbonyl" label="Nickel carbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q416523" start="13669" end="13691" title="metal carbonyl complex" label="metal carbonyl complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q103510" start="13789" end="13792" title="Bar (unit)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q418647" start="13954" end="13973" title="iridium(III) chloride" label="iridium trichloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q115493" start="13978" end="13996" title="triphenylphosphine" label="triphenylphosphine"/>
<link wikidata="Q903362" start="14014" end="14030" title="2-Methoxyethanol" label="2-methoxyethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q409298" start="14034" end="14037" title="dimethylformamide" label="DMF"/>
<link wikidata="Q421607" start="14048" end="14063" title="Vaska&amp;#x27;s complex" label="IrCl(CO)(PPh3)2"/>
<link wikidata="Q306229" start="14208" end="14218" title="sigma bond" label="sigma bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268094" start="14306" end="14333" title="Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson model" label="Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson model"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="14396" end="14413" title="infrared spectrum" label="infrared spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="14590" end="14596" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q134856" start="14609" end="14625" title="carboxylic acids" label="carboxylic acids"/>
<link wikidata="Q130044680" start="14658" end="14669" title="acylium ion" label="acylium ion"/>
<link wikidata="Q904085" start="14725" end="14743" title="Koch–Haaf reaction" label="Koch–Haaf reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q903064" start="14752" end="14776" title="Gattermann–Koch reaction" label="Gattermann–Koch reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19834818" start="14778" end="14784" title="Aromatic hydrocarbon" label="arenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q372524" start="14802" end="14814" title="benzaldehyde" label="benzaldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q314036" start="14850" end="14855" title="aluminium chloride" label="AlCl3"/>
<link wikidata="Q211086" start="14861" end="14864" title="hydrogen chloride" label="HCl"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="14912" end="14918" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q888529" start="15063" end="15075" title="halogenation" label="Chlorination"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="15132" end="15140" title="phosgene" label="phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q15634214" start="15147" end="15153" title="borane" label="borane"/>
<link wikidata="Q55647673" start="15174" end="15179" title="Borane carbonyl" label="H3BCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q899823" start="15190" end="15203" title="isoelectronic" label="isoelectronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130044680" start="15213" end="15220" title="acylium" label="acylium"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="15253" end="15259" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758601" start="15313" end="15336" title="acetylenediol" label="sodium acetylenediolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="15363" end="15372" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2758601" start="15422" end="15448" title="acetylenediol" label="potassium acetylenediolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q793159" start="15453" end="15478" title="benzenehexol" label="potassium benzenehexolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823301" start="15486" end="15507" title="rhodizonic acid" label="potassium rhodizonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q587285" start="15527" end="15544" title="cyclohexanehexone" label="cyclohexanehexone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008556" start="15570" end="15589" title="cyclopentanepentone" label="cyclopentanepentone"/>
<link wikidata="Q44395" start="15743" end="15746" title="pascal (unit)" label="GPa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821498" start="15776" end="15788" title="polycarbonyl" label="polycarbonyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183091" start="15967" end="15978" title="Dehydration reaction" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q161233" start="15982" end="15993" title="formic acid" label="formic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="15997" end="16008" title="oxalic acid" label="oxalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118" start="16040" end="16053" title="sulfuric acid" label="sulfuric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="16113" end="16117" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q23767" start="16128" end="16145" title="calcium carbonate" label="calcium carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190077" start="16183" end="16193" title="zinc oxide" label="zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q185006" start="16198" end="16211" title="calcium oxide" label="calcium oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q207442" start="16244" end="16258" title="Silver nitrate" label="Silver nitrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q412393" start="16263" end="16271" title="iodoform" label="iodoform"/>
<link wikidata="Q417351" start="16359" end="16366" title="oxalate" label="oxalate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181699" start="16408" end="16417" title="carbonate" label="carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q133235" start="16458" end="16468" title="combustion" label="combustion"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="16574" end="16580" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="16655" end="16669" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q203789" start="16699" end="16704" title="stove" label="stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="16711" end="16737" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622355" start="17058" end="17070" title="producer gas" label="producer gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="17266" end="17270" title="coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q894998" start="17409" end="17427" title="Boudouard reaction" label="Boudouard reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099761" start="17556" end="17565" title="water gas" label="water gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="17586" end="17594" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251738" start="17656" end="17661" title="steam" label="steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273339" start="17762" end="17775" title="syngas" label="synthesis gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="17805" end="17816" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408813" start="17875" end="17904" title="high-temperature electrolysis" label="high-temperature electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222509" start="17928" end="17957" title="solid oxide electrolyzer cell" label="solid oxide electrolyzer cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q50690" start="18160" end="18165" title="oxide" label="oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="18166" end="18169" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q45003" start="18469" end="18476" title="entropy" label="entropy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329753" start="18494" end="18511" title="Ellingham diagram" label="Ellingham diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456821" start="18630" end="18644" title="industrial gas" label="industrial gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q899181" start="18755" end="18771" title="hydroformylation" label="hydroformylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="18784" end="18790" title="alkene" label="alkene"/>
<link wikidata="Q750312" start="18853" end="18880" title="Shell higher olefin process" label="Shell higher olefin process"/>
<link wikidata="Q334637" start="18903" end="18912" title="detergent" label="detergent"/>
<link wikidata="Q189090" start="18916" end="18924" title="Phosgene" label="Phosgene"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="19047" end="19055" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190878" start="19084" end="19100" title="activated carbon" label="activated carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="19120" end="19128" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="19231" end="19239" title="Methanol" label="Methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q214166" start="19259" end="19272" title="hydrogenation" label="hydrogenation"/>
<link wikidata="Q654400" start="19397" end="19420" title="Fischer–Tropsch process" label="Fischer–Tropsch process"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="19511" end="19515" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q579304" start="19562" end="19576" title="Cativa process" label="Cativa process"/>
<link wikidata="Q877" start="19646" end="19653" title="iridium" label="iridium"/>
<link wikidata="Q82264" start="19654" end="19662" title="catalyst" label="catalyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q908093" start="19667" end="19682" title="hydroiodic acid" label="hydroiodic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="19691" end="19702" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372081" start="19869" end="19883" title="pyrometallurgy" label="pyrometallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="19894" end="19899" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q102798" start="19906" end="19909" title="ore" label="ore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="20038" end="20052" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q181485" start="20299" end="20312" title="blast furnace" label="blast furnace"/>
<link wikidata="Q205470" start="20419" end="20436" title="blast furnace gas" label="blast furnace gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435974" start="20550" end="20562" title="Cowper stove" label="Cowper stove"/>
<link wikidata="Q45728" start="20598" end="20621" title="open hearth furnace" label="open hearth steelmaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q918443" start="20740" end="20755" title="Geoffrey Landis" label="Geoffrey Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q838950" start="20757" end="20786" title="Carbon monoxide/oxygen engine" label="Carbon monoxide/oxygen engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q218860" start="20938" end="20956" title="atmosphere of Mars" label="atmosphere of Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q36200" start="20960" end="20968" title="zirconia" label="zirconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q64403" start="20969" end="20981" title="electrolysis" label="electrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985733" start="21001" end="21024" title="Water on Mars" label="Martian water resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q657925" start="21423" end="21449" title="Gaseous signaling molecules" label="gaseous signaling molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q419972" start="21578" end="21592" title="heme oxygenase" label="heme oxygenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q189621" start="21600" end="21604" title="heme" label="heme"/>
<link wikidata="Q902628" start="21618" end="21629" title="hemoprotein" label="hemoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="21639" end="21649" title="hemoglobin" label="hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581996" start="22083" end="22100" title="anti-inflammatories" label="anti-inflammatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q14859627" start="22102" end="22114" title="vasodilators" label="vasodilatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281049" start="22135" end="22146" title="neovascular" label="neovascular"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="22253" end="22259" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413991" start="22283" end="22310" title="ischemia/reperfusion injury" label="ischemia/reperfusion injury"/>
<link wikidata="Q109544934" start="23275" end="23290" title="gasotransmitter" label="gasotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359858" start="23371" end="23375" title="CooA" label="CooA"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="23602" end="23611" title="redox" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013950" start="23644" end="23673" title="carbon monoxide dehydrogenase" label="carbon monoxide dehydrogenase"/>
<link wikidata="Q570714" start="23689" end="23702" title="bioenergetics" label="bioenergetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169785" start="23798" end="23808" title="methanogen" label="methanogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815645" start="24027" end="24046" title="modified atmosphere" label="modified atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q192642" start="24328" end="24337" title="myoglobin" label="myoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q426464" start="24525" end="24537" title="metmyoglobin" label="metmyoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041116" start="24761" end="24789" title="generally recognized as safe" label="generally recognized as safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="24817" end="24850" title="U.S. Food and Drug Administration" label="U.S. Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="25122" end="25131" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="25141" end="25155" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q36456" start="25200" end="25208" title="Hannibal" label="Hannibal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="25218" end="25223" title="Ancient Rome" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271" start="25261" end="25277" title="Second Punic War" label="Second Punic War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="25314" end="25322" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="25330" end="25343" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q153813" start="25352" end="25371" title="Extermination camps in the Holocaust" label="extermination camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q152982" start="25393" end="25400" title="Nazi gas van" label="gas van"/>
<link wikidata="Q160152" start="25405" end="25412" title="Chełmno extermination camp" label="Chełmno"/>
<link wikidata="Q154494" start="25425" end="25434" title="Action T4" label="Action T4"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="25441" end="25451" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="25765" end="25775" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748405" start="25780" end="25788" title="smelting" label="smelting"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="25838" end="25848" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="25962" end="25978" title="Native Americans in the United States" label="Native Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="26054" end="26065" title="shamanistic" label="shamanistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83160" start="26197" end="26207" title="Prometheus" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="26213" end="26228" title="Greek mythology" label="Greek mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="26258" end="26267" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="26353" end="26358" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24489" start="26566" end="26570" title="coal" label="coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="26586" end="26595" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q30315441" start="26605" end="26609" title="Death of Cleopatra" label="died"/>
<link wikidata="Q125367" start="26615" end="26640" title="carbon monoxide poisoning" label="carbon monoxide poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q57566" start="26677" end="26694" title="Georg Ernst Stahl" label="Georg Ernst Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q76607" start="26804" end="26822" title="Friedrich Hoffmann" label="Friedrich Hoffmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q313093" start="26925" end="26941" title="Herman Boerhaave" label="Herman Boerhaave"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="27057" end="27073" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Joseph Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q70538" start="27139" end="27159" title="Carl Wilhelm Scheele" label="Carl Wilhelm Scheele"/>
<link wikidata="Q201347" start="27281" end="27296" title="Torbern Bergman" label="Torbern Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q184832" start="27327" end="27338" title="oxalic acid" label="oxalic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q190077" start="27405" end="27415" title="zinc oxide" label="zinc oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="27421" end="27425" title="Coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="27481" end="27489" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="27655" end="27672" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Antoine Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q623" start="27784" end="27790" title="carbon" label="carbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="27795" end="27801" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q902388" start="27805" end="27824" title="William Cruickshank (chemist)" label="William Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422365" start="27835" end="27849" title="Thomas Beddoes" label="Thomas Beddoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="27854" end="27864" title="James Watt" label="James Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099761" start="27896" end="27910" title="Hydrocarbonate (gas)" label="hydrocarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16198412" start="28146" end="28159" title="Adrien Chenot" label="Adrien Chenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q208230" start="28346" end="28360" title="Claude Bernard" label="Claude Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q65845" start="28483" end="28501" title="Felix Hoppe-Seyler" label="Felix Hoppe-Seyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q654400" start="28752" end="28775" title="Fischer–Tropsch process" label="Fischer–Tropsch process"/>
<link wikidata="Q81406" start="29088" end="29094" title="olefin" label="olefin"/>
<link wikidata="Q101497" start="29104" end="29112" title="aldehyde" label="aldehyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q899181" start="29136" end="29152" title="hydroformylation" label="hydroformylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191154" start="29208" end="29218" title="surfactant" label="surfactant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18225" start="29335" end="29344" title="vitamin A" label="vitamin A"/>
<link wikidata="Q207983" start="29401" end="29409" title="Monsanto" label="Monsanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47512" start="29445" end="29456" title="acetic acid" label="acetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q579304" start="29494" end="29508" title="Cativa process" label="Cativa process"/>
<link wikidata="Q900377" start="29575" end="29588" title="carbonylation" label="carbonylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60346" start="29834" end="29887" title="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health" label="National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="29900" end="29942" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6138" wikidata="Q319141" url="?curid=6138" title="Conjecture">
<text>In mathematics, a conjecture is a conclusion or a proposition that is proffered on a tentative basis without proof. Some conjectures, such as the Riemann hypothesis or Fermat&#x27;s conjecture (now a theorem, proven in 1995 by Andrew Wiles), have shaped much of mathematical history as new areas of mathematics are developed in order to prove them.

==Resolution of conjectures==

===Proof===
Formal mathematics is based on &quot;provable&quot; truth. In mathematics, any number of cases supporting a universally quantified conjecture, no matter how large, is insufficient for establishing the conjecture&#x27;s veracity, since a single counterexample could immediately bring down the conjecture. Mathematical journals sometimes publish the minor results of research teams having extended the search for a counterexample farther than previously done. For instance, the Collatz conjecture, which concerns whether or not certain sequences of integers terminate, has been tested for all integers up to 1.2 × 1012 (1.2 trillion). However, the failure to find a counterexample after extensive search does not constitute a proof that the conjecture is true—because the conjecture might be false but with a very large minimal counterexample.

Nevertheless, mathematicians often regard a conjecture as strongly supported by evidence even though not yet proved. That evidence may be of various kinds, such as verification of consequences of it or strong interconnections with known results.

A conjecture is considered proven only when it has been shown that it is logically impossible for it to be false. There are various methods of doing so; see methods of mathematical proof for more details.

One method of proof, applicable when there are only a finite number of cases that could lead to counterexamples, is known as &quot;brute force&quot;: in this approach, all possible cases are considered and shown not to give counterexamples. In some occasions, the number of cases is quite large, in which case a brute-force proof may require as a practical matter the use of a computer algorithm to check all the cases. For example, the validity of the 1976 and 1997 brute-force proofs of the four color theorem by computer was initially doubted, but was eventually confirmed in 2005 by theorem-proving software.

When a conjecture has been proven, it is no longer a conjecture but a theorem. Many important theorems were once conjectures, such as the Geometrization theorem (which resolved the Poincaré conjecture), Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem, and others.

===Disproof===
Conjectures disproven through counterexample are sometimes referred to as &quot;false conjectures&quot; (cf. the Pólya conjecture and Euler&#x27;s sum of powers conjecture). In the case of the latter, the first counterexample found for the n=4 case involved numbers in the millions, although it has been subsequently found that the minimal counterexample is actually smaller.

===Independent conjectures===
Not every conjecture ends up being proven true or false. The continuum hypothesis, which tries to ascertain the relative cardinality of certain infinite sets, was eventually shown to be independent from the generally accepted set of Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms of set theory. It is therefore possible to adopt this statement, or its negation, as a new axiom in a consistent manner (much as Euclid&#x27;s parallel postulate can be taken either as true or false in an axiomatic system for geometry).

In this case, if a proof uses this statement, researchers will often look for a new proof that &quot;does not&quot; require the hypothesis (in the same way that it is desirable that statements in Euclidean geometry be proved using only the axioms of neutral geometry, i.e. without the parallel postulate). The one major exception to this in practice is the axiom of choice, as the majority of researchers usually do not worry whether a result requires it—unless they are studying this axiom in particular.

==Conditional proofs==
Sometimes, a conjecture is called a &quot;hypothesis&quot; when it is used frequently and repeatedly as an assumption in proofs of other results. For example, the Riemann hypothesis is a conjecture from number theory that — amongst other things — makes predictions about the distribution of prime numbers. Few number theorists doubt that the Riemann hypothesis is true. In fact, in anticipation of its eventual proof, some have even proceeded to develop further proofs which are contingent on the truth of this conjecture. These are called &quot;conditional proofs&quot;: the conjectures assumed appear in the hypotheses of the theorem, for the time being.

These &quot;proofs&quot;, however, would fall apart if it turned out that the hypothesis was false, so there is considerable interest in verifying the truth or falsity of conjectures of this type.

==Important examples==

===Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem===

In number theory, Fermat&#x27;s Last Theorem (sometimes called Fermat&#x27;s conjecture, especially in older texts) states that no three positive integers formula_1, &quot;formula_2&quot;, and &quot;formula_3&quot; can satisfy the equation &quot;formula_4&quot; for any integer value of &quot;formula_5&quot; greater than two.

This theorem was first conjectured by Pierre de Fermat in 1637 in the margin of a copy of &quot;Arithmetica&quot;, where he claimed that he had a proof that was too large to fit in the margin. The first successful proof was released in 1994 by Andrew Wiles, and formally published in 1995, after 358 years of effort by mathematicians. The unsolved problem stimulated the development of algebraic number theory in the 19th century, and the proof of the modularity theorem in the 20th century. It is among the most notable theorems in the history of mathematics, and prior to its proof it was in the &quot;Guinness Book of World Records&quot; for &quot;most difficult mathematical problems&quot;.

===Four color theorem===

In mathematics, the four color theorem, or the four color map theorem, states that given any separation of a plane into regions, producing a figure called a &quot;map&quot;, no more than four colors are required to color the regions of the map—so that no two adjacent regions have the same color. Two regions are called &quot;adjacent&quot; if they share a common boundary that is not a corner, where corners are the points shared by three or more regions. For example, in the map of the United States of America, Utah and Arizona are adjacent, but Utah and New Mexico, which only share a point that also belongs to Arizona and Colorado, are not.

Möbius mentioned the problem in his lectures as early as 1840. The conjecture was first proposed on October 23, 1852 when Francis Guthrie, while trying to color the map of counties of England, noticed that only four different colors were needed. The five color theorem, which has a short elementary proof, states that five colors suffice to color a map and was proven in the late 19th century; however, proving that four colors suffice turned out to be significantly harder. A number of false proofs and false counterexamples have appeared since the first statement of the four color theorem in 1852.

The four color theorem was ultimately proven in 1976 by Kenneth Appel and Wolfgang Haken. It was the first major theorem to be proved using a computer. Appel and Haken&#x27;s approach started by showing that there is a particular set of 1,936 maps, each of which cannot be part of a smallest-sized counterexample to the four color theorem (i.e., if they did appear, one could make a smaller counter-example). Appel and Haken used a special-purpose computer program to confirm that each of these maps had this property. Additionally, any map that could potentially be a counterexample must have a portion that looks like one of these 1,936 maps. Showing this with hundreds of pages of hand analysis, Appel and Haken concluded that no smallest counterexample exists because any must contain, yet do not contain, one of these 1,936 maps. This contradiction means there are no counterexamples at all and that the theorem is therefore true. Initially, their proof was not accepted by mathematicians at all because the computer-assisted proof was infeasible for a human to check by hand. However, the proof has since then gained wider acceptance, although doubts still remain.

===Hauptvermutung===
The Hauptvermutung (German for main conjecture) of geometric topology is the conjecture that any two triangulations of a triangulable space have a common refinement, a single triangulation that is a subdivision of both of them. It was originally formulated in 1908, by Steinitz and Tietze.

This conjecture is now known to be false. The non-manifold version was disproved by John Milnor in 1961 using Reidemeister torsion.

The manifold version is true in dimensions . The cases were proved by Tibor Radó and Edwin E. Moise in the 1920s and 1950s, respectively.

===Weil conjectures===

In mathematics, the Weil conjectures were some highly influential proposals by on the generating functions (known as local zeta-functions) derived from counting the number of points on algebraic varieties over finite fields.

A variety &quot;V&quot; over a finite field with &quot;q&quot; elements has a finite number of rational points, as well as points over every finite field with &quot;q&quot;&quot;k&quot; elements containing that field. The generating function has coefficients derived from the numbers &quot;N&quot;&quot;k&quot; of points over the (essentially unique) field with &quot;q&quot;&quot;k&quot; elements.

Weil conjectured that such &quot;zeta-functions&quot; should be rational functions, should satisfy a form of functional equation, and should have their zeroes in restricted places. The last two parts were quite consciously modeled on the Riemann zeta function and Riemann hypothesis. The rationality was proved by , the functional equation by , and the analogue of the Riemann hypothesis was proved by .

===Poincaré conjecture===
In mathematics, the Poincaré conjecture is a theorem about the characterization of the 3-sphere, which is the hypersphere that bounds the unit ball in four-dimensional space. The conjecture states that: An equivalent form of the conjecture involves a coarser form of equivalence than homeomorphism called homotopy equivalence: if a 3-manifold is &quot;homotopy equivalent&quot; to the 3-sphere, then it is necessarily &quot;homeomorphic&quot; to it.

Originally conjectured by Henri Poincaré in 1904, the theorem concerns a space that locally looks like ordinary three-dimensional space but is connected, finite in size, and lacks any boundary (a closed 3-manifold). The Poincaré conjecture claims that if such a space has the additional property that each loop in the space can be continuously tightened to a point, then it is necessarily a three-dimensional sphere. An analogous result has been known in higher dimensions for some time.

After nearly a century of effort by mathematicians, Grigori Perelman presented a proof of the conjecture in three papers made available in 2002 and 2003 on arXiv. The proof followed on from the program of Richard S. Hamilton to use the Ricci flow to attempt to solve the problem. Hamilton later introduced a modification of the standard Ricci flow, called &quot;Ricci flow with surgery&quot; to systematically excise singular regions as they develop, in a controlled way, but was unable to prove this method &quot;converged&quot; in three dimensions. Perelman completed this portion of the proof. Several teams of mathematicians have verified that Perelman&#x27;s proof is correct.

The Poincaré conjecture, before being proven, was one of the most important open questions in topology.

===Riemann hypothesis===

In mathematics, the Riemann hypothesis, proposed by , is a conjecture that the non-trivial zeros of the Riemann zeta function all have real part 1/2. The name is also used for some closely related analogues, such as the Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields.

The Riemann hypothesis implies results about the distribution of prime numbers. Along with suitable generalizations, some mathematicians consider it the most important unresolved problem in pure mathematics. The Riemann hypothesis, along with the Goldbach conjecture, is part of Hilbert&#x27;s eighth problem in David Hilbert&#x27;s list of 23 unsolved problems; it is also one of the Clay Mathematics Institute Millennium Prize Problems.

===P versus NP problem===

The P versus NP problem is a major unsolved problem in computer science. Informally, it asks whether every problem whose solution can be quickly verified by a computer can also be quickly solved by a computer; it is widely conjectured that the answer is no. It was essentially first mentioned in a 1956 letter written by Kurt Gödel to John von Neumann. Gödel asked whether a certain NP-complete problem could be solved in quadratic or linear time. The precise statement of the P=NP problem was introduced in 1971 by Stephen Cook in his seminal paper &quot;The complexity of theorem proving procedures&quot; and is considered by many to be the most important open problem in the field. It is one of the seven Millennium Prize Problems selected by the Clay Mathematics Institute to carry a US$1,000,000 prize for the first correct solution.

===Other conjectures===
* Goldbach&#x27;s conjecture
* The twin prime conjecture
* The Collatz conjecture
* The Manin conjecture
* The Maldacena conjecture
* The Euler conjecture, proposed by Euler in the 18th century but for which counterexamples for a number of exponents (starting with n=4) were found beginning in the mid 20th century
* The Hardy-Littlewood conjectures are a pair of conjectures concerning the distribution of prime numbers, the first of which expands upon the aforementioned twin prime conjecture. Neither one has either been proven or disproven, but it &quot;has&quot; been proven that both cannot simultaneously be true (i.e., at least one must be false). It has not been proven which one is false, but it is widely believed that the first conjecture is true and the second one is false.
* The Langlands program is a far-reaching web of these ideas of &#x27;unifying conjectures&#x27; that link different subfields of mathematics (e.g. between number theory and representation theory of Lie groups). Some of these conjectures have since been proved.

==In other sciences==
Karl Popper pioneered the use of the term &quot;conjecture&quot; in scientific philosophy. Conjecture is related to hypothesis, which in science refers to a testable conjecture.

==See also==
* Bold hypothesis
* Futures studies
* Hypotheticals
* List of conjectures
* Ramanujan machine

==References==
===Works cited===
*

==External links==
*Open Problem Garden
*Unsolved Problems web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q319141" start="18" end="28" title="Conjecture" label="conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q261155" start="34" end="44" title="Consequent" label="conclusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q108163" start="50" end="61" title="proposition" label="proposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="109" end="114" title="mathematical proof" label="proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="146" end="164" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="168" end="192" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="200" end="207" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q184433" start="227" end="239" title="Andrew Wiles" label="Andrew Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q126695" start="501" end="523" title="universally quantified" label="universally quantified"/>
<link wikidata="Q596077" start="637" end="651" title="counterexample" label="counterexample"/>
<link wikidata="Q837314" start="869" end="887" title="Collatz conjecture" label="Collatz conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="927" end="935" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="940" end="947" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1640" end="1669" title="Mathematical proof#Methods of proof" label="methods of mathematical proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299950" start="1820" end="1831" title="Proof by exhaustion" label="brute force"/>
<link wikidata="Q184410" start="2182" end="2200" title="four color theorem" label="four color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="2276" end="2291" title="theorem-proving" label="theorem-proving"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="2330" end="2336" title="mathematical proof" label="proven"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="2373" end="2380" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503309" start="2441" end="2463" title="Geometrization conjecture" label="Geometrization theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q203586" start="2484" end="2503" title="Poincaré conjecture" label="Poincaré conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="2506" end="2532" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441904" start="2675" end="2691" title="Pólya conjecture" label="Pólya conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096450" start="2696" end="2733" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s sum of powers conjecture" label="Euler&amp;#x27;s sum of powers conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="3030" end="3050" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="3090" end="3101" title="cardinal number" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="3113" end="3125" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705017" start="3155" end="3166" title="Independence (mathematical logic)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="3202" end="3225" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms" label="Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17736" start="3317" end="3322" title="axiom" label="axiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8747" start="3355" end="3361" title="Euclid" label="Euclid"/>
<link wikidata="Q207014" start="3369" end="3387" title="parallel postulate" label="parallel postulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q162886" start="3660" end="3678" title="Euclidean geometry" label="Euclidean geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="3821" end="3836" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="4157" end="4175" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="4197" end="4210" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="4285" end="4297" title="prime number" label="prime number"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159270" start="4540" end="4557" title="conditional proof" label="conditional proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="4911" end="4924" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q132469" start="4926" end="4952" title="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193832" start="5045" end="5053" title="positive number" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="5054" end="5061" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q75655" start="5274" end="5290" title="Pierre de Fermat" label="Pierre de Fermat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668560" start="5332" end="5343" title="Arithmetica" label="Arithmetica"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001607" start="5429" end="5455" title="Wiles&amp;#x27; proof of Fermat&amp;#x27;s Last Theorem" label="The first successful proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q184433" start="5480" end="5492" title="Andrew Wiles" label="Andrew Wiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="5622" end="5645" title="algebraic number theory" label="algebraic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q649469" start="5688" end="5706" title="modularity theorem" label="modularity theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q185264" start="5773" end="5795" title="history of mathematics" label="history of mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="5840" end="5870" title="Guinness Book of World Records" label="Guinness Book of World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="5961" end="5972" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184410" start="5978" end="5996" title="four color theorem" label="four color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3888479" start="6547" end="6552" title="Four Corners Monument" label="point"/>
<link wikidata="Q57335" start="6606" end="6612" title="August Ferdinand Möbius" label="Möbius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441533" start="6728" end="6743" title="Francis Guthrie" label="Francis Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q105222412" start="6856" end="6874" title="five color theorem" label="five color theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q596077" start="7116" end="7130" title="counterexample" label="counterexample"/>
<link wikidata="Q224787" start="7264" end="7277" title="Kenneth Appel" label="Kenneth Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082" start="7282" end="7296" title="Wolfgang Haken" label="Wolfgang Haken"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="7321" end="7328" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7335" end="7358" title="computer-assisted proof#Theorems proved with the help of computer programs" label="proved using a computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150675" start="8221" end="8244" title="computer-assisted proof" label="computer-assisted proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q5682772" start="8405" end="8419" title="Hauptvermutung" label="Hauptvermutung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939186" start="8452" end="8470" title="geometric topology" label="geometric topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840154" start="8502" end="8516" title="Triangulation (topology)" label="triangulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840154" start="8522" end="8540" title="triangulable space" label="triangulable space"/>
<link wikidata="Q61828" start="8670" end="8678" title="Ernst Steinitz" label="Steinitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q84554" start="8683" end="8689" title="Heinrich Tietze" label="Tietze"/>
<link wikidata="Q215765" start="8776" end="8787" title="John Milnor" label="John Milnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751142" start="8802" end="8822" title="Analytic torsion" label="Reidemeister torsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203920" start="8829" end="8837" title="manifold" label="manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="8857" end="8866" title="dimension" label="dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q896749" start="8895" end="8905" title="Tibor Radó" label="Tibor Radó"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294831" start="8910" end="8924" title="Edwin E. Moise" label="Edwin E. Moise"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="8991" end="9002" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479613" start="9008" end="9024" title="Weil conjectures" label="Weil conjectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q860609" start="9074" end="9093" title="generating function" label="generating function"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075294" start="9105" end="9124" title="local zeta-function" label="local zeta-function"/>
<link wikidata="Q648995" start="9173" end="9192" title="algebraic variety" label="algebraic varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q603880" start="9198" end="9210" title="finite field" label="finite field"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393476" start="9309" end="9323" title="rational point" label="rational point"/>
<link wikidata="Q41237" start="9678" end="9695" title="rational function" label="rational function"/>
<link wikidata="Q594452" start="9723" end="9742" title="functional equation" label="functional equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187235" start="9852" end="9873" title="Riemann zeta function" label="Riemann zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="9878" end="9896" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="10048" end="10059" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q203586" start="10065" end="10084" title="Poincaré conjecture" label="Poincaré conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q65943" start="10090" end="10097" title="theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937829" start="10108" end="10124" title="Characterization (mathematics)" label="characterization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274197" start="10132" end="10140" title="3-sphere" label="3-sphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307800" start="10183" end="10192" title="unit ball" label="unit ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q746083" start="10350" end="10370" title="homotopy equivalence" label="homotopy equivalence"/>
<link wikidata="Q81082" start="10522" end="10536" title="Henri Poincaré" label="Henri Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517914" start="10692" end="10698" title="Closed manifold" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q526901" start="10699" end="10709" title="3-manifold" label="3-manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366002" start="10802" end="10806" title="path (topology)" label="loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532452" start="10916" end="10932" title="generalized Poincaré conjecture" label="analogous result"/>
<link wikidata="Q117346" start="11037" end="11053" title="Grigori Perelman" label="Grigori Perelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q118398" start="11141" end="11146" title="arXiv" label="arXiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q239904" start="11190" end="11209" title="Richard S. Hamilton" label="Richard S. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361396" start="11221" end="11231" title="Ricci flow" label="Ricci flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="11762" end="11770" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q205966" start="11819" end="11837" title="Riemann hypothesis" label="Riemann hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214604" start="11890" end="11895" title="root of a function" label="zeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q187235" start="11903" end="11924" title="Riemann zeta function" label="Riemann zeta function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="11934" end="11943" title="real part" label="real part"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075294" start="12019" end="12067" title="Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields" label="Riemann hypothesis for curves over finite fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q49008" start="12135" end="12148" title="prime numbers" label="prime numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q837863" start="12260" end="12276" title="pure mathematics" label="pure mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q485520" start="12317" end="12336" title="Goldbach conjecture" label="Goldbach conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059886" start="12349" end="12378" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s eighth problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s eighth problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41585" start="12382" end="12395" title="David Hilbert" label="David Hilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q273167" start="12411" end="12431" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s problems" label="23 unsolved problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q857975" start="12455" end="12481" title="Clay Mathematics Institute" label="Clay Mathematics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q727000" start="12482" end="12507" title="Millennium Prize Problems" label="Millennium Prize Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q746242" start="12541" end="12560" title="P versus NP problem" label="P versus NP problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190519" start="12572" end="12608" title="List of unsolved problems in computer science" label="unsolved problem in computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="12858" end="12868" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17455" start="12872" end="12888" title="John von Neumann" label="John von Neumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q62870" start="13053" end="13065" title="Stephen Cook" label="Stephen Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q727000" start="13245" end="13270" title="Millennium Prize Problems" label="Millennium Prize Problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q857975" start="13287" end="13313" title="Clay Mathematics Institute" label="Clay Mathematics Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q485520" start="13403" end="13429" title="Goldbach&amp;#x27;s conjecture" label="Goldbach&amp;#x27;s conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q110863" start="13436" end="13457" title="twin prime conjecture" label="twin prime conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q837314" start="13464" end="13482" title="Collatz conjecture" label="Collatz conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080204" start="13489" end="13505" title="Manin conjecture" label="Manin conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q543413" start="13512" end="13532" title="Maldacena conjecture" label="Maldacena conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096450" start="13539" end="13555" title="Euler&amp;#x27;s sum of powers conjecture" label="Euler conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920423" start="13722" end="13750" title="Second Hardy–Littlewood conjecture" label="Hardy-Littlewood conjectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393253" start="14195" end="14212" title="Langlands program" label="Langlands program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885166" start="14259" end="14278" title="unifying conjecture" label="unifying conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12479" start="14345" end="14358" title="number theory" label="number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220368" start="14363" end="14384" title="representation theory" label="representation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q622679" start="14388" end="14397" title="Lie group" label="Lie group"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="14474" end="14485" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q59115" start="14542" end="14563" title="Philosophy of science" label="scientific philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="14590" end="14600" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="14611" end="14618" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939088" start="14668" end="14683" title="Bold hypothesis" label="Bold hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188867" start="14686" end="14701" title="Futures studies" label="Futures studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q147027" start="14704" end="14717" title="Hypotheticals" label="Hypotheticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085764" start="14720" end="14739" title="List of conjectures" label="List of conjectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q108444510" start="14742" end="14759" title="Ramanujan machine" label="Ramanujan machine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6139" wikidata="Q835394" url="?curid=6139" title="Christoph Ludwig Agricola">
<text>Christoph Ludwig Agricola (5 November 1665 – 8 August 1724) was a German landscape painter and etcher. He was born and died in Regensburg (Ratisbon).

==Life and career==
Christoph Ludwig Agricola was born on 5 November 1665 in Regensburg in Germany. He trained, as many painters of the period did, by studying nature.

He spent a great part of his life in travel visiting England, the Netherlands and France, and residing for a considerable period in Naples, where he may have been influenced by Nicolas Poussin. He also stayed in Venice for several years around 1712, where he painted many works for Zaccaria Sagredo.

He died in Regensburg in 1724.

==Work==
Although he primarily worked in gouache and oils, documentary sources show that he also produced a small number of etchings. He was a good draughtsman, used warm lighting and exhibited a warm, masterly brushstroke.

His numerous landscapes, chiefly cabinet pictures, are remarkable for their fidelity to nature, and especially for their skilful representation of varied phases of climate, especially nocturnal scenes and weather phenomena like thunderstorms. In composition, his style shows the influence of Nicolas Poussin: Agricola&#x27;s work often displays idealistic scenes like Poussin&#x27;s work. In light and colour Agricola&#x27;s work resembles that of Claude Lorrain. His compositions often include ruins of ancient buildings in the foreground, but his favourite foreground figures were men dressed in Oriental attire. He also produced a series of etchings of birds.

His pictures can be found in Dresden, Braunschweig, Vienna, Florence, Naples and many other locations in Germany and Italy.

==Legacy==
He probably tutored the artist Johann Theile and had a strong influence on him. Art historians have also noted that the work of the landscape painter Christian Johann Bendeler (1699–1728) was influenced by Agricola.

==Gallery==
==References==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q835394" start="0" end="25" title="Christoph Ludwig Agricola" label="Christoph Ludwig Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q191163" start="73" end="90" title="Landscape art" label="landscape painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978" start="127" end="137" title="Regensburg" label="Regensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="452" end="458" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q41554" start="497" end="512" title="Nicolas Poussin" label="Nicolas Poussin"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="532" end="538" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461447" start="602" end="618" title="Sagredo family" label="Zaccaria Sagredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q214074" start="1326" end="1340" title="Claude Lorrain" label="Claude Lorrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="1571" end="1578" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773" start="1580" end="1592" title="Braunschweig" label="Braunschweig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="1594" end="1600" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="1602" end="1610" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="1659" end="1664" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q686557" start="1709" end="1722" title="Johann Theile" label="Johann Theile"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6140" wikidata="Q1411" url="?curid=6140" title="Claudius">
<text>Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus ( ; ; 1 August 10 BC – 13 October AD 54), or Claudius, was a Roman emperor, ruling from AD 41 to 54. A member of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, Claudius was born to Drusus and Antonia Minor at Lugdunum in Roman Gaul, where his father was stationed as a military legate. He was the first Roman emperor to be born outside Italy.

As he had a limp and slight deafness due to an illness he suffered when young, he was ostracised by his family and was excluded from public office until his consulship (which was shared with his nephew, Caligula, in 37). Claudius&#x27;s infirmity probably saved him from the fate of many other nobles during the purges throughout the reigns of Tiberius and Caligula, as potential enemies did not see him as a serious threat. His survival led to his being declared emperor by the Praetorian Guard after Caligula&#x27;s assassination, at which point he was the last adult male of his family.

Despite his lack of experience, Claudius was an able and efficient administrator. He expanded the imperial bureaucracy to include freedmen, and helped restore the empire&#x27;s finances after the excesses of Caligula&#x27;s reign. He was also an ambitious builder, constructing new roads, aqueducts, and canals across the Empire. During his reign, the Empire started its successful conquest of Britain. Having a personal interest in law, he presided at public trials, and issued edicts daily. He was seen as vulnerable throughout his reign, particularly by elements of the nobility. Claudius was constantly forced to shore up his position, which resulted in the deaths of many senators. Those events damaged his reputation among the ancient writers, though more recent historians have revised that opinion. Many authors contend that he was murdered by his own wife, Agrippina the Younger. After his death at the age of 63, his grandnephew and legally adopted step-son, Nero, succeeded him as emperor.

== Name ==

As a consequence of Roman customs, society, and personal preference, Claudius&#x27; full name varied throughout his life:

*Tiberius Claudius D. f. Ti. n. Drusus, the cognomen Drusus being inherited from his father as his brother Germanicus, as the eldest son, inherited the cognomen Nero when their uncle the future Emperor Tiberius was adopted by Augustus into the Julii Caesares and the victory name (agnomen) Germanicus from their father.
*Tiberius Claudius D. f. Ti. n. Nero, the cognomen Nero devolved to Claudius as the head of the Claudii Nerones after his elder brother was adopted by Tiberius as required by Augustus into the Julii Caesares in AD 9. Germanicus kept the victory title Germanicus as a praenomen, becoming Germanicus Julius Caesar. His son, Caligula, was known as Gaius Julius Caesar Germanicus, keeping the victory title, and later was known as Gaius Caesar Augustus Germanicus. Some authorities consider that his full name may have been Tiberius Claudius Drusus Nero Germanicus.
*Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus While Claudius had never been formally adopted either by Augustus or his successors, he was nevertheless the grandson of Augustus&#x27;s sister Octavia, and so he felt that he had the right of family. He also adopted the name &quot;Augustus&quot; as the two previous emperors had done at their accessions. He kept the honorific &quot;Germanicus&quot; to display the connection with his heroic brother and father. He deified his paternal grandmother Livia to highlight her position as wife of the divine Augustus. Claudius frequently used the term &quot;filius Drusi&quot; (son of Drusus) in his titles, to remind the people of his legendary father and lay claim to his reputation.

== Family and youth ==

=== Early life ===

Claudius was born on 1 August 10 BC at Lugdunum (modern Lyon, France). He had two older siblings, Germanicus and Livilla. His mother, Antonia Minor, may have had two other children who died young. Claudius&#x27;s maternal grandparents were Mark Antony and Octavia Minor, Augustus&#x27;s sister, and he was therefore the great-great-grandnephew of Gaius Julius Caesar. His paternal grandparents were Livia, Augustus&#x27;s third wife, and Tiberius Claudius Nero. During his reign, Claudius revived the rumour that his father Nero Claudius Drusus was actually the illegitimate son of Augustus, to give the appearance that Augustus was Claudius&#x27;s paternal grandfather.

In 9 BC, Claudius&#x27;s father Drusus died on campaign in Germania from a fall from a horse. Claudius was then raised by his mother, who never remarried. When his disability became evident, the relationship with his family turned sour. Antonia referred to him as a monster, and used him as a standard for stupidity. She seems to have passed her son off to his grandmother Livia for a number of years.

Livia was a little kinder, but nevertheless sent Claudius short, angry letters of reproof. He was put under the care of a former mule-driver to keep him disciplined, under the logic that his condition was due to laziness and a lack of willpower. However, by the time he reached his teenage years, his symptoms apparently waned and his family began to take some notice of his scholarly interests. In AD 7, Livy was hired to tutor Claudius in history, with the assistance of Sulpicius Flavus. He spent a lot of his time with the latter, as well as the philosopher Athenodorus. Augustus, according to a letter, was surprised at the clarity of Claudius&#x27;s oratory.

=== Public life ===

Claudius&#x27; work as a historian damaged his prospects for advancement in public life. According to Vincent Scramuzza and others, he began work on a history of the Civil Wars that was either too truthful or too critical of Octavian, then reigning as Caesar Augustus. In either case, it was far too early for such an account, and may have only served to remind Augustus that Claudius was Antony&#x27;s descendant. His mother and grandmother quickly put a stop to it, and this may have convinced them that Claudius was not fit for public office, since he could not be trusted to toe the existing party line.

When Claudius returned to the narrative later in life, he skipped over the wars of the Second Triumvirate altogether; but the damage was done, and his family pushed him into the background. When the Arch of Pavia was erected to honour the Imperial clan in AD 8, Claudius&#x27;s name (now Tiberius Claudius Nero Germanicus after his elevation to &quot;pater familias&quot; of the Claudii Nerones on the adoption of his brother) was inscribed on the edge, past the deceased princes, Gaius and Lucius, and Germanicus&#x27;s children. There is some speculation that the inscription was added by Claudius himself decades later, and that he originally did not appear at all.

When Augustus died in AD 14, Claudius – then aged 23 – appealed to his uncle Tiberius to allow him to begin the &quot;cursus honorum&quot;. Tiberius, the new Emperor, responded by granting Claudius consular ornaments. Claudius requested office once more and was snubbed. Since the new emperor was no more generous than the old, Claudius gave up hope of public office and retired to a scholarly, private life.

Despite the disdain of the Imperial family, it seems that from very early on the general public respected Claudius. At Augustus&#x27;s death, the &quot;equites&quot;, or knights, chose Claudius to head their delegation. When his house burned down, the Senate demanded it be rebuilt at public expense. They also requested that Claudius be allowed to debate in the Senate. Tiberius turned down both motions, but the sentiment remained.

During the period immediately after the death of Tiberius&#x27;s son, Drusus, Claudius was pushed by some quarters as a potential heir to the throne. This again suggests the political nature of his exclusion from public life. However, as this was also the period during which the power and terror of the commander of the Praetorian Guard, Sejanus, was at its peak, Claudius chose to downplay this possibility. After the death of Tiberius, the new emperor Caligula (the son of Claudius&#x27;s brother Germanicus) recognized Claudius to be of some use. He appointed Claudius his co-consul in 37 to emphasize the memory of Caligula&#x27;s deceased father Germanicus.

Despite this, Caligula tormented his uncle: playing practical jokes, charging him enormous sums of money, humiliating him before the Senate, and the like. According to Cassius Dio, Claudius became sickly and thin by the end of Caligula&#x27;s reign, most likely due to stress. A possible surviving portrait of Claudius from this period may support this.

===Assassination of Caligula (AD 41)===
On 24 January 41, Caligula was assassinated in a conspiracy involving Cassius Chaerea – a military tribune in the Praetorian Guard – and several senators. There is no evidence that Claudius had a direct hand in the assassination, although it has been argued that he knew about the plot – particularly since he left the scene of the crime shortly before his nephew was murdered. However, after the deaths of Caligula&#x27;s wife and daughter, it became apparent that Cassius intended to go beyond the terms of the conspiracy and wipe out the Imperial family.
In the chaos following the murder, Claudius witnessed the German guard cut down several uninvolved noblemen, including many of his friends. He fled to the palace to hide. According to tradition, a Praetorian named Gratus found him hiding behind a curtain and suddenly declared him &quot;princeps&quot;. Claudius was spirited away to the Praetorian camp and put under their protection.

The Senate met and debated a change of government, but this devolved into an argument over which of them would be the new &quot;princeps&quot;. When they heard of the Praetorians&#x27; claim, they demanded that Claudius be delivered to them for approval, but he refused, sensing the danger that would come with complying. Some historians, particularly Josephus, claim that Claudius was directed in his actions by the Judaean King Herod Agrippa. However, an earlier version of events by the same ancient author downplays Agrippa&#x27;s role so it remains uncertain. Eventually the Senate was forced to give in. In return, Claudius granted a general amnesty, although he executed a few junior officers involved in the conspiracy. The actual assassins, including Cassius Chaerea and Julius Lupus, the murderer of Caligula&#x27;s wife and daughter, were put to death to ensure Claudius&#x27;s own safety and as a future deterrent.

==Emperor==

Claudius took several steps to legitimize his rule against potential usurpers, most of them emphasizing his place within the Julio-Claudian family. He adopted the name &quot;Caesar&quot; as a cognomen, as the name still carried great weight with the populace. To do so, he dropped the cognomen &quot;Nero&quot;, which he had adopted as &quot;pater familias&quot; of the Claudii Nerones when his brother Germanicus was adopted. As Pharaoh of Egypt, Claudius adopted the royal titulary &quot;Tiberios Klaudios, Autokrator Heqaheqau Meryasetptah, Kanakht Djediakhshuemakhet&quot; (&quot;Tiberius Claudius, Emperor and ruler of rulers, beloved of Isis and Ptah, the strong bull of the stable moon on the horizon&quot;).

While Claudius had never been formally adopted either by Augustus or his successors, he was nevertheless the grandson of Augustus&#x27;s sister Octavia, and so he felt that he had the right of family. He also adopted the name &quot;Augustus&quot; as the two previous emperors had done at their accessions. He kept the honorific &quot;Germanicus&quot; to display the connection with his heroic brother. He deified his paternal grandmother Livia to highlight her position as wife of the divine Augustus. Claudius frequently used the term &quot;filius Drusi&quot; (son of Drusus) in his titles, to remind the people of his legendary father and lay claim to his reputation.

Since Claudius was the first emperor proclaimed on the initiative of the Praetorian Guard instead of the Senate, his repute suffered at the hands of commentators (such as Seneca). Moreover, he was the first emperor who resorted to bribery as a means to secure army loyalty and rewarded the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard that had elevated him with 15,000 sesterces. Tiberius and Augustus had both left gifts to the army and guard in their wills, and upon Caligula&#x27;s death the same would have been expected, even if no will existed. Claudius remained grateful to the guard, issuing coins with tributes to the Praetorians in the early part of his reign.

Pliny the Elder noted, according to the 1938 Loeb Classical Library translation by Harris Rackham, &quot;... many people do not allow any gems in a signet-ring, and seal with the gold itself; this was a fashion invented when Claudius Cæsar was emperor.&quot;

Claudius restored the status of the peaceful Imperial Roman provinces of Macedonia and Achaea as senatorial provinces.

===Expansion of the Empire===

Under Claudius, the Empire underwent its first major expansion since the reign of Augustus. The provinces of Thrace, Noricum, Lycia, and Judea were annexed (or put under direct rule) under various circumstances during his term. The annexation of Mauretania, begun under Caligula, was completed after the defeat of rebel forces, as well as the official division of the former client kingdom into two Imperial provinces. The most far-reaching conquest was that of Britannia.

In 43, Claudius sent Aulus Plautius with four legions to Britain (&quot;Britannia&quot;) after an appeal from an ousted tribal ally. Britain was an attractive target for Rome because of its material wealth: mines and the potential of slave labor, as well as being a haven for Gallic rebels. Claudius himself traveled to the island after the completion of initial offensives, bringing with him reinforcements and elephants. The Roman &quot;colonia&quot; of &quot;Colonia Claudia Victricensis&quot; was established as the provincial capital of the newly established province of Britannia at Camulodunum, where a large temple was dedicated in his honour.

He left Britain after 16 days, but remained in the provinces for some time. The Senate granted him a triumph for his efforts. Only members of the Imperial family were allowed such honours, but Claudius subsequently lifted this restriction for some of his conquering generals. He was granted the honorific &quot;Britannicus&quot; but only accepted it on behalf of his son, never using the title himself. When the British general Caractacus was captured in 50, Claudius granted him clemency. Caractacus lived out his days on land provided by the Roman state, an unusual end for an enemy commander.

Claudius conducted a census in 48 that found 5,984,072 (adult male) Roman citizens (women, children, slaves, and free adult males without Roman citizenship were not counted), an increase of around a million since the census conducted at Augustus&#x27;s death. He had helped increase this number through the foundation of Roman colonies that were granted blanket citizenship. These colonies were often made out of existing communities, especially those with elites who could rally the populace to the Roman cause. Several colonies were placed in new provinces or on the border of the Empire to secure Roman holdings as quickly as possible.

===Judicial and legislative affairs===
Claudius personally judged many of the legal cases tried during his reign. Ancient historians have many complaints about this, stating that his judgments were variable and sometimes did not follow the law. He was also easily swayed. Nevertheless, Claudius paid detailed attention to the operation of the judicial system. He extended the summer court session, as well as the winter term, by shortening the traditional breaks. Claudius also made a law requiring plaintiffs to remain in the city while their cases were pending, as defendants had previously been required to do. These measures had the effect of clearing out the docket. The minimum age for jurors was also raised to 25 to ensure a more experienced jury pool.

Claudius also settled disputes in the provinces. He freed the island of Rhodes from Roman rule for their good faith and exempted Ilium (Troy) from taxes. Early in his reign, the Greeks and Jews of Alexandria each sent him embassies after riots broke out between the two communities. This resulted in the famous &quot;Letter to the Alexandrians&quot;, which reaffirmed Jewish rights in the city but forbade them to move in more families en masse. According to Josephus, he then reaffirmed the rights and freedoms of all the Jews in the Empire. However, Claudius also expelled Jews from the city of Rome, following disturbances allegedly instigated by Christians. This expulsion is attested to in Acts of the Apostles (18:2), and by Roman historians Suetonius and Cassius Dio along with the fifth-century Christian author Paulus Orosius.

One of Claudius&#x27;s investigators discovered that many old Roman citizens based in the city of Tridentum (modern Trento) were not in fact citizens. The Emperor issued a declaration, contained in the &quot;Tabula clesiana&quot;, that they would be allowed to hold citizenship from then on, since to strip them of their status would cause major problems. However, in individual cases, Claudius punished the false assumption of citizenship harshly, making it a capital offense. Similarly, any freedmen found to be laying false claim to membership of the Roman equestrian order were sold back into slavery.

Numerous edicts were issued throughout Claudius&#x27;s reign. These were on a number of topics, everything from medical advice to moral judgments. A famous medical example is one promoting yew juice as a cure for snakebite. Suetonius wrote that he is even said to have thought of an edict allowing public flatulence for good health. One of the more famous edicts concerned the status of sick slaves. Masters had been abandoning ailing slaves at the temple of Aesculapius on Tiber Island to die instead of providing them with medical assistance and care, and then reclaiming them if they lived. Claudius ruled that slaves who were thus abandoned and recovered after such treatment would be free. Furthermore, masters who chose to kill slaves rather than take care of them were liable to be charged with murder.

===Public works===

Claudius embarked on many public works throughout his reign, both in the capital and in the provinces. He built or finished two aqueducts, the Aqua Claudia, begun by Caligula, and the Aqua Anio Novus. These entered the city in 52 and met at the Porta Maggiore. He also restored a third, the Aqua Virgo.

He paid special attention to transportation. Throughout Italy and the provinces he built roads and canals. Among these was a large canal leading from the Rhine to the sea, as well as a road from Italy to Germany – both begun by his father, Drusus. Closer to Rome, he built a navigable canal on the Tiber, leading to Portus, his new port just north of Ostia. This port was constructed in a semicircle with two moles and a lighthouse at its mouth, reducing flooding in Rome.

The port at Ostia was part of Claudius&#x27;s solution to the constant grain shortages that occurred in winter, after the Roman shipping season. The other part of his solution was to insure the ships of grain merchants who were willing to risk travelling to Egypt in the off-season. He also granted their sailors special privileges, including citizenship and exemption from the Lex Papia Poppaea, a law that regulated marriage. In addition, he repealed the taxes that Caligula had instituted on food, and further reduced taxes on communities suffering drought or famine.

The last part of Claudius&#x27;s plan to avoid famine was to increase the amount of arable land in Italy. This was to be achieved by draining the Fucine lake, also making the nearby river navigable year-round. A serious famine is mentioned in the book of Acts as taking place during Claudius&#x27; reign, and had been prophesied by a Christian called Agabus while visiting Antioch.

A tunnel was dug through the lake bed, but the plan was a failure. The tunnel was crooked and not large enough to carry the water, which caused it to back up when opened. The resultant flood washed out a large gladiatorial exhibition held to commemorate the opening, causing Claudius to run for his life along with the other spectators. The draining of the lake continued to present a problem well into the Middle Ages. It was finally achieved by the Prince Torlonia in the 19th century, producing over of new arable land. He expanded the Claudian tunnel to three times its original size.

===Senate===

Because of the circumstances of his accession, Claudius took great pains to please the Senate. During regular sessions, the Emperor sat among the Senate body, speaking in turn. When introducing a law, he sat on a bench between the consuls in his position as holder of the power of Tribune, (the Emperor could not officially serve as a Tribune of the Plebes since he was a patrician, but this was a power taken by previous rulers, which he continued). He refused to accept all his predecessors&#x27; titles (including Imperator) at the beginning of his reign, preferring to earn them in due course. He allowed the Senate to issue its own bronze coinage for the first time since Augustus. He also put the Imperial provinces of Macedonia and Achaea back under Senate control.

Claudius set about remodeling the Senate into a more efficient, representative body. He chided the senators about their reluctance to debate bills introduced by himself, as noted in the fragments of a surviving speech:

In 47, he assumed the office of &quot;censor&quot; with Lucius Vitellius, which had been allowed to lapse for some time. He struck out the names of many senators and &quot;equites&quot; who no longer met qualifications, but showed respect by allowing them to resign in advance. At the same time, he sought to admit to the senate eligible men from the provinces. The Lyon Tablet preserves his speech on the admittance of Gallic senators, in which he addresses the Senate with reverence but also with criticism for their disdain of these men. He even joked about how the Senate had admitted members from beyond Gallia Narbonensis (Lyons), i.e. himself. He also increased the number of patricians by adding new families to the dwindling number of noble lines. Here he followed the precedent of Lucius Junius Brutus and Julius Caesar.

Nevertheless, many in the Senate remained hostile to Claudius, and many plots were made on his life. This hostility carried over into the historical accounts. As a result, Claudius reduced the Senate&#x27;s power for the sake of efficiency. The administration of Ostia was turned over to an Imperial procurator after construction of the port. Administration of many of the empire&#x27;s financial concerns was turned over to Imperial appointees and freedmen. This led to further resentment and suggestions that these same freedmen were ruling the Emperor.

==== Plots and coup attempts ====
Several coup attempts were made during Claudius&#x27;s reign, resulting in the deaths of many senators. Appius Silanus was executed early in Claudius&#x27;s reign under questionable circumstances. Shortly after this, a large rebellion was undertaken by the Senator Vinicianus and Scribonianus - governor of Dalmatia - and gained quite a few senatorial supporters. It ultimately failed because of the reluctance of Scribonianus&#x27; troops, which led to the suicide of the main conspirators.

Many other senators tried different conspiracies and were condemned. Claudius&#x27;s son-in-law Pompeius Magnus was executed for his part in a conspiracy with his father Crassus Frugi. Another plot involved the consulars Lusius Saturninus, Cornelius Lupus, and Pompeius Pedo.

In 46, Asinius Gallus, grandson of Asinius Pollio, and Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus were exiled for a plot hatched with several of Claudius&#x27;s own freedmen. Valerius Asiaticus was executed without public trial for unknown reasons. Ancient sources say the charge was adultery, and that Claudius was tricked into issuing the punishment. However, Claudius singles out Asiaticus for special damnation in his speech on the Gauls, which dates over a year later, suggesting that the charge must have been much more serious.

Asiaticus had been a claimant to the throne in the chaos following Caligula&#x27;s death and a co-consul with Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus. Most of these conspiracies took place before Claudius&#x27;s term as Censor, and may have induced him to review the Senatorial rolls. The conspiracy of Gaius Silius in the year after his Censorship, 48, is detailed in book 11 of Tacitus&#x27; Annals. This section of Tacitus&#x27; history narrates the alleged conspiracy of Claudius&#x27;s third wife, Messalina. Suetonius states that a total of 35 senators and 300 knights were executed for offenses during Claudius&#x27;s reign. Needless to say, the responses to these conspiracies could not have helped Senate–emperor relations.

===Secretariat and centralization of powers===
Claudius was hardly the first emperor to use freedmen to help with the day-to-day running of the Empire. He was, however, forced to increase their role as the powers of the &quot;princeps&quot; became more centralized and the burden of running the government became larger. Claudius did not want free-born magistrates to serve under him as if they were not peers.

The secretariat was divided into bureaus, with each being placed under the leadership of one freedman. Narcissus was the secretary of correspondence. Pallas became the secretary of the treasury. Callistus became secretary of justice. There was a fourth bureau for miscellaneous issues, which was put under Polybius until his execution for treason. The freedmen could also officially speak for the Emperor, as when Narcissus addressed the troops in Claudius&#x27;s stead before the conquest of Britain.

Since these were important positions, the senators were aghast at their being placed in the hands of former slaves and &quot;well-known eunuchs&quot;. If freedmen had total control of money, letters and law, it seemed it would not be hard for them to manipulate the Emperor. This is exactly the accusation put forth by ancient sources. However, these same sources admit that the freedmen were loyal to Claudius.

He was similarly appreciative of them and gave them due credit for policies where he had used their advice. However, if they showed treasonous inclinations, the Emperor punished them with just force, as in the case of Polybius and Pallas&#x27;s brother, Felix. There is no evidence that the character of Claudius&#x27;s policies and edicts changed with the rise and fall of the various freedmen, suggesting that he was firmly in control throughout.

Regardless of the extent of their political power, the freedmen did manage to amass wealth through their positions. Pliny the Elder notes that several of them were richer than Crassus, the richest man of the Republican era.

===Religious reforms===

Claudius, as the author of a treatise on Augustus&#x27;s religious reforms, felt himself in a good position to institute some of his own. He had strong opinions about the proper form for state religion. He refused the request of Alexandrian Greeks to dedicate a temple to his divinity, saying that only gods may choose new gods. He restored lost days to festivals and got rid of many extraneous celebrations added by Caligula. He re-instituted old observances and archaic language.

Claudius was concerned with the spread of eastern mysteries within the city and searched for more Roman replacements. He emphasized the Eleusinian Mysteries, which had been practiced by so many during the Republic. He expelled foreign astrologers, and at the same time rehabilitated the old Roman soothsayers (known as haruspices) as a replacement. He was especially hard on Druidism, because of its incompatibility with the Roman state religion and its proselytizing activities.

===Public games and entertainments===
According to Suetonius, Claudius was extraordinarily fond of games. He is said to have risen with the crowd after gladiatorial matches and given unrestrained praise to the fighters. Claudius also presided over many new and original events. Soon after coming into power, Claudius instituted games to be held in honor of his father on the latter&#x27;s birthday. Annual games were also held in honour of his accession, and took place at the Praetorian camp where Claudius had first been proclaimed Emperor.

Claudius organised a performance of the Secular Games, marking the 800th anniversary of the founding of Rome. Augustus had performed the same games less than a century prior. Augustus&#x27;s excuse was that the interval for the games was 110 years, not 100, but his date actually did not qualify under either reasoning. Claudius also presented staged naval battles to mark the attempted draining of the Fucine Lake, as well as many other public games and shows.

At Ostia, in front of a crowd of spectators, Claudius fought an orca which was trapped in the harbour. The event was witnessed by Pliny the Elder:

Claudius also restored and adorned many public venues in Rome. At the Circus Maximus, the turning posts and starting stalls were replaced in marble and embellished, and an embankment was probably added to prevent flooding of the track. Claudius also reinforced or extended the seating rules that reserved front seating at the Circus for senators. He rebuilt Pompey&#x27;s Theatre after it had been destroyed by fire, organising special fights at the re-dedication, which he observed from a special platform in the orchestra box.

==Marriages and personal life==
Suetonius and the other ancient authors accused Claudius of being dominated by women and wives, and of being a womanizer.

Claudius married four times, after two failed betrothals. The first betrothal was to his distant cousin Aemilia Lepida, but was broken for political reasons. The second was to Livia Medullina Camilla, which ended with Medullina&#x27;s sudden death on their wedding day.

===Plautia Urgulanilla===
Plautia Urgulanilla was the granddaughter of Livia&#x27;s confidant Urgulania. During their marriage she gave birth to a son, Claudius Drusus. Drusus died of asphyxiation in his early teens, shortly after becoming engaged to Junilla, daughter of Sejanus.

Claudius later divorced Urgulanilla for adultery and on suspicion of murdering her sister-in-law Apronia. When Urgulanilla gave birth after the divorce, Claudius repudiated the baby girl, Claudia, as the father was allegedly one of his own freedmen. Later, this action made him the target of criticism by his enemies.

===Aelia Paetina===
Soon after, (possibly in 28) Claudius married Aelia Paetina, a relative of Sejanus, if not Sejanus&#x27;s adoptive sister. During their marriage, Claudius and Paetina had a daughter, Claudia Antonia. He later divorced her after the marriage became a political liability. One version suggests that it may have been due to emotional and mental abuse by Paetina.

===Valeria Messalina===

Some years after divorcing Aelia Paetina, in 38 or early 39, Claudius married Valeria Messalina, who was his first cousin once removed (Claudius&#x27;s grandmother, Octavia the Younger, was Valeria&#x27;s great-grandmother on both her mother and father&#x27;s side) and closely allied with Caligula&#x27;s circle. Shortly thereafter, she gave birth to a daughter, Claudia Octavia. A son, first named Tiberius Claudius Germanicus, and later known as Britannicus, was born just after Claudius&#x27;s accession.

This marriage ended in tragedy. The ancient historians allege that Messalina was a nymphomaniac who was regularly unfaithful to Claudius—Tacitus states she went so far as to compete with a prostitute to see who could have more sexual partners in a nightand manipulated his policies to amass wealth. In 48, Messalina married her lover Gaius Silius in a public ceremony while Claudius was at Ostia.
Sources disagree as to whether or not she divorced the Emperor first, and whether the intention was to usurp the throne. Under Roman law, the spouse needed to be informed that he or she had been divorced before a new marriage could take place; the sources state that Claudius was in total ignorance until after the marriage. Scramuzza, in his biography, suggests that Silius may have convinced Messalina that Claudius was doomed, and the union was her only hope of retaining her rank and protecting her children. The historian Tacitus suggests that Claudius&#x27;s ongoing term as Censor may have prevented him from noticing the affair before it reached such a critical point, after which she was executed.

===Agrippina the Younger===
Claudius married once more. Ancient sources tell that his freedmen put forward three candidates, Caligula&#x27;s third wife Lollia Paulina, Claudius&#x27;s divorced second wife Aelia Paetina and Claudius&#x27;s niece Agrippina the Younger. According to Suetonius, Agrippina won out through her feminine wiles. She gradually seized power from Claudius and successfully conspired to eliminate his son&#x27;s rivals, opening the way for her son to become emperor.
The truth is probably more political. The attempted coup d&#x27;état by Silius and Messalina probably made Claudius realize the weakness of his position as a member of the Claudian (but not the Julian) family. This weakness was compounded by the fact that he did not yet have an obvious adult heir, Britannicus being just a boy. Agrippina was one of the few remaining descendants of Augustus, and her son Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (the future Nero) was one of the last males of the Imperial family. Coup attempts might rally around the pair and Agrippina was already showing such ambition. It has been suggested that the Senate may have pushed for the marriage, an attempt to end the feud between the Julian and Claudian branches. This feud dated back to Agrippina&#x27;s mother&#x27;s actions against Tiberius after the death of her husband Germanicus (Claudius&#x27;s brother), actions that Tiberius had punished. 

Another reason was to bring in Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus as a candidate for the succession. His prestige as the descendent of Augustus and Germanicus made him popular, and marking him as an heir would have helped the survival of Claudius&#x27; regime. In any case, Claudius accepted Agrippina and later adopted the mature Ahenobarbus as his son, renaming him as &#x27;Nero Claudius Caesar&#x27;.

Nero was married to Claudius&#x27;s daughter Octavia, made joint heir with the underage Britannicus, and promoted; Augustus had similarly named his grandson Postumus Agrippa and his stepson Tiberius as joint heirs, and Tiberius had named Caligula as his joint heir with his grandson Tiberius Gemellus. Adoption of adults or near adults was an old tradition in Rome when a suitable natural adult heir was unavailable, as was the case during Britannicus&#x27;s minority. Claudius may have previously looked to adopt one of his sons-in-law to protect his own reign.

Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix, who was married to Claudius&#x27;s daughter Claudia Antonia, was only descended from Octavia and Antony on one side – not close enough to the Imperial family to ensure his right to be Emperor (although that did not stop others from making him the object of a coup attempt against Nero a few years later), besides being the half-brother of Valeria Messalina, which told against him. Nero was more popular with the general public as both the grandson of Germanicus and the direct descendant of Augustus.

==Affliction and personality==

The historian Suetonius describes the physical manifestations of Claudius&#x27;s condition. His knees were weak and gave way under him and his head shook. He stammered and his speech was confused. He slobbered and his nose ran when he was excited. The Stoic Seneca states in his &quot;Apocolocyntosis&quot; that Claudius&#x27;s voice belonged to no land animal, and that his hands were weak as well.
However, he showed no physical deformity, as Suetonius notes that when calm and seated he was a tall, well-built figure of &quot;dignitas&quot;. When angered or stressed, his symptoms became worse. Historians agree that this condition improved upon his accession to the throne. Claudius himself claimed that he had exaggerated his ailments to save his life.

Modern assessments of his health have changed several times in the past century. Prior to World War II, infantile paralysis (or polio) was widely accepted as the cause. This is the diagnosis used in Robert Graves&#x27;s Claudius novels, first published in the 1930s. &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote in 1934 that Claudius suffered from infantile paralysis (which led to his limp state) and measles (which made him deaf) at seven months of age, among several other ailments. Polio does not explain many of the described symptoms, however, and a more recent theory implicates cerebral palsy as the cause. Tourette syndrome has also been considered a possibility.

As a person, ancient historians described Claudius as generous and lowbrow, a man who sometimes lunched with the plebeians. They also paint him as bloodthirsty and cruel, over-fond of gladiatorial combat and executions, and very quick to anger; Claudius himself acknowledged the latter trait, and apologized publicly for his temper. According to the ancient historians he was also excessively trusting, and easily manipulated by his wives and freedmen, but at the same time they portray him as paranoid and apathetic, dull and easily confused.

==Scholarly works and their impact==
Claudius wrote copiously throughout his life. Arnaldo Momigliano states that during the reign of Tiberius, which covers the peak of Claudius&#x27;s literary career, it became impolitic to speak of republican Rome. The trend among the young historians was either to write about the new empire or about obscure antiquarian topics. Claudius was the rare scholar who covered both.

Besides his history of Augustus&#x27; reign that caused him so much grief, his major works included &quot;Tyrrhenika&quot;, a twenty-book Etruscan history, and &quot;Carchedonica&quot;, an eight-volume history of Carthage, as well as an Etruscan dictionary. He also wrote a book on dice-playing. Despite the general avoidance of the topic of the Republican era, he penned a defense of Cicero against the charges of Asinius Gallus. Modern historians have used this to determine the nature of his politics and of the aborted chapters of his civil war history.
He proposed a reform of the Latin alphabet by the addition of three new letters; he officially instituted the change during his censorship but they did not survive his reign. Claudius also tried to revive the old custom of putting dots between successive words (Classical Latin was written with no spacing). Finally, he wrote an eight-volume autobiography that Suetonius describes as lacking in taste. Claudius (like most of the members of his dynasty) harshly criticized his predecessors and relatives in surviving speeches.

None of the works survived, but other sources&#x27; reference to him provide material for the surviving histories of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Suetonius quotes Claudius&#x27;s autobiography once and must have used it as a source numerous times. Tacitus uses Claudius&#x27;s arguments for the orthographical innovations mentioned above and may have used him for some of the more antiquarian passages in his annals. Claudius is the source for numerous passages of Pliny&#x27;s &quot;Natural History&quot;.

The influence of historical study on Claudius is obvious. In his speech on Gallic senators, he uses a version of the founding of Rome identical to that of Livy, his tutor in adolescence. Many of the public works instituted in his reign were based on plans first suggested by Julius Caesar. Levick believes this emulation of Caesar may have spread to all aspects of his policies.

His censorship seems to have been based on those of his ancestors, particularly Appius Claudius Caecus, and he used the office to put into place many policies based on those of Republican times. This is when many of his religious reforms took effect; also, his building efforts greatly increased during his tenure. In fact, his assumption of the office of Censor may have been motivated by a desire to see his academic labors bear fruit. For example, he believed (as most Romans did) that Caecus had used the power of the censorship office to introduce the letter &quot;R&quot; and so used his own term to introduce his new letters.

==Death==

Ancient historians agree that Claudius was murdered by poison – possibly contained in mushrooms or on a feather (ostensibly put down his throat to induce vomiting) – and died in the early hours of 13 October 54.

Nearly all implicate his final and powerful wife, Agrippina, as the instigator. Agrippina and Claudius had become more combative in the months leading up to his death. This carried on to the point where Claudius openly lamented his bad wives, and began to comment on Britannicus&#x27; approaching manhood with an eye towards restoring his status within the imperial family. Agrippina had motive in ensuring the succession of Nero before Britannicus could gain power.

Some implicate either his taster Halotus, his doctor Xenophon, or the infamous poisoner Locusta as the administrator of the fatal substance. Some say he died after prolonged suffering following a single dose at dinner, and some have him recovering only to be poisoned again. Among his contemporary sources, Seneca the Younger ascribed the emperor&#x27;s death to natural causes, while Josephus only spoke of rumors of his poisoning.

Some historians have cast doubt on whether Claudius was murdered or merely died from illness or old age. Evidence against his murder include his serious illnesses in his last years, his unhealthy lifestyle and the fact that his taster Halotus continued to serve in the same position under Nero. Claudius had been so ill the year before that Nero vowed games for his recovery and the year of 54 seems to have been such an unhealthy year that one sitting member of each magistracy died within the span of a few months. He may even have died by eating a naturally poisonous mushroom, possibly &quot;Amanita muscaria&quot;. On the other hand, some modern scholars claim the near universality of the accusations in ancient texts lends credence to the crime. Claudius&#x27;s ashes were interred in the Mausoleum of Augustus on 24 October 54, after a funeral similar to that of his great-uncle Augustus 40 years earlier.

==Legacy==

===Divine honours===
Already, while alive, he received the widespread private worship of a living &quot;princeps&quot; and was worshipped in Britannia in his own temple in Camulodunum.

Claudius was deified by Nero and the Senate almost immediately.

===Views of the new regime===
Agrippina had sent Narcissus away shortly before Claudius&#x27;s death, and now had the freedman murdered.

The last act of this secretary of letters was to burn all of Claudius&#x27;s correspondence – most likely so it could not be used against him and others in an already hostile new regime. Thus Claudius&#x27;s private words about his own policies and motives were lost to history. Just as Claudius had criticized his predecessors in official edicts, Nero often criticized the deceased Emperor, and many Claudian laws and edicts were disregarded under the reasoning that he was too stupid and senile to have meant them.

Seneca&#x27;s Apocolocyntosis mocks the deification of Claudius and reinforces the view of Claudius as an unpleasant fool; this remained the official view for the duration of Nero&#x27;s reign. Eventually Nero stopped referring to his deified adoptive father at all. Claudius&#x27;s temple was left unfinished after only some of the foundation had been laid down. Eventually the site was overtaken by Nero&#x27;s Golden House.

===Flavian and later perspectives===
The Flavians, who had risen to prominence under Claudius, took a different tack. They needed to shore up their legitimacy, but also justify the fall of the Julio-Claudians. They reached back to Claudius in contrast with Nero, to show that they were associated with a good regime. Commemorative coins were issued of Claudius and his son Britannicus, who had been a friend of Emperor Titus (Titus was born in 39, Britannicus was born in 41). When Nero&#x27;s Golden House was burned, the Temple of Claudius was finally completed on the Caelian Hill.

However, as the Flavians became established, they needed to emphasize their own credentials more, and their references to Claudius ceased. Instead, he was lumped with the other emperors of the fallen dynasty. His state-cult in Rome probably continued until the abolition of all cults of dead Emperors by Maximinus Thrax in 237–238. The &quot;Feriale Duranum&quot;, probably identical to the festival calendars of every regular army unit, assigns him a sacrifice of a steer on his birthday, the Kalends of August. And such commemoration (and consequent feasting) probably continued until the Christianization and disintegration of the army in the late 4th century.

===Views of ancient historians===
The ancient historians Tacitus, Suetonius (in &quot;The Twelve Caesars&quot;), and Cassius Dio all wrote after the last of the Flavians had gone. All three were senators or &quot;equites&quot;. They took the side of the Senate in most conflicts with the Princeps, invariably viewing him as being in the wrong. This resulted in biases, both conscious and unconscious. Suetonius lost access to the official archives shortly after beginning his work. He was forced to rely on second-hand accounts when it came to Claudius (with the exception of Augustus&#x27;s letters, which had been gathered earlier). Suetonius painted Claudius as a ridiculous figure, belittling many of his acts and crediting his good works to his retinue.

Tacitus wrote a narrative for his fellow senators and fitted each of the emperors into a simple mold of his choosing. He wrote of Claudius as a passive pawn and an idiot in affairs relating to the palace and public life. During his Censorship of 47–48 Tacitus allows the reader a glimpse of a Claudius who is more statesmanlike (XI.23–25), but it is a mere glimpse. Tacitus is usually held to have &#x27;hidden&#x27; his use of Claudius&#x27;s writings and to have omitted Claudius&#x27;s character from his works. Even his version of Claudius&#x27;s Lyons tablet speech is edited to be devoid of the emperor&#x27;s personality. Dio was less biased, but seems to have used Suetonius and Tacitus as sources. Thus, the conception of Claudius as a weak fool, controlled by those he supposedly ruled, was preserved for the ages.

As time passed, Claudius was mostly forgotten outside of the historians&#x27; accounts. His books were lost first, as their antiquarian subjects became unfashionable. In the 2nd century, Pertinax, who shared his birthday, became emperor, overshadowing commemoration of Claudius.

==In modern media==
* The best known fictional representation of the Emperor Claudius was contained in the books &quot;I, Claudius&quot; and &quot;Claudius the God&quot; (published in 1934 and 1935, respectively) by Robert Graves, both written in the first-person to give the reader the impression that they are Claudius&#x27;s autobiography. Graves employed a fictive artifice to suggest that they were recently discovered, genuine translations of Claudius&#x27;s writings. Claudius&#x27;s extant letters, speeches, and sayings were incorporated into the text (mostly in the second book, &quot;Claudius the God&quot;), to add authenticity.
** In 1937, director Josef von Sternberg attempted a film version of &quot;I, Claudius&quot;, with Charles Laughton as Claudius. However, the lead actress, Merle Oberon, had a near-fatal car accident and the movie was never finished. The surviving reels were featured in the BBC documentary &quot;The Epic That Never Was&quot; (1965). The motion picture rights for a new film eventually passed to producer Scott Rudin (b. 1958).
** Graves&#x27;s two books were the basis for a British television adaptation &quot;I, Claudius&quot;, produced by the BBC. The series starred Derek Jacobi as Claudius and was broadcast in 1976 on BBC2. It was a substantial critical success, and won several BAFTA awards. The series was later broadcast in the United States on &quot;Masterpiece Theatre&quot; in 1977. The 1996 7-VHS release and the later DVD release of the television series, include &quot;The Epic That Never Was&quot; documentary.
** A radio adaptation of the Graves novels by Robin Brooks and directed by Jonquil Panting, was broadcast in six one-hour episodes on BBC Radio 4 beginning 4 December 2010. The cast featured Tom Goodman-Hill as Claudius, Derek Jacobi as Augustus, Harriet Walter as Livia, Tim McInnerny as Tiberius and Samuel Barnett as Caligula.
** In 2011, it was announced rights for a miniseries adaptation passed to HBO and BBC Two. Anne Thomopoulos and Jane Tranter, producers of the popular HBO–BBC2 &quot;Rome&quot; miniseries, were attached to the &quot;I, Claudius&quot; project. However, as of 2018, it has yet to be produced, and no release date is pending.
* The 1954 film &quot;Demetrius and the Gladiators&quot; also portrayed him sympathetically, played by Barry Jones.
* In the 1960 film &quot;Messalina&quot;, Claudius is portrayed by Mino Doro.
* On television, Freddie Jones portrayed Claudius in the 1968 British television series &quot;The Caesars&quot;.
* The 1975 TV Special &quot;Further Up Pompeii!&quot; (based on the Frankie Howerd sit-com &quot;Up Pompeii!&quot;) featured Cyril Appleton as Claudius.
* In the 1979 motion picture &quot;Caligula&quot;, where the role was performed by Giancarlo Badessi, Claudius is depicted as an idiot, in contrast to Robert Graves&#x27; portrait of Claudius as a cunning and deeply intelligent man, who is perceived by others to be an idiot.
* In the 1981 Franco-Italian film &quot;Caligula and Messalina&quot;, he was portrayed by Gino Turini (as John Turner).
* The 1985 made-for-television miniseries &quot;A.D.&quot; features actor Richard Kiley as Claudius. Kiley portrays him as thoughtful, but willing to cater to public opinion as well as being under the influence of Agrippina.
* In the 2004 TV film &quot;Imperium: Nero&quot;, Claudius is portrayed by Massimo Dapporto.
* He is portrayed in Season 3 of the Netflix documentary series &quot;Roman Empire&quot;, which focused on the reign of Caligula, by Kelson Henderson. The series concludes with Claudius&#x27;s accession.
* There is also a reference to Claudius&#x27;s suppression of a coup in the movie &quot;Gladiator&quot;, though that incident is entirely fictional.
* In the series Britannia (2018), Claudius visits Britannia, played by Steve Pemberton as a fool who is drugged by Aulus Plautius.
* He is portrayed by Derek Jacobi in the 2019 BBC film Horrible Histories: The Movie - Rotten Romans

In literature, Claudius and his contemporaries appear in the historical novel &quot;The Roman&quot; by Mika Waltari. Canadian-born science fiction writer A. E. van Vogt reimagined Robert Graves&#x27;s Claudius story, in his two novels, &quot;Empire of the Atom&quot; and &quot;The Wizard of Linn&quot;.

The historical novel &quot;Chariot of the Soul&quot; by Linda Proud features Claudius as host and mentor of the young Togidubnus, son of King Verica of the Atrebates, during his ten-year stay in Rome. When Togidubnus returns to Britain in advance of the Roman army, it is with a mission given to him by Claudius.

==See also==
* Julio-Claudian family tree
* List of Roman emperors
* Temple of Claudius

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===Ancient sources===
*
*
*
===Modern sources===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==

* Works by Claudius
** Claudius&#x27; Letter to the Alexandrians
** Lyon Tablet
*** Second half of the Lyons Tablet
*** Tacitus&#x27; version of the Lyons Tablet speech
** Edict confirming the rights of the people of Trent. Full Latin text here.
* Biography from De Imperatoribus Romanis
* Claudius Page
* Claudius I at BBC History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="0" end="44" title="Claudius" label="Tiberius Claudius Caesar Augustus Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="90" end="98" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q842606" start="106" end="119" title="Roman emperor" label="Roman emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="162" end="184" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="207" end="213" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229836" start="218" end="231" title="Antonia Minor" label="Antonia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q665" start="235" end="243" title="Lugdunum" label="Lugdunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="247" end="257" title="Roman Gaul" label="Roman Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q913582" start="362" end="367" title="Roman Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="527" end="537" title="consulship" label="consulship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="573" end="581" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="714" end="722" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="849" end="865" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="1343" end="1362" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="conquest of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q162314" start="1394" end="1397" title="Roman law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="1638" end="1646" title="Roman Senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="1827" end="1848" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q250358" start="1904" end="1919" title="Adoption in ancient Rome" label="legally adopted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="1930" end="1934" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q272851" start="1995" end="2008" title="Roman naming conventions" label="Roman customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="2183" end="2189" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="father"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="2205" end="2215" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="2300" end="2308" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2324" end="2332" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268376" start="2342" end="2356" title="Julii Caesares" label="Julii Caesares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596516" start="2379" end="2386" title="agnomen" label="agnomen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2514" end="2529" title="Claudia gens#Claudii Nerones" label="Claudii Nerones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="2569" end="2577" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="2593" end="2601" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268376" start="2611" end="2625" title="Julii Caesares" label="Julii Caesares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="2740" end="2748" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q665" start="3791" end="3799" title="Lugdunum" label="Lugdunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="3808" end="3812" title="Lyon, France" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3814" end="3820" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="3850" end="3860" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q234665" start="3865" end="3872" title="Livilla" label="Livilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q229836" start="3886" end="3899" title="Antonia Minor" label="Antonia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q51673" start="3992" end="4003" title="Mark Antony" label="Mark Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q229483" start="4008" end="4021" title="Octavia Minor" label="Octavia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="4023" end="4031" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="4099" end="4118" title="Julius Caesar" label="Gaius Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q469701" start="4151" end="4156" title="Livia" label="Livia"/>
<link wikidata="Q342512" start="4190" end="4212" title="Tiberius Claudius Nero (father of Tiberius Caesar)" label="Tiberius Claudius Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="4276" end="4296" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Nero Claudius Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039" start="5232" end="5236" title="Livy" label="Livy"/>
<link wikidata="Q280432" start="5389" end="5400" title="Athenodoros Cananites" label="Athenodorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747183" start="5680" end="5690" title="Roman civil wars" label="Civil Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="5766" end="5781" title="Augustus" label="Caesar Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054291" start="6110" end="6120" title="Party line (politics)" label="party line"/>
<link wikidata="Q212079" start="6210" end="6228" title="Second Triumvirate" label="Second Triumvirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="6322" end="6326" title="Triumphal arch" label="Arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259" start="6330" end="6335" title="Pavia" label="Pavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q601444" start="6474" end="6488" title="pater familias" label="pater familias"/>
<link wikidata="Q298162" start="6604" end="6609" title="Gaius Caesar" label="Gaius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313735" start="6614" end="6620" title="Lucius Caesar" label="Lucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="6870" end="6878" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="6911" end="6925" title="cursus honorum" label="cursus honorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="7355" end="7362" title="Equestrian (Roman)" label="equites"/>
<link wikidata="Q313737" start="7708" end="7714" title="Drusus Julius Caesar" label="Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="7959" end="7975" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q120015" start="7977" end="7984" title="Sejanus" label="Sejanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="8093" end="8101" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="8138" end="8148" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="8471" end="8482" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500368" start="8572" end="8578" title="Psychological stress" label="stress"/>
<link wikidata="Q18074156" start="8747" end="8757" title="conspiracy (political)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q333788" start="8768" end="8783" title="Cassius Chaerea" label="Cassius Chaerea"/>
<link wikidata="Q849288" start="8788" end="8804" title="military tribune" label="military tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="8812" end="8828" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="8843" end="8851" title="Roman Senate" label="senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q240928" start="9105" end="9125" title="Milonia Caesonia" label="Caligula&amp;#x27;s wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q235586" start="9130" end="9138" title="Julia Drusilla (daughter of Caligula)" label="daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514172" start="9314" end="9326" title="Numerus Batavorum" label="German guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597732" start="9470" end="9476" title="Gratus" label="Gratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q396808" start="9543" end="9551" title="princeps" label="princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049836" start="9593" end="9608" title="Castra Praetoria" label="Praetorian camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="9994" end="10002" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="10059" end="10066" title="Iudaea Province" label="Judaean"/>
<link wikidata="Q298636" start="10072" end="10085" title="Herod Agrippa" label="Herod Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="10708" end="10729" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian family"/>
<link wikidata="Q777342" start="10775" end="10783" title="cognomen" label="cognomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q782456" start="11092" end="11102" title="Autokrator" label="Autokrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="12142" end="12148" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="12412" end="12417" title="will (law)" label="wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="12631" end="12646" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q645948" start="12676" end="12698" title="Loeb Classical Library" label="Loeb Classical Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="12964" end="12973" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="12978" end="12984" title="Achaea (Roman province)" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q182547" start="12988" end="13008" title="senatorial provinces" label="senatorial provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="13151" end="13157" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q131434" start="13159" end="13166" title="Noricum" label="Noricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18927" start="13168" end="13173" title="Lycia" label="Lycia"/>
<link wikidata="Q104028" start="13179" end="13184" title="Judea" label="Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q194465" start="13190" end="13197" title="annexation" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q309272" start="13288" end="13298" title="Mauretania" label="Mauretania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="13496" end="13513" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="that of Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q352489" start="13537" end="13551" title="Aulus Plautius" label="Aulus Plautius"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="13562" end="13569" title="Roman legion" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="13792" end="13798" title="Gaul" label="Gallic"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="13955" end="13962" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="14080" end="14101" title="Roman Britain" label="province of Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q630604" start="14105" end="14116" title="Camulodunum" label="Camulodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q764886" start="14132" end="14166" title="Temple of Claudius, Colchester" label="temple was dedicated in his honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="14270" end="14277" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q335073" start="14597" end="14607" title="Caractacus" label="Caractacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213810" start="15128" end="15139" title="Roman citizenship" label="citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="16240" end="16246" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16304" end="16308" title="Troy#Classical Ilium (Ilion)" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="16346" end="16352" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354069" start="16357" end="16375" title="Jews of Alexandria" label="Jews of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="16627" end="16635" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869830" start="16691" end="16709" title="History of the Jews in the Roman Empire" label="Jews in the Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129460" start="16734" end="16769" title="Claudius&amp;#x27; expulsion of Jews from Rome" label="expelled Jews from the city of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302871" start="16818" end="16828" title="Christianity in the 1st century" label="Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="16863" end="16883" title="Acts of the Apostles" label="Acts of the Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16885" end="16889" title="Acts 18:2" label="18:2"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="16930" end="16941" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q311456" start="16988" end="17002" title="Paulus Orosius" label="Paulus Orosius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376" start="17121" end="17127" title="Trento" label="Trento"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163465" start="17213" end="17228" title="Tabula clesiana" label="Tabula clesiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="17559" end="17581" title="Roman equestrian order" label="Roman equestrian order"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="17801" end="17804" title="Taxus baccata" label="yew"/>
<link wikidata="Q68854" start="17825" end="17834" title="snakebite" label="snakebite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023765" start="18061" end="18082" title="Temple of Asclepius, Rome" label="temple of Aesculapius"/>
<link wikidata="Q545404" start="18086" end="18098" title="Tiber Island" label="Tiber Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218676" start="18571" end="18580" title="Aqueduct (Roman)" label="aqueducts"/>
<link wikidata="Q622930" start="18586" end="18598" title="Aqua Claudia" label="Aqua Claudia"/>
<link wikidata="Q548608" start="18627" end="18642" title="Aqua Anio Novus" label="Aqua Anio Novus"/>
<link wikidata="Q751318" start="18688" end="18702" title="Porta Maggiore" label="Porta Maggiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q600139" start="18734" end="18744" title="Aqua Virgo" label="Aqua Virgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="18901" end="18906" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q685132" start="18930" end="18958" title="Via Claudia Augusta" label="a road from Italy to Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q156778" start="18987" end="18993" title="Nero Claudius Drusus" label="Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13712" start="19045" end="19050" title="Tiber" label="Tiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037271" start="19063" end="19069" title="Portus" label="Portus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="19098" end="19103" title="Ostia Antica (archaeological site)" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13370235" start="19156" end="19161" title="Mole (architecture)" label="moles"/>
<link wikidata="Q43183" start="19404" end="19410" title="Insurance" label="insure"/>
<link wikidata="Q477796" start="19599" end="19616" title="Lex Papia Poppaea" label="Lex Papia Poppaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="19784" end="19790" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q914789" start="19939" end="19950" title="Fucine lake" label="Fucine lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="20040" end="20052" title="book of Acts" label="book of Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q335127" start="20144" end="20150" title="Agabus" label="Agabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="20166" end="20173" title="Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993839" start="20634" end="20642" title="Torlonia" label="Torlonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23000145" start="20715" end="20730" title="Tunnels of Claudius" label="Claudian tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="20867" end="20873" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="21061" end="21068" title="Tribune" label="Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="21152" end="21161" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q725434" start="21297" end="21306" title="Imperator" label="Imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q207497" start="21505" end="21514" title="Macedonia (Roman province)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q204772" start="21519" end="21525" title="Achaea (Roman province)" label="Achaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="21812" end="21818" title="Roman censor" label="censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q351491" start="21830" end="21846" title="Lucius Vitellius" label="Lucius Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108" start="22140" end="22151" title="Lyon Tablet" label="Lyon Tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26897" start="22383" end="22401" title="Gallia Narbonensis" label="Gallia Narbonensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="22403" end="22408" title="Lyons" label="Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q223440" start="22565" end="22585" title="Lucius Junius Brutus" label="Lucius Junius Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="22590" end="22603" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q731997" start="22906" end="22916" title="Promagistrate" label="procurator"/>
<link wikidata="Q721170" start="23301" end="23315" title="Appius Silanus" label="Appius Silanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16167135" start="23462" end="23472" title="Lucius Annius Vinicianus" label="Vinicianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q710717" start="23477" end="23489" title="Lucius Arruntius Camillus Scribonianus" label="Scribonianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330965" start="23504" end="23512" title="Dalmatia (Roman province)" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338377" start="23786" end="23801" title="Gnaeus Pompeius Magnus (husband of Claudia Antonia)" label="Pompeius Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233627" start="23860" end="23873" title="Marcus Licinius Crassus Frugi (consul 27)" label="Crassus Frugi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47468435" start="23911" end="23928" title="Quintus Futius Lusius Saturninus" label="Lusius Saturninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q329563" start="23930" end="23945" title="Cornelius Lupus" label="Cornelius Lupus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23974" end="23988" title="Gaius Asinius Gallus Saloninus#Family" label="Asinius Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319273" start="24002" end="24016" title="Gaius Asinius Pollio (consul 40 BC)" label="Asinius Pollio"/>
<link wikidata="Q718967" start="24022" end="24053" title="Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus" label="Titus Statilius Taurus Corvinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181866" start="24131" end="24149" title="Valerius Asiaticus" label="Valerius Asiaticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="24240" end="24248" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="24704" end="24710" title="Roman censor" label="Censor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14852482" start="24787" end="24799" title="Gaius Silius" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q229871" start="24987" end="24996" title="Messalina" label="Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q841571" start="25310" end="25318" title="Freedman" label="freedmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q724689" start="25733" end="25742" title="Tiberius Claudius Narcissus" label="Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q955856" start="25780" end="25786" title="Pallas (freedman)" label="Pallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1491470" start="25825" end="25834" title="Gaius Julius Callistus" label="Callistus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364198" start="25936" end="25944" title="Polybius (freedman)" label="Polybius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="26111" end="26130" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="conquest of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q179294" start="26269" end="26275" title="eunuch" label="eunuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q316915" start="26800" end="26805" title="Antonius Felix" label="Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q175121" start="27172" end="27179" title="Crassus" label="Crassus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="27204" end="27218" title="Roman Republic" label="Republican era"/>
<link wikidata="Q26314" start="27865" end="27885" title="Eleusinian Mysteries" label="Eleusinian Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q623455" start="28048" end="28058" title="haruspices" label="haruspices"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="28104" end="28112" title="Druidism" label="Druidism"/>
<link wikidata="Q217170" start="28183" end="28196" title="Proselytism" label="proselytizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q739680" start="28794" end="28807" title="Secular Games" label="Secular Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247524" start="28846" end="28862" title="founding of Rome" label="founding of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q914789" start="29157" end="29168" title="Fucine Lake" label="Fucine Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="29281" end="29285" title="orca" label="orca"/>
<link wikidata="Q207808" start="29435" end="29449" title="Circus Maximus" label="Circus Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q944814" start="29723" end="29744" title="Pompey&amp;#x27;s Theatre" label="Pompey&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="30038" end="30047" title="Womanizing" label="womanizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q259576" start="30154" end="30168" title="Aemilia Lepida (fiancee of Claudius)" label="Aemilia Lepida"/>
<link wikidata="Q435226" start="30226" end="30249" title="Livia Medullina Camilla" label="Livia Medullina Camilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q236259" start="30347" end="30366" title="Plautia Urgulanilla" label="Plautia Urgulanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q469853" start="30415" end="30424" title="Urgulania" label="Urgulania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975271" start="30473" end="30488" title="Claudius Drusus" label="Claudius Drusus"/>
<link wikidata="Q120015" start="30593" end="30600" title="Sejanus" label="Sejanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774631" start="30765" end="30774" title="repudiate" label="repudiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q238448" start="30988" end="31001" title="Aelia Paetina" label="Aelia Paetina"/>
<link wikidata="Q255410" start="31125" end="31140" title="Claudia Antonia" label="Claudia Antonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229871" start="31406" end="31423" title="Valeria Messalina" label="Valeria Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q231262" start="31692" end="31707" title="Claudia Octavia" label="Claudia Octavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313115" start="31777" end="31788" title="Britannicus" label="Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q267907" start="31921" end="31933" title="Hypersexuality" label="nymphomaniac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="31975" end="31982" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q285517" start="32172" end="32184" title="Gaius Silius (consul designatus 49 AD)" label="Gaius Silius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012797" start="32228" end="32233" title="Ostia Antica (archaeological site)" label="Ostia"/>
<link wikidata="Q256048" start="33095" end="33109" title="Lollia Paulina" label="Lollia Paulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q238448" start="33148" end="33161" title="Aelia Paetina" label="Aelia Paetina"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="33188" end="33209" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="33484" end="33500" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="33837" end="33864" title="Nero" label="Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="33877" end="33881" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q229413" start="34206" end="34219" title="Agrippina the Elder" label="mother&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q191039" start="34276" end="34286" title="Germanicus" label="Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313115" start="34839" end="34850" title="Britannicus" label="Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q325906" start="34908" end="34924" title="Postumus Agrippa" label="Postumus Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="34941" end="34949" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q319410" start="35034" end="35051" title="Tiberius Gemellus" label="Tiberius Gemellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q250358" start="35053" end="35061" title="Adoption in ancient Rome" label="Adoption"/>
<link wikidata="Q705117" start="35315" end="35344" title="Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix" label="Faustus Cornelius Sulla Felix"/>
<link wikidata="Q255410" start="35390" end="35405" title="Claudia Antonia" label="Claudia Antonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229871" start="35685" end="35702" title="Valeria Messalina" label="Valeria Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="35895" end="35904" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="36133" end="36138" title="Stoicism" label="Stoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="36139" end="36145" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q242030" start="36166" end="36181" title="Apocolocyntosis" label="Apocolocyntosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919052" start="36410" end="36418" title="Dignitas (Roman concept)" label="dignitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="36730" end="36742" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12195" start="36744" end="36763" title="infantile paralysis" label="infantile paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="36839" end="36852" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q135215" start="36860" end="36875" title="Claudius (novel)" label="Claudius novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="36913" end="36931" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q79793" start="37034" end="37041" title="measles" label="measles"/>
<link wikidata="Q210427" start="37218" end="37232" title="cerebral palsy" label="cerebral palsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191779" start="37247" end="37264" title="Tourette syndrome" label="Tourette syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q104687" start="37419" end="37428" title="plebeians" label="plebeians"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="37490" end="37502" title="gladiator" label="gladiatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q644418" start="37934" end="37952" title="Arnaldo Momigliano" label="Arnaldo Momigliano"/>
<link wikidata="Q104698894" start="38372" end="38382" title="Tyrrhenika" label="Tyrrhenika"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="38404" end="38412" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6343" start="38479" end="38487" title="Carthage" label="Carthage"/>
<link wikidata="Q35726" start="38503" end="38511" title="Etruscan language" label="Etruscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q24883170" start="38540" end="38560" title="De arte aleae" label="book on dice-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541" start="38651" end="38657" title="Cicero" label="Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q450708" start="38681" end="38695" title="Gaius Asinius Gallus Saloninus" label="Asinius Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="38852" end="38866" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232690" start="38886" end="38903" title="Claudian letters" label="three new letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067693" start="39029" end="39059" title="Interpunct" label="the old custom of putting dots"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="39834" end="39849" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048" start="40133" end="40146" title="Julius Caesar" label="Julius Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q297783" start="40318" end="40340" title="Appius Claudius Caecus" label="Appius Claudius Caecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9852" start="40791" end="40815" title="R" label="the letter &amp;quot;R&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="41146" end="41155" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina"/>
<link wikidata="Q313115" start="41363" end="41374" title="Britannicus" label="Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572114" start="41597" end="41604" title="Halotus" label="Halotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346086" start="41617" end="41625" title="Gaius Stertinius Xenophon" label="Xenophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q242475" start="41652" end="41659" title="Locusta" label="Locusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="41871" end="41889" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q131227" start="42594" end="42610" title="Amanita muscaria" label="Amanita muscaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q770847" start="42794" end="42815" title="Mausoleum of Augustus" label="Mausoleum of Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q396808" start="43029" end="43037" title="princeps" label="princeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q138396" start="43066" end="43075" title="Britannia" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q764886" start="43087" end="43108" title="Temple of Claudius, Colchester" label="temple in Camulodunum"/>
<link wikidata="Q724689" start="43225" end="43234" title="Tiberius Claudius Narcissus" label="Narcissus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054" start="43832" end="43838" title="Seneca the Younger" label="Seneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q242030" start="43846" end="43861" title="Apocolocyntosis" label="Apocolocyntosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="44245" end="44257" title="Domus Aurea" label="Golden House"/>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="44301" end="44309" title="Flavians" label="Flavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q313115" start="44633" end="44644" title="Britannicus" label="Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="44679" end="44684" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="44754" end="44766" title="Domus Aurea" label="Golden House"/>
<link wikidata="Q523765" start="44783" end="44801" title="Temple of Claudius" label="Temple of Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777" start="45150" end="45165" title="Maximinus Thrax" label="Maximinus Thrax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444300" start="45188" end="45203" title="Feriale Duranum" label="Feriale Duranum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45313" end="45318" title="Cattle#Terminology" label="steer"/>
<link wikidata="Q282162" start="45340" end="45347" title="Kalends" label="Kalends"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="45597" end="45615" title="The Twelve Caesars" label="The Twelve Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="45628" end="45639" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436" start="47284" end="47292" title="Pertinax" label="Pertinax"/>
<link wikidata="Q135215" start="47496" end="47507" title="I, Claudius" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q135215" start="47524" end="47540" title="Claudius the God" label="Claudius the God"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="47593" end="47606" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q690940" start="47628" end="47640" title="Grammatical person" label="first-person"/>
<link wikidata="Q78719" start="48039" end="48058" title="Josef von Sternberg" label="Josef von Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3146440" start="48093" end="48104" title="I, Claudius (film)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q55264" start="48117" end="48133" title="Charles Laughton" label="Charles Laughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q230958" start="48174" end="48186" title="Merle Oberon" label="Merle Oberon"/>
<link wikidata="Q461529" start="48424" end="48435" title="Scott Rudin" label="Scott Rudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q135096" start="48531" end="48542" title="I, Claudius (TV series)" label="I, Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="48566" end="48569" title="British Broadcasting Corporation" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="48590" end="48602" title="Derek Jacobi" label="Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="48644" end="48648" title="BBC Two" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q159661" start="48705" end="48710" title="British Academy of Film and Television Arts" label="BAFTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297878" start="48780" end="48799" title="Masterpiece Theatre" label="Masterpiece Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352276" start="48993" end="49005" title="Robin Brooks" label="Robin Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275888" start="49022" end="49037" title="Jonquil Panting" label="Jonquil Panting"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="49081" end="49092" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815969" start="49138" end="49154" title="Tom Goodman-Hill" label="Tom Goodman-Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="49168" end="49180" title="Derek Jacobi" label="Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="Q271177" start="49194" end="49208" title="Harriet Walter" label="Harriet Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q552162" start="49219" end="49232" title="Tim McInnerny" label="Tim McInnerny"/>
<link wikidata="Q736794" start="49249" end="49263" title="Samuel Barnett (actor)" label="Samuel Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q209878" start="49443" end="49447" title="Rome (TV series)" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1213081" start="49622" end="49650" title="Demetrius and the Gladiators" label="Demetrius and the Gladiators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885759" start="49703" end="49714" title="Barry Jones (actor)" label="Barry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306980" start="49741" end="49750" title="Messalina (1960 film)" label="Messalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590462" start="49783" end="49792" title="Mino Doro" label="Mino Doro"/>
<link wikidata="Q195396" start="49811" end="49824" title="Freddie Jones" label="Freddie Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720918" start="49888" end="49899" title="The Caesars (TV series)" label="The Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q979233" start="49975" end="49989" title="Frankie Howerd" label="Frankie Howerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7897988" start="50004" end="50015" title="Up Pompeii!" label="Up Pompeii!"/>
<link wikidata="Q23900820" start="50032" end="50046" title="Cyril Appleton" label="Cyril Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217685" start="50095" end="50103" title="Caligula (film)" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q472847" start="50143" end="50160" title="Giancarlo Badessi" label="Giancarlo Badessi"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="50211" end="50224" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="50487" end="50497" title="miniseries" label="miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q202600" start="50530" end="50543" title="Richard Kiley" label="Richard Kiley"/>
<link wikidata="Q316732" start="50709" end="50723" title="Nero (2004 film)" label="Imperium: Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1907673" start="50756" end="50772" title="Massimo Dapporto" label="Massimo Dapporto"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="50811" end="50818" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q27856747" start="50844" end="50856" title="Roman Empire (TV series)" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128518" start="51066" end="51075" title="Gladiator (2000 film)" label="Gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613581" start="51198" end="51213" title="Steve Pemberton" label="Steve Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q352489" start="51242" end="51256" title="Aulus Plautius" label="Aulus Plautius"/>
<link wikidata="Q256164" start="51279" end="51291" title="Derek Jacobi" label="Derek Jacobi"/>
<link wikidata="" start="51313" end="51358" title="Horrible Histories: The Movie – Rotten Romans" label="Horrible Histories: The Movie - Rotten Romans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016345" start="51444" end="51453" title="The Roman" label="The Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q193111" start="51463" end="51475" title="Mika Waltari" label="Mika Waltari"/>
<link wikidata="Q315059" start="51514" end="51528" title="A. E. van Vogt" label="A. E. van Vogt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202872" start="51602" end="51620" title="Empire of the Atom" label="Empire of the Atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227321" start="51637" end="51655" title="The Wizard of Linn" label="The Wizard of Linn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551905" start="51720" end="51731" title="Linda Proud" label="Linda Proud"/>
<link wikidata="Q520835" start="51993" end="52019" title="Julio-Claudian family tree" label="Julio-Claudian family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q125740" start="52022" end="52044" title="List of Roman emperors" label="List of Roman emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q523765" start="52047" end="52065" title="Temple of Claudius" label="Temple of Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108" start="52272" end="52283" title="Lyon Tablet" label="Lyon Tablet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163465" start="52376" end="52426" title="Tabula clesiana" label="Edict confirming the rights of the people of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="" start="52444" end="52448" title=":it:Tabula clesiana" label="here"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6141" wikidata="Q1570209" url="?curid=6141" title="Cardinal">
<text>Cardinal or The Cardinal most commonly refers to
* Cardinalidae, a family of North and South American birds
**&quot;Cardinalis&quot;, genus of three species in the family Cardinalidae
***Northern cardinal, &quot;Cardinalis cardinalis&quot;, the common cardinal of eastern North America
***Pyrrhuloxia or desert cardinal, &quot;Cardinalis sinuatus&quot;, found in southwest North America 
***Vermilion cardinal, &quot;Cardinalis phoeniceus&quot;, found in Colombia and Venezuela
* Cardinal (Catholic Church), a senior official of the Catholic Church
**Member of the College of Cardinals
* Cardinal Health, a health care services company
* Cardinal number
** Large cardinal
* Cardinal direction, one of the four primary directions: north, south, east, and west
* &quot;Cardinal&quot; (TV series), a 2017 Canadian television series
* Arizona Cardinals, an American professional football team
* St. Louis Cardinals, an American professional baseball team

Cardinal or The Cardinal may also refer to:

== Animals ==
===Birds===
In addition to the aforementioned cardinalids:
* &quot;Paroaria&quot;, a South American genus of birds in the family Thraupidae commonly called red-headed cardinals or cardinal-tanagers
* Yellow cardinal, &quot;Gubernatrix cristata&quot; a South American bird in the family Thraupidae

===Other animals===
* &quot;Argynnis pandora&quot;, a species of butterfly
* Cardinal tetra, a freshwater fish

==Businesses==
* Cardinal Brewery, a brewery founded in 1788 by François Piller, located in Fribourg, Switzerland
* Cardinal Technologies, a defunct modem manufacturer (1987–1997)

== Christianity ==
* Cardinal (Church of England), either of two members of the College of Minor Canons of St. Paul&#x27;s Cathedral
* Cardinal (Catholic Church) a senior member of the Catholic Church.

==Entertainment==
===Films===
* &quot;Cardinals&quot;, a 2017 Canadian film
* &quot;The Cardinal&quot;, a 1936 British historical drama
* &quot;The Cardinal&quot;, a 1963 American film

===Games===
* Cardinal (chess), a fairy chess piece, also known as the archbishop
* Cardinal, a participant in the army drinking game Cardinal Puff

===Music===
====Groups====
* Cardinal (band), indie pop duo formed in 1992
* The Cardinals (rock band), a group formed in 2003
* The Cardinals, a 1950s R&amp;B group

====Albums====
* &quot;Cardinal&quot; (Cardinal album), 1994
* &quot;Cardinal&quot; (Pinegrove album), 2016

===Television===
* &quot;Cardinal&quot; (&quot;The Americans&quot;), the second episode of the second season of the television series &quot;The Americans&quot;

===Other arts, entertainment, and media===
* Cardinal (comics), a supervillain appearing in Marvel Comics
* &quot;The Cardinal&quot; (1641 play), a Caroline era tragedy by James Shirley
* &quot;The Cardinal&quot; (1901 play), a historical play by the British writer Louis N. Parker
* The Cardinal System, a system appearing in the &quot;Sword Art Online&quot; series
* Cardinal, a stormtrooper officer featured in &quot;Star Wars: Phasma&quot;, a novel by Delilah S. Dawson

==Linguistics==
* Cardinal numeral, a part of speech for expressing numbers by name
* Cardinal vowel, a concept in phonetics

==Mathematics==
* Cardinal voting

==Navigation==
* Cardinal mark, a sea mark used in navigation

==Places==
* Cardinal, Manitoba, Canada
* Cardinal, Ontario, Canada
* Cardinal High School (Middlefield, Ohio), a public high school in Middlefield, Ohio, Geauga County, United States
* Cardinal Mountain, a summit in California
* Cardinal Power Plant, a power plant in Jefferson County, Ohio
* Cardinal, Virginia, United States
* C/2008 T2 (Cardinal), a comet

==Plants==
* Cardinal (grape), a table grape first produced in California in 1939
* &quot;Lobelia cardinalis&quot;, also known as &quot;cardinal flower&quot;

==Sports==
* Assindia Cardinals, an American football club from Essen, Germany
* Ball State Cardinals, the athletic teams of Ball State University
* Cardenales de Lara, a Venezuelan baseball team
* Catholic University Cardinals, the athletic teams of the Catholic University of America
* Front Royal Cardinals, an American baseball team
*Incarnate Word Cardinals, the athletic teams of the University of the Incarnate Word
* Lamar Cardinals, the athletic teams of Lamar University in Beaumont, Texas, USA
* Louisville Cardinals, the athletic teams of University of Louisville
* Mapúa Cardinals, the athletic teams of Mapúa University
* North Central Cardinals, the athletic teams of North Central College
* St. John Fisher Cardinals, the athletic teams of St. John Fisher College in Rochester, NY
* Stanford Cardinal, the athletic teams of Stanford University; named for the color but not the bird
* Wesleyan Cardinals, the athletic teams of Wesleyan University
* West Perth Football Club, an Australian rules football club in Western Australia
* Woking F.C., an English football team

==Transport==
===Aircraft===
* Cessna 177 Cardinal, a single engine aircraft
* St. Louis Cardinal C-2-110, a light aircraft built in 1928
* NCSIST Cardinal, a family of small UAVs

===Trains===
* &quot;Cardinal&quot; (train)
* &quot;The Cardinal&quot; (railcar)

==Other uses==
* Cardinal (color), a vivid red
* Cardinal (name), a surname
* Cardinal, a Ruby programming language implementation using for the Parrot virtual machine

==See also==
* Cardenal, a surname
* Cardinal sin or cardinal syn
* Cardinale, a surname</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1570209" start="0" end="8" title="Cardinal" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570209" start="12" end="24" title="Cardinal" label="The Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q223402" start="51" end="63" title="Cardinalidae" label="Cardinalidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q858444" start="116" end="126" title="Cardinalis" label="Cardinalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q726389" start="187" end="204" title="Northern cardinal" label="Northern cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q166985" start="289" end="300" title="Pyrrhuloxia" label="Pyrrhuloxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q854674" start="391" end="409" title="Vermilion cardinal" label="Vermilion cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="480" end="506" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal (Catholic Church)"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="565" end="585" title="College of Cardinals" label="College of Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q902397" start="588" end="603" title="Cardinal Health" label="Cardinal Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="638" end="653" title="Cardinal number" label="Cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548262" start="657" end="671" title="Large cardinal" label="Large cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23718" start="674" end="692" title="Cardinal direction" label="Cardinal direction"/>
<link wikidata="Q22907055" start="761" end="793" title="Cardinal (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Cardinal&amp;quot; (TV series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q224164" start="831" end="848" title="Arizona Cardinals" label="Arizona Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="891" end="910" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570209" start="952" end="960" title="Cardinal" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570209" start="964" end="976" title="Cardinal" label="The Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078332" start="1078" end="1086" title="Paroaria" label="Paroaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q550274" start="1211" end="1226" title="Yellow cardinal" label="Yellow cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q691376" start="1337" end="1353" title="Argynnis pandora" label="Argynnis pandora"/>
<link wikidata="Q590731" start="1386" end="1400" title="Cardinal tetra" label="Cardinal tetra"/>
<link wikidata="Q225900" start="1438" end="1454" title="Cardinal Brewery" label="Cardinal Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q55864479" start="1537" end="1558" title="Cardinal Technologies" label="Cardinal Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146776" start="1623" end="1651" title="Cardinal (Church of England)" label="Cardinal (Church of England)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1737" end="1763" title="Cardinal (Catholic Church)" label="Cardinal (Catholic Church)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39074573" start="1837" end="1858" title="Cardinals (film)" label="&amp;quot;Cardinals&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721341" start="1883" end="1907" title="The Cardinal (1936 film)" label="&amp;quot;The Cardinal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q737065" start="1949" end="1961" title="The Cardinal" label="The Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q646328" start="2005" end="2021" title="Cardinal (chess)" label="Cardinal (chess)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432248" start="2125" end="2138" title="Cardinal Puff" label="Cardinal Puff"/>
<link wikidata="Q96374447" start="2169" end="2184" title="Cardinal (band)" label="Cardinal (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825609" start="2217" end="2242" title="The Cardinals (rock band)" label="The Cardinals (rock band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28464787" start="2269" end="2282" title="The Cardinals" label="The Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038524" start="2324" end="2361" title="Cardinal (Cardinal album)" label="&amp;quot;Cardinal&amp;quot; (Cardinal album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22903414" start="2370" end="2408" title="Cardinal (Pinegrove album)" label="&amp;quot;Cardinal&amp;quot; (Pinegrove album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16746441" start="2435" end="2483" title="Cardinal (The Americans)" label="&amp;quot;Cardinal&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;The Americans&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589349" start="2622" end="2639" title="Cardinal (comics)" label="Cardinal (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721343" start="2685" end="2721" title="The Cardinal (1641 play)" label="&amp;quot;The Cardinal&amp;quot; (1641 play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834955" start="2765" end="2801" title="The Cardinal (1901 play)" label="&amp;quot;The Cardinal&amp;quot; (1901 play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q27863" start="2914" end="2930" title="Sword Art Online" label="Sword Art Online"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2997" end="3014" title="Star Wars: Phasma" label="Star Wars: Phasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329258" start="3070" end="3086" title="Cardinal numeral" label="Cardinal numeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q893304" start="3138" end="3152" title="Cardinal vowel" label="Cardinal vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038645" start="3196" end="3211" title="Cardinal voting" label="Cardinal voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089890" start="3230" end="3243" title="Cardinal mark" label="Cardinal mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q15500593" start="3289" end="3307" title="Cardinal, Manitoba" label="Cardinal, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346145" start="3318" end="3335" title="Cardinal, Ontario" label="Cardinal, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038562" start="3346" end="3386" title="Cardinal High School (Middlefield, Ohio)" label="Cardinal High School (Middlefield, Ohio)"/>
<link wikidata="Q35732811" start="3462" end="3479" title="Cardinal Mountain" label="Cardinal Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q19372239" start="3506" end="3526" title="Cardinal Power Plant" label="Cardinal Power Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038521" start="3570" end="3588" title="Cardinal, Virginia" label="Cardinal, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5007230" start="3606" end="3626" title="C/2008 T2 (Cardinal)" label="C/2008 T2 (Cardinal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q858435" start="3650" end="3666" title="Cardinal (grape)" label="Cardinal (grape)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396837" start="3727" end="3745" title="Lobelia cardinalis" label="Lobelia cardinalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q741980" start="3809" end="3827" title="Assindia Cardinals" label="Assindia Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938064" start="3877" end="3897" title="Ball State Cardinals" label="Ball State Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q870407" start="3945" end="3963" title="Cardenales de Lara" label="Cardenales de Lara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053257" start="3994" end="4023" title="Catholic University Cardinals" label="Catholic University Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505832" start="4084" end="4105" title="Front Royal Cardinals" label="Front Royal Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150848" start="4134" end="4158" title="Incarnate Word Cardinals" label="Incarnate Word Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996770" start="4221" end="4236" title="Lamar Cardinals" label="Lamar Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938067" start="4303" end="4323" title="Louisville Cardinals" label="Louisville Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078134" start="4374" end="4389" title="Mapúa Cardinals" label="Mapúa Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q96432140" start="4432" end="4455" title="North Central Cardinals" label="North Central Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588902" start="4503" end="4528" title="St. John Fisher Cardinals" label="St. John Fisher Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938060" start="4595" end="4612" title="Stanford Cardinal" label="Stanford Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="4696" end="4714" title="Wesleyan Cardinals" label="Wesleyan Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986203" start="4760" end="4784" title="West Perth Football Club" label="West Perth Football Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528" start="4843" end="4854" title="Woking F.C." label="Woking F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1057100" start="4913" end="4932" title="Cessna 177 Cardinal" label="Cessna 177 Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589578" start="4961" end="4987" title="St. Louis Cardinal C-2-110" label="St. Louis Cardinal C-2-110"/>
<link wikidata="Q85787508" start="5022" end="5037" title="NCSIST Cardinal" label="NCSIST Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q858400" start="5078" end="5106" title="Cardinal (train)" label="&amp;quot;Cardinal&amp;quot; (train)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490829" start="5109" end="5143" title="The Cardinal (railcar)" label="&amp;quot;The Cardinal&amp;quot; (railcar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426821" start="5162" end="5178" title="Cardinal (color)" label="Cardinal (color)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16865371" start="5194" end="5209" title="Cardinal (name)" label="Cardinal (name)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5235" end="5275" title="Ruby (programming language)#Implementations" label="Ruby programming language implementation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28800623" start="5329" end="5337" title="Cardenal" label="Cardenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038644" start="5351" end="5363" title="Cardinal sin (disambiguation)" label="Cardinal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q56537934" start="5382" end="5391" title="Cardinale" label="Cardinale"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6172" wikidata="Q273188" url="?curid=6172" title="Cantor set">
<text>In mathematics, the Cantor set is a set of points lying on a single line segment that has a number of unintuitive properties. It was discovered in 1874 by Henry John Stephen Smith and mentioned by German mathematician Georg Cantor in 1883.

Through consideration of this set, Cantor and others helped lay the foundations of modern point-set topology. The most common construction is the Cantor ternary set, built by removing the middle third of a line segment and then repeating the process with the remaining shorter segments. Cantor mentioned this ternary construction only in passing, as an example of a perfect set that is nowhere dense.

More generally, in topology, &quot;a&quot; Cantor space is a topological space homeomorphic to the Cantor ternary set (equipped with its subspace topology). The Cantor set is naturally homeomorphic to the countable product formula_1 of the discrete two-point space formula_2. By a theorem of L. E. J. Brouwer, this is equivalent to being perfect, nonempty, compact, metrizable and zero-dimensional.

==Construction and formula of the ternary set==
The Cantor ternary set formula_3 is created by iteratively deleting the &quot;open&quot; middle third from a set of line segments. One starts by deleting the open middle third formula_4 from the interval formula_5, leaving two line segments: formula_6. Next, the open middle third of each of these remaining segments is deleted, leaving four line segments: formula_7.
The Cantor ternary set contains all points in the interval formula_8 that are not deleted at any step in this infinite process. The same construction can be described recursively by setting
: formula_9
and
: formula_10
for formula_11, so that
: formula_12 formula_13 formula_14   for any   formula_15.

The first six steps of this process are illustrated below.

Using the idea of self-similar transformations, formula_16 formula_17 and formula_18 the explicit closed formulas for the Cantor set are
: formula_19
where every middle third is removed as the open interval formula_20 from the closed interval formula_21 surrounding it, or
: formula_22
where the middle third formula_23 of the foregoing closed interval formula_24 is removed by intersecting with formula_25

This process of removing middle thirds is a simple example of a finite subdivision rule. The complement of the Cantor ternary set is an example of a fractal string.

In arithmetical terms, the Cantor set consists of all real numbers of the unit interval formula_8 that do not require the digit 1 in order to be expressed as a ternary (base 3) fraction. As the above diagram illustrates, each point in the Cantor set is uniquely located by a path through an infinitely deep binary tree, where the path turns left or right at each level according to which side of a deleted segment the point lies on. Representing each left turn with 0 and each right turn with 2 yields the ternary fraction for a point.

=== Mandelbrot&#x27;s construction by &quot;curdling&quot; ===
In &quot;The Fractal Geometry of Nature&quot;, mathematician Benoit Mandelbrot provides a whimsical thought experiment to assist non-mathematical readers in imagining the construction of formula_3. His narrative begins with imagining a bar, perhaps of lightweight metal, in which the bar&#x27;s matter &quot;curdles&quot; by iteratively shifting towards its extremities. As the bar&#x27;s segments become smaller, they become thin, dense slugs that eventually grow too small and faint to see.CURDLING: The construction of the Cantor bar results from the process I call curdling. It begins with a round bar. It is best to think of it as having a very low density. Then matter &quot;curdles&quot; out of this bar&#x27;s middle third into the end thirds, so that the positions of the latter remain unchanged. Next matter curdles out of the middle third of each end third into its end thirds, and so on ad infinitum until one is left with an infinitely large number of infinitely thin slugs of infinitely high density. These slugs are spaced along the line in the very specific fashion induced by the generating process. In this illustration, curdling (which eventually requires hammering!) stops when both the printer&#x27;s press and our eye cease to follow; the last line is indistinguishable from the last but one: each of its ultimate parts is seen as a gray slug rather than two parallel black slugs.

== Composition ==
Since the Cantor set is defined as the set of points not excluded, the proportion (i.e., measure) of the unit interval remaining can be found by total length removed. This total is the geometric progression

:formula_28

So that the proportion left is 1 − 1 = 0.

This calculation suggests that the Cantor set cannot contain any interval of non-zero length. It may seem surprising that there should be anything left—after all, the sum of the lengths of the removed intervals is equal to the length of the original interval. However, a closer look at the process reveals that there must be something left, since removing the &quot;middle third&quot; of each interval involved removing open sets (sets that do not include their endpoints). So removing the line segment (, ) from the original interval [0, 1] leaves behind the points and . Subsequent steps do not remove these (or other) endpoints, since the intervals removed are always internal to the intervals remaining. So the Cantor set is not empty, and in fact contains an uncountably infinite number of points (as follows from the above description in terms of paths in an infinite binary tree).

It may appear that &quot;only&quot; the endpoints of the construction segments are left, but that is not the case either. The number , for example, has the unique ternary form 0.020202... = . It is in the bottom third, and the top third of that third, and the bottom third of that top third, and so on. Since it is never in one of the middle segments, it is never removed. Yet it is also not an endpoint of any middle segment, because it is not a multiple of any power of 1/3.
All endpoints of segments are &quot;terminating&quot; ternary fractions and are contained in the set
:formula_29
which is a countably infinite set.
As to cardinality, almost all elements of the Cantor set are not endpoints of intervals, nor rational points like 1/4. The whole Cantor set is in fact not countable.

== Properties ==

=== Cardinality ===
It can be shown that there are as many points left behind in this process as there were to begin with, and that therefore, the Cantor set is uncountable. To see this, we show that there is a function &quot;f&quot; from the Cantor set formula_3 to the closed interval [0,1] that is surjective (i.e. &quot;f&quot; maps from formula_3 onto [0,1]) so that the cardinality of formula_3 is no less than that of [0,1]. Since formula_3 is a subset of [0,1], its cardinality is also no greater, so the two cardinalities must in fact be equal, by the Cantor–Bernstein–Schröder theorem.

To construct this function, consider the points in the [0, 1] interval in terms of base 3 (or ternary) notation. Recall that the proper ternary fractions, more precisely: the elements of formula_34, admit more than one representation in this notation, as for example , that can be written as 0.13 = 3, but also as 0.0222...3 = 3, and , that can be written as 0.23 = 3 but also as 0.1222...3 = 3.
When we remove the middle third, this contains the numbers with ternary numerals of the form 0.1xxxxx...3 where xxxxx...3 is strictly between 00000...3 and 22222...3. So the numbers remaining after the first step consist of
* Numbers of the form 0.0xxxxx...3 (including 0.022222...3 = 1/3)
* Numbers of the form 0.2xxxxx...3 (including 0.222222...3 = 1)

This can be summarized by saying that those numbers with a ternary representation such that the first digit after the radix point is not 1 are the ones remaining after the first step.

The second step removes numbers of the form 0.01xxxx...3 and 0.21xxxx...3, and (with appropriate care for the endpoints) it can be concluded that the remaining numbers are those with a ternary numeral where neither of the first &quot;two&quot; digits is 1.

Continuing in this way, for a number not to be excluded at step &quot;n&quot;, it must have a ternary representation whose &quot;n&quot;th digit is not 1. For a number to be in the Cantor set, it must not be excluded at any step, it must admit a numeral representation consisting entirely of 0s and 2s.

It is worth emphasizing that numbers like 1, = 0.13 and = 0.213 are in the Cantor set, as they have ternary numerals consisting entirely of 0s and 2s: 1 = 0.222...3 = 3, = 0.0222...3 = 3 and = 0.20222...3 = 3.
All the latter numbers are &quot;endpoints&quot;, and these examples are right limit points of formula_3. The same is true for the left limit points of formula_3, e.g. = 0.1222...3 = 3 = 3 and = 0.21222...3 = 3 = 3. All these endpoints are &quot;proper ternary&quot; fractions (elements of formula_37) of the form , where denominator &quot;q&quot; is a power of 3 when the fraction is in its irreducible form. The ternary representation of these fractions terminates (i.e., is finite) or — recall from above that proper ternary fractions each have 2 representations — is infinite and &quot;ends&quot; in either infinitely many recurring 0s or infinitely many recurring 2s. Such a fraction is a left limit point of formula_3 if its ternary representation contains no 1&#x27;s and &quot;ends&quot; in infinitely many recurring 0s. Similarly, a proper ternary fraction is a right limit point of formula_3 if it again its ternary expansion contains no 1&#x27;s and &quot;ends&quot; in infinitely many recurring 2s.

This set of endpoints is dense in formula_3 (but not dense in [0, 1]) and makes up a countably infinite set. The numbers in formula_3 which are &quot;not&quot; endpoints also have only 0s and 2s in their ternary representation, but they cannot end in an infinite repetition of the digit 0, nor of the digit 2, because then it would be an endpoint.

The function from formula_3 to [0,1] is defined by taking the ternary numerals that do consist entirely of 0s and 2s, replacing all the 2s by 1s, and interpreting the sequence as a binary representation of a real number. In a formula,

:formula_43   where   formula_44

For any number &quot;y&quot; in [0,1], its binary representation can be translated into a ternary representation of a number &quot;x&quot; in formula_3 by replacing all the 1s by 2s. With this, &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) = &quot;y&quot; so that &quot;y&quot; is in the range of &quot;f&quot;. For instance if &quot;y&quot; = = 0.100110011001...2 = , we write &quot;x&quot; = = 0.200220022002...3 = . Consequently, &quot;f&quot; is surjective. However, &quot;f&quot; is &quot;not&quot; injective — the values for which &quot;f&quot;(&quot;x&quot;) coincides are those at opposing ends of one of the &quot;middle thirds&quot; removed. For instance, take
: = 3 (which is a right limit point of formula_3 and a left limit point of the middle third [, ])  and
: = 3 (which is a left limit point of formula_3 and a right limit point of the middle third [, ])
so
:formula_48
Thus there are as many points in the Cantor set as there are in the interval [0, 1] (which has the uncountable cardinality However, the set of endpoints of the removed intervals is countable, so there must be uncountably many numbers in the Cantor set which are not interval endpoints. As noted above, one example of such a number is , which can be written as 0.020202...3 = in ternary notation. In fact, given any formula_49, there exist formula_50 such that formula_51. This was first demonstrated by Steinhaus in 1917, who proved, via a geometric argument, the equivalent assertion that formula_52 for every formula_49. Since this construction provides an injection from formula_54 to formula_55, we have formula_56 as an immediate corollary. Assuming that formula_57 for any infinite set formula_58 (a statement shown to be equivalent to the axiom of choice by Tarski), this provides another demonstration that formula_59.

The Cantor set contains as many points as the interval from which it is taken, yet itself contains no interval of nonzero length. The irrational numbers have the same property, but the Cantor set has the additional property of being closed, so it is not even dense in any interval, unlike the irrational numbers which are dense in every interval.

It has been conjectured that all algebraic irrational numbers are normal. Since members of the Cantor set are not normal in base 3, this would imply that all members of the Cantor set are either rational or transcendental.

=== Self-similarity ===
The Cantor set is the prototype of a fractal. It is self-similar, because it is equal to two copies of itself, if each copy is shrunk by a factor of 3 and translated. More precisely, the Cantor set is equal to the union of two functions, the left and right self-similarity transformations of itself, formula_60 and formula_17, which leave the Cantor set invariant up to homeomorphism: formula_62

Repeated iteration of formula_63 and formula_64 can be visualized as an infinite binary tree. That is, at each node of the tree, one may consider the subtree to the left or to the right. Taking the set formula_65 together with function composition forms a monoid, the dyadic monoid.

The automorphisms of the binary tree are its hyperbolic rotations, and are given by the modular group. Thus, the Cantor set is a homogeneous space in the sense that for any two points formula_66 and formula_67 in the Cantor set formula_3, there exists a homeomorphism formula_69 with formula_70. An explicit construction of formula_71 can be described more easily if we see the Cantor set as a product space of countably many copies of the discrete space formula_72. Then the map formula_73 defined by formula_74 is an involutive homeomorphism exchanging formula_66 and formula_67.

=== Conservation law===

It has been found that some form of conservation law is always responsible behind scaling and self-similarity. In the case of Cantor set it can be seen that the formula_77th moment (where formula_78 is the fractal dimension) of all the surviving intervals at any stage of the construction process is equal to a constant which is one in the case of the Cantor set.
We know that there are formula_79 intervals of size formula_80 present in the system at the formula_81th step of its construction. Then if we label the surviving intervals as formula_82 then the formula_77th moment is formula_84 since formula_85.

The Hausdorff dimension of the Cantor set is equal to formula_86 ≈ 0.631.

=== Topological and analytical properties ===

Although &quot;the&quot; Cantor set typically refers to the original, middle-thirds Cantor set described above, topologists often talk about &quot;a&quot; Cantor set, which means any topological space that is homeomorphic (topologically equivalent) to it.

As the above summation argument shows, the Cantor set is uncountable but has Lebesgue measure 0. Since the Cantor set is the complement of a union of open sets, it itself is a closed subset of the reals, and therefore a complete metric space. Since it is also totally bounded, the Heine–Borel theorem says that it must be compact.

For any point in the Cantor set and any arbitrarily small neighborhood of the point, there is some other number with a ternary numeral of only 0s and 2s, as well as numbers whose ternary numerals contain 1s. Hence, every point in the Cantor set is an accumulation point (also called a cluster point or limit point) of the Cantor set, but none is an interior point. A closed set in which every point is an accumulation point is also called a perfect set in topology, while a closed subset of the interval with no interior points is nowhere dense in the interval.

Every point of the Cantor set is also an accumulation point of the complement of the Cantor set.

For any two points in the Cantor set, there will be some ternary digit where they differ — one will have 0 and the other 2. By splitting the Cantor set into &quot;halves&quot; depending on the value of this digit, one obtains a partition of the Cantor set into two closed sets that separate the original two points. In the relative topology on the Cantor set, the points have been separated by a clopen set. Consequently, the Cantor set is totally disconnected. As a compact totally disconnected Hausdorff space, the Cantor set is an example of a Stone space.

As a topological space, the Cantor set is naturally homeomorphic to the product of countably many copies of the space formula_87, where each copy carries the discrete topology. This is the space of all sequences in two digits 
:formula_88

which can also be identified with the set of 2-adic integers. The basis for the open sets of the product topology are cylinder sets; the homeomorphism maps these to the subspace topology that the Cantor set inherits from the natural topology on the real line. This characterization of the Cantor space as a product of compact spaces gives a second proof that Cantor space is compact, via Tychonoff&#x27;s theorem.

From the above characterization, the Cantor set is homeomorphic to the &quot;p&quot;-adic integers, and, if one point is removed from it, to the &quot;p&quot;-adic numbers.

The Cantor set is a subset of the reals, which are a metric space with respect to the ordinary distance metric; therefore the Cantor set itself is a metric space, by using that same metric. Alternatively, one can use the &quot;p&quot;-adic metric on formula_89: given two sequences formula_90, the distance between them is formula_91, where formula_92 is the smallest index such that formula_93; if there is no such index, then the two sequences are the same, and one defines the distance to be zero. These two metrics generate the same topology on the Cantor set.

We have seen above that the Cantor set is a totally disconnected perfect compact metric space. Indeed, in a sense it is the only one: every nonempty totally disconnected perfect compact metric space is homeomorphic to the Cantor set. See Cantor space for more on spaces homeomorphic to the Cantor set.

The Cantor set is sometimes regarded as &quot;universal&quot; in the category of compact metric spaces, since any compact metric space is a continuous image of the Cantor set; however this construction is not unique and so the Cantor set is not universal in the precise categorical sense. The &quot;universal&quot; property has important applications in functional analysis, where it is sometimes known as the &quot;representation theorem for compact metric spaces&quot;.

For any integer &quot;q&quot; ≥ 2, the topology on the group G = Z&quot;q&quot;ω (the countable direct sum) is discrete. Although the Pontrjagin dual Γ is also Z&quot;q&quot;ω, the topology of Γ is compact. One can see that Γ is totally disconnected and perfect - thus it is homeomorphic to the Cantor set. It is easiest to write out the homeomorphism explicitly in the case &quot;q&quot; = 2. (See Rudin 1962 p 40.)

===Measure and probability===
The Cantor set can be seen as the compact group of binary sequences, and as such, it is endowed with a natural Haar measure. When normalized so that the measure of the set is 1, it is a model of an infinite sequence of coin tosses. Furthermore, one can show that the usual Lebesgue measure on the interval is an image of the Haar measure on the Cantor set, while the natural injection into the ternary set is a canonical example of a singular measure. It can also be shown that the Haar measure is an image of any probability, making the Cantor set a universal probability space in some ways.

In Lebesgue measure theory, the Cantor set is an example of a set which is uncountable and has zero measure. In contrast, the set has a Hausdorff measure of 1 in its dimension of formula_94.

===Cantor numbers===
If we define a Cantor number as a member of the Cantor set, then
# Every real number in [0, 2] is the sum of two Cantor numbers.
# Between any two Cantor numbers there is a number that is not a Cantor number.

=== Descriptive set theory ===
The Cantor set is a meagre set (or a set of first category) as a subset of [0,1] (although not as a subset of itself, since it is a Baire space). The Cantor set thus demonstrates that notions of &quot;size&quot; in terms of cardinality, measure, and (Baire) category need not coincide. Like the set formula_95, the Cantor set formula_3 is &quot;small&quot; in the sense that it is a null set (a set of measure zero) and it is a meagre subset of [0,1]. However, unlike formula_95, which is countable and has a &quot;small&quot; cardinality, formula_98, the cardinality of formula_3 is the same as that of [0,1], the continuum formula_100, and is &quot;large&quot; in the sense of cardinality. In fact, it is also possible to construct a subset of [0,1] that is meagre but of positive measure and a subset that is non-meagre but of measure zero: By taking the countable union of &quot;fat&quot; Cantor sets formula_101 of measure formula_102 (see Smith–Volterra–Cantor set below for the construction), we obtain a set formula_103which has a positive measure (equal to 1) but is meagre in [0,1], since each formula_101 is nowhere dense. Then consider the set formula_105. Since formula_106, formula_107 cannot be meagre, but since formula_108, formula_107 must have measure zero.

== Variants ==
===Smith–Volterra–Cantor set===
Instead of repeatedly removing the middle third of every piece as in the Cantor set, we could also keep removing any other fixed percentage (other than 0% and 100%) from the middle. In the case where the middle of the interval is removed, we get a remarkably accessible case — the set consists of all numbers in [0,1] that can be written as a decimal consisting entirely of 0s and 9s. If a fixed percentage is removed at each stage, then the limiting set will have measure zero, since the length of the remainder formula_110 as formula_111 for any formula_112 such that formula_113.

On the other hand, &quot;fat Cantor sets&quot; of positive measure can be generated by removal of smaller fractions of the middle of the segment in each iteration. Thus, one can construct sets homeomorphic to the Cantor set that have positive Lebesgue measure while still being nowhere dense. If an interval of length formula_114 (formula_115) is removed from the middle of each segment at the &quot;n&quot;th iteration, then the total length removed is formula_116, and the limiting set will have a Lebesgue measure of formula_117. Thus, in a sense, the middle-thirds Cantor set is a limiting case with formula_118. If formula_119, then the remainder will have positive measure with formula_120. The case formula_121 is known as the Smith–Volterra–Cantor set, which has a Lebesgue measure of formula_122.

===Stochastic Cantor set===

One can modify the construction of the Cantor set by dividing randomly instead of equally. Besides, to incorporate time we can divide only one of the available intervals at each step instead of dividing all the available intervals. In the case of stochastic triadic Cantor set the resulting process can be described by the following rate equation

:formula_123

and for the stochastic dyadic Cantor set

:formula_124

where formula_125 is the number of intervals of size between formula_66 and formula_127. In the case of triadic Cantor set the fractal dimension is formula_128 which is 
less than its deterministic counterpart formula_129. In the case of stochastic dyadic Cantor set
the fractal dimension is formula_130 which is again less than that of its deterministic counterpart formula_131. In the case of stochastic dyadic Cantor set the solution for formula_132 exhibits dynamic scaling as its solution in the long-time limit is formula_133 where the fractal dimension of the stochastic dyadic Cantor set formula_134. In either case, like triadic Cantor set, the formula_77th moment (formula_136) of stochastic triadic and dyadic Cantor set too are conserved quantities.

=== Cantor dust ===

Cantor dust is a multi-dimensional version of the Cantor set. It can be formed by taking a finite Cartesian product of the Cantor set with itself, making it a Cantor space. Like the Cantor set, Cantor dust has zero measure.

A different 2D analogue of the Cantor set is the Sierpinski carpet, where a square is divided up into nine smaller squares, and the middle one removed. The remaining squares are then further divided into nine each and the middle removed, and so on ad infinitum. One 3D analogue of this is the Menger sponge.

==Historical remarks==

Cantor introduced what we call today the Cantor ternary set formula_137 as an example &quot;of a perfect point-set, which is not everywhere-dense in any interval, however small.&quot; Cantor described formula_137 in terms of ternary expansions, as &quot;the set of all real numbers given by the formula: formula_139where the coefficients formula_140 arbitrarily take the two values 0 and 2, and the series can consist of a finite number or an infinite number of elements.&quot;

A topological space formula_141 is perfect if all its points are limit points or, equivalently, if it coincides with its derived set formula_142. Subsets of the real line, like formula_137, can be seen as topological spaces under the induced subspace topology.

Cantor was led to the study of derived sets by his results on uniqueness of trigonometric series. The latter did much to set him on the course for developing an abstract, general theory of infinite sets.

Benoit Mandelbrot wrote much on Cantor dusts and their relation to natural fractals and statistical physics. He further reflected on the puzzling or even upsetting nature of such structures to those in the mathematics and physics community. In The Fractal geometry of Nature, he described how &quot;When I started on this topic in 1962, everyone was agreeing that Cantor dusts are at least as monstrous as the Koch and Peano curves,&quot; and added that &quot;every self-respecting physicist was automatically turned off by a mention of Cantor, ready to run a mile from anyone claiming formula_137 to be interesting in science.&quot;

== See also ==

*The indicator function of the Cantor set
*Smith–Volterra–Cantor set
*Cantor function
*Cantor cube
*Antoine&#x27;s necklace
*Koch snowflake
*Knaster–Kuratowski fan
*List of fractals by Hausdorff dimension
*Moser–de Bruijn sequence

==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* Cantor Sets and Cantor Set and Function at cut-the-knot
* Cantor Set at Platonic Realms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="20" end="30" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="36" end="39" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="68" end="80" title="line segment" label="line segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q742431" start="155" end="179" title="Henry John Stephen Smith" label="Henry John Stephen Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="218" end="230" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q621550" start="331" end="349" title="point-set topology" label="point-set topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q273188" start="387" end="405" title="Cantor set" label="Cantor ternary set"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168101" start="607" end="618" title="perfect set" label="perfect set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991405" start="627" end="640" title="Nowhere dense set" label="nowhere dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q616653" start="686" end="698" title="Cantor space" label="Cantor space"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282066" start="883" end="907" title="discrete two-point space" label="discrete two-point space"/>
<link wikidata="Q155887" start="935" end="951" title="L. E. J. Brouwer" label="L. E. J. Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="1163" end="1179" title="open interval" label="&amp;quot;open&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="1286" end="1294" title="interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640920" start="1569" end="1585" title="ad infinitum" label="infinite process"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1715" end="1725" title="Set-theoretic limit#Monotone sequences" label="formula_13"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="2049" end="2064" title="closed interval" label="closed interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450407" start="2294" end="2317" title="finite subdivision rule" label="finite subdivision rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q30588573" start="2379" end="2393" title="fractal string" label="fractal string"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="2450" end="2461" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987578" start="2470" end="2483" title="unit interval" label="unit interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056486" start="2556" end="2563" title="Ternary numeral system" label="ternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q380172" start="2703" end="2714" title="binary tree" label="binary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735118" start="3005" end="3035" title="The Fractal Geometry of Nature" label="The Fractal Geometry of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q101740" start="3057" end="3074" title="Benoit Mandelbrot" label="Benoit Mandelbrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="4507" end="4514" title="Lebesgue measure" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q173523" start="4603" end="4624" title="geometric progression" label="geometric progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="5102" end="5110" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q226183" start="5415" end="5420" title="empty set" label="empty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="5446" end="5466" title="uncountably infinite" label="uncountably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="6172" end="6190" title="countably infinite" label="countably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="6202" end="6213" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397701" start="6215" end="6225" title="almost all" label="almost all"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="6289" end="6297" title="rational number" label="rational"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="6542" end="6553" title="uncountable set" label="uncountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="6592" end="6600" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="6682" end="6692" title="Surjective function" label="surjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="6834" end="6840" title="subset" label="subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033910" start="6942" end="6975" title="Cantor–Bernstein–Schröder theorem" label="Cantor–Bernstein–Schröder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056486" start="7072" end="7079" title="ternary numeral system" label="ternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q427968" start="7847" end="7858" title="radix point" label="radix point"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="8765" end="8776" title="limit point" label="limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q96399905" start="9039" end="9049" title="power of 3" label="power of 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q263865" start="9078" end="9089" title="Irreducible fraction" label="irreducible"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="9385" end="9396" title="limit point" label="limit point"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="9723" end="9728" title="dense set" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="9783" end="9801" title="countably infinite" label="countably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10228" end="10234" title="Binary numeral system#Representing real numbers" label="binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806121" start="10588" end="10593" title="Range of a function" label="range"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="10804" end="10813" title="injective function" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="11286" end="11297" title="Uncountable set" label="uncountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q226072" start="11690" end="11699" title="Hugo Steinhaus" label="Steinhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11538" start="11713" end="11719" title="mathematical proof" label="proved"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343870" start="11922" end="11931" title="corollary" label="corollary"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="12033" end="12048" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908743" start="12049" end="12058" title="Tarski&amp;#x27;s theorem about choice" label="by Tarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="12249" end="12266" title="irrational number" label="irrational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="12348" end="12354" title="Closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q673444" start="12374" end="12379" title="Dense set" label="dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q319141" start="12475" end="12485" title="conjecture" label="conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q168817" start="12496" end="12505" title="algebraic number" label="algebraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q902708" start="12529" end="12535" title="normal number" label="normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q173091" start="12670" end="12684" title="transcendental number" label="transcendental"/>
<link wikidata="Q81392" start="12748" end="12755" title="fractal" label="fractal"/>
<link wikidata="Q262372" start="12763" end="12775" title="self-similar" label="self-similar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="13081" end="13094" title="homeomorphism" label="homeomorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254619" start="13117" end="13126" title="iterated function" label="iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q380172" start="13189" end="13200" title="binary tree" label="binary tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q244761" start="13335" end="13355" title="function composition" label="function composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208237" start="13364" end="13370" title="monoid" label="monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834342" start="13376" end="13389" title="dyadic monoid" label="dyadic monoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q782566" start="13396" end="13408" title="automorphism" label="automorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1834342" start="13480" end="13493" title="modular group" label="modular group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324364" start="13521" end="13538" title="homogeneous space" label="homogeneous space"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13781" end="13799" title="#Topological and analytical properties" label="as a product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q846862" start="13911" end="13921" title="involution (mathematics)" label="involutive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412452" start="14206" end="14223" title="fractal dimension" label="fractal dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q565186" start="14616" end="14635" title="Hausdorff dimension" label="Hausdorff dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="14917" end="14934" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q202906" start="14943" end="14955" title="homeomorphic" label="homeomorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="15068" end="15084" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q242767" start="15116" end="15126" title="complement (set theory)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="15132" end="15137" title="union (set theory)" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q213363" start="15141" end="15149" title="open set" label="open set"/>
<link wikidata="Q320357" start="15167" end="15173" title="closed set" label="closed"/>
<link wikidata="Q848569" start="15211" end="15232" title="complete metric space" label="complete metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362228" start="15251" end="15266" title="totally bounded" label="totally bounded"/>
<link wikidata="Q253214" start="15272" end="15291" title="Heine–Borel theorem" label="Heine–Borel theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="15313" end="15320" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478475" start="15381" end="15393" title="neighborhood (mathematics)" label="neighborhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q858223" start="15574" end="15592" title="accumulation point" label="accumulation point"/>
<link wikidata="Q862761" start="15672" end="15686" title="interior point" label="interior point"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168101" start="15764" end="15775" title="perfect set" label="perfect set"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="15779" end="15787" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991405" start="15854" end="15867" title="Nowhere dense set" label="nowhere dense"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="16307" end="16324" title="relative topology" label="relative topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q320369" start="16380" end="16390" title="clopen set" label="clopen set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544261" start="16424" end="16444" title="totally disconnected" label="totally disconnected"/>
<link wikidata="Q326908" start="16480" end="16495" title="Hausdorff space" label="Hausdorff space"/>
<link wikidata="Q30587585" start="16531" end="16542" title="Stone space" label="Stone space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="16617" end="16624" title="product topology" label="product"/>
<link wikidata="Q175116" start="16703" end="16720" title="discrete topology" label="discrete topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133250" start="16747" end="16755" title="sequence" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="16830" end="16845" title="p-adic integer" label="2-adic integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q810214" start="16851" end="16856" title="basis (topology)" label="basis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070472" start="16882" end="16898" title="product topology" label="product topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5199271" start="16903" end="16915" title="cylinder set" label="cylinder set"/>
<link wikidata="Q660730" start="16954" end="16971" title="subspace topology" label="subspace topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="17034" end="17043" title="real line" label="real line"/>
<link wikidata="Q616653" start="17074" end="17086" title="Cantor space" label="Cantor space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137014" start="17173" end="17197" title="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Tychonoff&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="17271" end="17298" title="p-adic integer" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-adic integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="17345" end="17371" title="p-adic number" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-adic numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="17427" end="17439" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773230" start="17460" end="17484" title="absolute difference" label="ordinary distance metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q311627" start="17595" end="17620" title="p-adic metric" label="&amp;quot;p&amp;quot;-adic metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="17911" end="17919" title="topological space" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168101" start="18005" end="18012" title="perfect set" label="perfect"/>
<link wikidata="Q616653" start="18178" end="18190" title="Cantor space" label="Cantor space"/>
<link wikidata="Q719395" start="18312" end="18320" title="category (mathematics)" label="category"/>
<link wikidata="Q381892" start="18324" end="18331" title="compact space" label="compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q170058" start="18383" end="18393" title="continuous function (topology)" label="continuous"/>
<link wikidata="Q860623" start="18394" end="18399" title="image (mathematics)" label="image"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417809" start="18488" end="18497" title="universal property" label="universal"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="18513" end="18524" title="category theory" label="categorical"/>
<link wikidata="Q190549" start="18597" end="18616" title="functional analysis" label="functional analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="18724" end="18731" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83478" start="18771" end="18776" title="group (mathematics)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632419" start="18850" end="18865" title="Pontrjagin dual" label="Pontrjagin dual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887083" start="19198" end="19211" title="compact group" label="compact group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162676" start="19275" end="19287" title="Haar measure" label="Haar measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="19437" end="19453" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824450" start="19598" end="19614" title="singular measure" label="singular measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9492" start="19678" end="19689" title="probability" label="probability"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="19761" end="19777" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591095" start="19894" end="19911" title="Hausdorff measure" label="Hausdorff measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747745" start="20232" end="20242" title="meagre set" label="meagre set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150180" start="20344" end="20355" title="Baire space" label="Baire space"/>
<link wikidata="Q827230" start="22621" end="22637" title="Lebesgue measure" label="Lebesgue measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q909569" start="22855" end="22880" title="Smith–Volterra–Cantor set" label="Smith–Volterra–Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405357" start="23837" end="23852" title="dynamic scaling" label="dynamic scaling"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="24257" end="24274" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q616653" start="24318" end="24330" title="Cantor space" label="Cantor space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201815" start="24369" end="24381" title="Measure zero" label="zero measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q280081" start="24433" end="24450" title="Sierpinski carpet" label="Sierpinski carpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q749773" start="24677" end="24690" title="Menger sponge" label="Menger sponge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168101" start="24814" end="24831" title="Perfect set" label="perfect point-set"/>
<link wikidata="Q322340" start="25317" end="25328" title="Derived set (mathematics)" label="derived set"/>
<link wikidata="Q179467" start="25534" end="25554" title="Fourier series" label="trigonometric series"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="25619" end="25660" title="axiomatic set theory" label="abstract, general theory of infinite sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q101740" start="25663" end="25680" title="Benoit Mandelbrot" label="Benoit Mandelbrot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455898" start="25730" end="25746" title="Fractals in nature" label="natural fractals"/>
<link wikidata="Q188715" start="25751" end="25770" title="statistical physics" label="statistical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735118" start="25907" end="25937" title="The Fractal Geometry of Nature" label="The Fractal geometry of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q223137" start="26073" end="26077" title="Koch snowflake" label="Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725409" start="26082" end="26093" title="Peano curve" label="Peano curve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26315" end="26355" title="Classification of discontinuities#Examples" label="The indicator function of the Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q909569" start="26357" end="26382" title="Smith–Volterra–Cantor set" label="Smith–Volterra–Cantor set"/>
<link wikidata="Q938883" start="26384" end="26399" title="Cantor function" label="Cantor function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034034" start="26401" end="26412" title="Cantor cube" label="Cantor cube"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983382" start="26414" end="26437" title="Antoine&amp;#x27;s necklace" label="Antoine&amp;#x27;s necklace"/>
<link wikidata="Q223137" start="26439" end="26453" title="Koch snowflake" label="Koch snowflake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4105873" start="26455" end="26477" title="Knaster–Kuratowski fan" label="Knaster–Kuratowski fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262715" start="26479" end="26518" title="List of fractals by Hausdorff dimension" label="List of fractals by Hausdorff dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q28405345" start="26520" end="26544" title="Moser–de Bruijn sequence" label="Moser–de Bruijn sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q56811887" start="26644" end="26656" title="cut-the-knot" label="cut-the-knot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6173" wikidata="Q163875" url="?curid=6173" title="Cardinal number">
<text>In mathematics, a cardinal number, or cardinal for short, is what is commonly called the number of elements of a set. In the case of a finite set, its cardinal number, or cardinality is therefore a natural number. For dealing with the case of infinite sets, the infinite cardinal numbers have been introduced, which are often denoted with the Hebrew letter formula_1 (aleph) marked with subscript indicating their rank among the infinite cardinals.

Cardinality is defined in terms of bijective functions. Two sets have the same cardinality if, and only if, there is a one-to-one correspondence (bijection) between the elements of the two sets. In the case of finite sets, this agrees with the intuitive notion of number of elements. In the case of infinite sets, the behavior is more complex. A fundamental theorem due to Georg Cantor shows that it is possible for infinite sets to have different cardinalities, and in particular the cardinality of the set of real numbers is greater than the cardinality of the set of natural numbers. It is also possible for a proper subset of an infinite set to have the same cardinality as the original set—something that cannot happen with proper subsets of finite sets.

There is a transfinite sequence of cardinal numbers:
:formula_2
This sequence starts with the natural numbers including zero (finite cardinals), which are followed by the aleph numbers. The aleph numbers are indexed by ordinal numbers. If the axiom of choice is true, this transfinite sequence includes every cardinal number. If the axiom of choice is not true (see ), there are infinite cardinals that are not aleph numbers.

Cardinality is studied for its own sake as part of set theory. It is also a tool used in branches of mathematics including model theory, combinatorics, abstract algebra and mathematical analysis. In category theory, the cardinal numbers form a skeleton of the category of sets.

== History ==

The notion of cardinality, as now understood, was formulated by Georg Cantor, the originator of set theory, in 1874–1884. Cardinality can be used to compare an aspect of finite sets. For example, the sets {1,2,3} and {4,5,6} are not &quot;equal&quot;, but have the &quot;same cardinality&quot;, namely three. This is established by the existence of a bijection (i.e., a one-to-one correspondence) between the two sets, such as the correspondence {1→4, 2→5, 3→6}.

Cantor applied his concept of bijection to infinite sets (for example the set of natural numbers N = {0, 1, 2, 3, ...}). Thus, he called all sets having a bijection with N &quot;denumerable (countably infinite) sets&quot;, which all share the same cardinal number. This cardinal number is called formula_3, aleph-null. He called the cardinal numbers of infinite sets transfinite cardinal numbers.

Cantor proved that any unbounded subset of N has the same cardinality as N, even though this might appear to run contrary to intuition. He also proved that the set of all ordered pairs of natural numbers is denumerable; this implies that the set of all rational numbers is also denumerable, since every rational can be represented by a pair of integers. He later proved that the set of all real algebraic numbers is also denumerable. Each real algebraic number &quot;z&quot; may be encoded as a finite sequence of integers, which are the coefficients in the polynomial equation of which it is a solution, i.e. the ordered n-tuple (&quot;a&quot;0, &quot;a&quot;1, ..., &quot;an&quot;), &quot;ai&quot; ∈ Z together with a pair of rationals (&quot;b&quot;0, &quot;b&quot;1) such that &quot;z&quot; is the unique root of the polynomial with coefficients (&quot;a&quot;0, &quot;a&quot;1, ..., &quot;an&quot;) that lies in the interval (&quot;b&quot;0, &quot;b&quot;1).

In his 1874 paper &quot;On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers&quot;, Cantor proved that there exist higher-order cardinal numbers, by showing that the set of real numbers has cardinality greater than that of N. His proof used an argument with nested intervals, but in an 1891 paper, he proved the same result using his ingenious and much simpler diagonal argument. The new cardinal number of the set of real numbers is called the cardinality of the continuum and Cantor used the symbol formula_4 for it.

Cantor also developed a large portion of the general theory of cardinal numbers; he proved that there is a smallest transfinite cardinal number (formula_3, aleph-null), and that for every cardinal number there is a next-larger cardinal

:formula_6

His continuum hypothesis is the proposition that the cardinality formula_4 of the set of real numbers is the same as formula_8. This hypothesis is independent of the standard axioms of mathematical set theory, that is, it can neither be proved nor disproved from them. This was shown in 1963 by Paul Cohen, complementing earlier work by Kurt Gödel in 1940.

== Motivation ==
In informal use, a cardinal number is what is normally referred to as a &quot;counting number&quot;, provided that 0 is included: 0, 1, 2, ... They may be identified with the natural numbers beginning with 0. The counting numbers are exactly what can be defined formally as the finite cardinal numbers. Infinite cardinals only occur in higher-level mathematics and logic.

More formally, a non-zero number can be used for two purposes: to describe the size of a set, or to describe the position of an element in a sequence. For finite sets and sequences it is easy to see that these two notions coincide, since for every number describing a position in a sequence we can construct a set that has exactly the right size. For example, 3 describes the position of &#x27;c&#x27; in the sequence &lt;&#x27;a&#x27;,&#x27;b&#x27;,&#x27;c&#x27;,&#x27;d&#x27;...&gt;, and we can construct the set {a,b,c}, which has 3 elements.

However, when dealing with infinite sets, it is essential to distinguish between the two, since the two notions are in fact different for infinite sets. Considering the position aspect leads to ordinal numbers, while the size aspect is generalized by the cardinal numbers described here.

The intuition behind the formal definition of cardinal is the construction of a notion of the relative size or &quot;bigness&quot; of a set, without reference to the kind of members which it has. For finite sets this is easy; one simply counts the number of elements a set has. In order to compare the sizes of larger sets, it is necessary to appeal to more refined notions.

A set &quot;Y&quot; is at least as big as a set &quot;X&quot; if there is an injective mapping from the elements of &quot;X&quot; to the elements of &quot;Y&quot;. An injective mapping identifies each element of the set &quot;X&quot; with a unique element of the set &quot;Y&quot;. This is most easily understood by an example; suppose we have the sets &quot;X&quot; = {1,2,3} and &quot;Y&quot; = {a,b,c,d}, then using this notion of size, we would observe that there is a mapping:
: 1 → a
: 2 → b
: 3 → c
which is injective, and hence conclude that &quot;Y&quot; has cardinality greater than or equal to &quot;X&quot;. The element d has no element mapping to it, but this is permitted as we only require an injective mapping, and not necessarily a bijective mapping. The advantage of this notion is that it can be extended to infinite sets.

We can then extend this to an equality-style relation. Two sets &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; are said to have the same &quot;cardinality&quot; if there exists a bijection between &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;. By the Schroeder–Bernstein theorem, this is equivalent to there being &quot;both&quot; an injective mapping from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot;, &quot;and&quot; an injective mapping from &quot;Y&quot; to &quot;X&quot;. We then write |&quot;X&quot;| = |&quot;Y&quot;|. The cardinal number of &quot;X&quot; itself is often defined as the least ordinal &quot;a&quot; with |&quot;a&quot;| = |&quot;X&quot;|. This is called the von Neumann cardinal assignment; for this definition to make sense, it must be proved that every set has the same cardinality as &quot;some&quot; ordinal; this statement is the well-ordering principle. It is however possible to discuss the relative cardinality of sets without explicitly assigning names to objects.

The classic example used is that of the infinite hotel paradox, also called Hilbert&#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel. Supposing there is an innkeeper at a hotel with an infinite number of rooms. The hotel is full, and then a new guest arrives. It is possible to fit the extra guest in by asking the guest who was in room 1 to move to room 2, the guest in room 2 to move to room 3, and so on, leaving room 1 vacant. We can explicitly write a segment of this mapping:
: 1 → 2
: 2 → 3
: 3 → 4
: &quot;n&quot; → &quot;n&quot; + 1
With this assignment, we can see that the set {1,2,3...} has the same cardinality as the set {2,3,4...}, since a bijection between the first and the second has been shown. This motivates the definition of an infinite set being any set that has a proper subset of the same cardinality (i.e., a Dedekind-infinite set); in this case {2,3,4...} is a proper subset of {1,2,3...}.

When considering these large objects, one might also want to see if the notion of counting order coincides with that of cardinal defined above for these infinite sets. It happens that it does not; by considering the above example we can see that if some object &quot;one greater than infinity&quot; exists, then it must have the same cardinality as the infinite set we started out with. It is possible to use a different formal notion for number, called ordinals, based on the ideas of counting and considering each number in turn, and we discover that the notions of cardinality and ordinality are divergent once we move out of the finite numbers.

It can be proved that the cardinality of the real numbers is greater than that of the natural numbers just described. This can be visualized using Cantor&#x27;s diagonal argument; classic questions of cardinality (for instance the continuum hypothesis) are concerned with discovering whether there is some cardinal between some pair of other infinite cardinals. In more recent times, mathematicians have been describing the properties of larger and larger cardinals.

Since cardinality is such a common concept in mathematics, a variety of names are in use. Sameness of cardinality is sometimes referred to as &quot;equipotence&quot;, &quot;equipollence&quot;, or &quot;equinumerosity&quot;. It is thus said that two sets with the same cardinality are, respectively, &quot;equipotent&quot;, &quot;equipollent&quot;, or &quot;equinumerous&quot;.

== Formal definition ==
Formally, assuming the axiom of choice, the cardinality of a set &quot;X&quot; is the least ordinal number α such that there is a bijection between &quot;X&quot; and α. This definition is known as the von Neumann cardinal assignment. If the axiom of choice is not assumed, then a different approach is needed. The oldest definition of the cardinality of a set &quot;X&quot; (implicit in Cantor and explicit in Frege and &quot;Principia Mathematica&quot;) is as the class [&quot;X&quot;] of all sets that are equinumerous with &quot;X&quot;. This does not work in ZFC or other related systems of axiomatic set theory because if &quot;X&quot; is non-empty, this collection is too large to be a set. In fact, for &quot;X&quot; ≠ ∅ there is an injection from the universe into [&quot;X&quot;] by mapping a set &quot;m&quot; to {&quot;m&quot;} × &quot;X&quot;, and so by the axiom of limitation of size, [&quot;X&quot;] is a proper class. The definition does work however in type theory and in New Foundations and related systems. However, if we restrict from this class to those equinumerous with &quot;X&quot; that have the least rank, then it will work (this is a trick due to Dana Scott: it works because the collection of objects with any given rank is a set).

Von Neumann cardinal assignment implies that the cardinal number of a finite set is the common ordinal number of all possible well-orderings of that set, and cardinal and ordinal arithmetic (addition, multiplication, power, proper subtraction) then give the same answers for finite numbers. However, they differ for infinite numbers. For example, formula_9 in ordinal arithmetic while formula_10 in cardinal arithmetic, although the von Neumann assignment puts formula_11. On the other hand, Scott&#x27;s trick implies that the cardinal number 0 is formula_12, which is also the ordinal number 1, and this may be confusing. A possible compromise (to take advantage of the alignment in finite arithmetic while avoiding reliance on the axiom of choice and confusion in infinite arithmetic) is to apply von Neumann assignment to the cardinal numbers of finite sets (those which can be well ordered and are not equipotent to proper subsets) and to use Scott&#x27;s trick for the cardinal numbers of other sets.

Formally, the order among cardinal numbers is defined as follows: |&quot;X&quot;| ≤ |&quot;Y&quot;| means that there exists an injective function from &quot;X&quot; to &quot;Y&quot;. The Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem states that if |&quot;X&quot;| ≤ |&quot;Y&quot;| and |&quot;Y&quot;| ≤ |&quot;X&quot;| then |&quot;X&quot;| = |&quot;Y&quot;|. The axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that given two sets &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;, either |&quot;X&quot;| ≤ |&quot;Y&quot;| or |&quot;Y&quot;| ≤ |&quot;X&quot;|.

A set &quot;X&quot; is Dedekind-infinite if there exists a proper subset &quot;Y&quot; of &quot;X&quot; with |&quot;X&quot;| = |&quot;Y&quot;|, and Dedekind-finite if such a subset does not exist. The finite cardinals are just the natural numbers, in the sense that a set &quot;X&quot; is finite if and only if |&quot;X&quot;| = |&quot;n&quot;| = &quot;n&quot; for some natural number &quot;n&quot;. Any other set is infinite.

Assuming the axiom of choice, it can be proved that the Dedekind notions correspond to the standard ones. It can also be proved that the cardinal formula_3 (aleph null or aleph-0, where aleph is the first letter in the Hebrew alphabet, represented formula_1) of the set of natural numbers is the smallest infinite cardinal (i.e., any infinite set has a subset of cardinality formula_3). The next larger cardinal is denoted by formula_8, and so on. For every ordinal α, there is a cardinal number formula_17 and this list exhausts all infinite cardinal numbers.

== Cardinal arithmetic ==
We can define arithmetic operations on cardinal numbers that generalize the ordinary operations for natural numbers. It can be shown that for finite cardinals, these operations coincide with the usual operations for natural numbers. Furthermore, these operations share many properties with ordinary arithmetic.

=== Successor cardinal ===
If the axiom of choice holds, then every cardinal κ has a successor, denoted κ+, where κ+ &gt; κ and there are no cardinals between κ and its successor. (Without the axiom of choice, using Hartogs&#x27; theorem, it can be shown that for any cardinal number κ, there is a minimal cardinal κ+ such that formula_18) For finite cardinals, the successor is simply κ + 1. For infinite cardinals, the successor cardinal differs from the successor ordinal.

=== Cardinal addition ===
If &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; are disjoint, addition is given by the union of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;. If the two sets are not already disjoint, then they can be replaced by disjoint sets of the same cardinality (e.g., replace &quot;X&quot; by &quot;X&quot;×{0} and &quot;Y&quot; by &quot;Y&quot;×{1}).
:formula_19

Zero is an additive identity &quot;κ&quot; + 0 = 0 + &quot;κ&quot; = &quot;κ&quot;.

Addition is associative (&quot;κ&quot; + &quot;μ&quot;) + &quot;ν&quot; = &quot;κ&quot; + (&quot;μ&quot; + &quot;ν&quot;).

Addition is commutative &quot;κ&quot; + &quot;μ&quot; = &quot;μ&quot; + &quot;κ&quot;.

Addition is non-decreasing in both arguments:
:formula_20

Assuming the axiom of choice, addition of infinite cardinal numbers is easy. If either &quot;κ&quot; or &quot;μ&quot; is infinite, then
:formula_21

==== Subtraction ====
Assuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal &quot;σ&quot; and a cardinal &quot;μ&quot;, there exists a cardinal &quot;κ&quot; such that &quot;μ&quot; + &quot;κ&quot; = &quot;σ&quot; if and only if &quot;μ&quot; ≤ &quot;σ&quot;. It will be unique (and equal to &quot;σ&quot;) if and only if &quot;μ&quot; &lt; &quot;σ&quot;.

=== Cardinal multiplication ===
The product of cardinals comes from the Cartesian product.
:formula_22

&quot;κ&quot;·0 = 0·&quot;κ&quot; = 0.

&quot;κ&quot;·&quot;μ&quot; = 0 → (&quot;κ&quot; = 0 or &quot;μ&quot; = 0).

One is a multiplicative identity &quot;κ&quot;·1 = 1·&quot;κ&quot; = &quot;κ&quot;.

Multiplication is associative (&quot;κ&quot;·&quot;μ&quot;)·&quot;ν&quot; = &quot;κ&quot;·(&quot;μ&quot;·&quot;ν&quot;).

Multiplication is commutative &quot;κ&quot;·&quot;μ&quot; = &quot;μ&quot;·&quot;κ&quot;.

Multiplication is non-decreasing in both arguments:
&quot;κ&quot; ≤ &quot;μ&quot; → (&quot;κ&quot;·&quot;ν&quot; ≤ &quot;μ&quot;·&quot;ν&quot; and &quot;ν&quot;·&quot;κ&quot; ≤ &quot;ν&quot;·&quot;μ&quot;).

Multiplication distributes over addition:
&quot;κ&quot;·(&quot;μ&quot; + &quot;ν&quot;) = &quot;κ&quot;·&quot;μ&quot; + &quot;κ&quot;·&quot;ν&quot; and
(&quot;μ&quot; + &quot;ν&quot;)·&quot;κ&quot; = &quot;μ&quot;·&quot;κ&quot; + &quot;ν&quot;·&quot;κ&quot;.

Assuming the axiom of choice, multiplication of infinite cardinal numbers is also easy. If either &quot;κ&quot; or &quot;μ&quot; is infinite and both are non-zero, then
:formula_23
Thus the product of two infinite cardinal numbers is equal to their sum.

==== Division ====
Assuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal &quot;π&quot; and a non-zero cardinal &quot;μ&quot;, there exists a cardinal &quot;κ&quot; such that &quot;μ&quot; · &quot;κ&quot; = &quot;π&quot; if and only if &quot;μ&quot; ≤ &quot;π&quot;. It will be unique (and equal to &quot;π&quot;) if and only if &quot;μ&quot; &lt; &quot;π&quot;.

=== Cardinal exponentiation ===
Exponentiation is given by
:formula_24
where &quot;XY&quot; is the set of all functions from &quot;Y&quot; to &quot;X&quot;. It is easy to check that the right-hand side depends only on formula_25 and formula_25.

:κ0 = 1 (in particular 00 = 1), see empty function.
:If 1 ≤ &quot;μ&quot;, then 0&quot;μ&quot; = 0.
:1&quot;μ&quot; = 1.
:&quot;κ&quot;1 = &quot;κ&quot;.
:&quot;κ&quot;&quot;μ&quot; + &quot;ν&quot; = &quot;κ&quot;&quot;μ&quot;·&quot;κ&quot;&quot;ν&quot;.
:κ&quot;μ&quot; · &quot;ν&quot; = (&quot;κ&quot;&quot;μ&quot;)&quot;ν&quot;.
:(&quot;κ&quot;·&quot;μ&quot;)&quot;ν&quot; = &quot;κ&quot;&quot;ν&quot;·&quot;μ&quot;&quot;ν&quot;.
Exponentiation is non-decreasing in both arguments:
:(1 ≤ &quot;ν&quot; and &quot;κ&quot; ≤ &quot;μ&quot;) → (&quot;ν&quot;&quot;κ&quot; ≤ &quot;ν&quot;&quot;μ&quot;) and
:(&quot;κ&quot; ≤ &quot;μ&quot;) → (&quot;κ&quot;&quot;ν&quot; ≤ &quot;μ&quot;&quot;ν&quot;).

2|&quot;X&quot;| is the cardinality of the power set of the set &quot;X&quot; and Cantor&#x27;s diagonal argument shows that 2|&quot;X&quot;| &gt; |&quot;X&quot;| for any set &quot;X&quot;. This proves that no largest cardinal exists (because for any cardinal &quot;κ&quot;, we can always find a larger cardinal 2&quot;κ&quot;). In fact, the class of cardinals is a proper class. (This proof fails in some set theories, notably New Foundations.)

All the remaining propositions in this section assume the axiom of choice:

:If &quot;κ&quot; and &quot;μ&quot; are both finite and greater than 1, and &quot;ν&quot; is infinite, then &quot;κ&quot;&quot;ν&quot; = &quot;μ&quot;&quot;ν&quot;.
:If &quot;κ&quot; is infinite and &quot;μ&quot; is finite and non-zero, then &quot;κ&quot;&quot;μ&quot; = &quot;κ&quot;.

If 2 ≤ &quot;κ&quot; and 1 ≤ &quot;μ&quot; and at least one of them is infinite, then:
:Max (&quot;κ&quot;, 2&quot;μ&quot;) ≤ &quot;κ&quot;&quot;μ&quot; ≤ Max (2&quot;κ&quot;, 2&quot;μ&quot;).

Using König&#x27;s theorem, one can prove &quot;κ&quot; &lt; &quot;κ&quot;cf(&quot;κ&quot;) and &quot;κ&quot; &lt; cf(2&quot;κ&quot;) for any infinite cardinal &quot;κ&quot;, where cf(&quot;κ&quot;) is the cofinality of &quot;κ&quot;.

==== Roots ====
Assuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal &quot;κ&quot; and a finite cardinal &quot;μ&quot; greater than 0, the cardinal &quot;ν&quot; satisfying formula_27 will be formula_28.

==== Logarithms ====
Assuming the axiom of choice and, given an infinite cardinal &quot;κ&quot; and a finite cardinal &quot;μ&quot; greater than 1, there may or may not be a cardinal &quot;λ&quot; satisfying formula_29. However, if such a cardinal exists, it is infinite and less than &quot;κ&quot;, and any finite cardinality &quot;ν&quot; greater than 1 will also satisfy formula_30.

The logarithm of an infinite cardinal number &quot;κ&quot; is defined as the least cardinal number &quot;μ&quot; such that &quot;κ&quot; ≤ 2&quot;μ&quot;. Logarithms of infinite cardinals are useful in some fields of mathematics, for example in the study of cardinal invariants of topological spaces, though they lack some of the properties that logarithms of positive real numbers possess.

== The continuum hypothesis ==
The continuum hypothesis (CH) states that there are no cardinals strictly between formula_3 and formula_32 The latter cardinal number is also often denoted by formula_4; it is the cardinality of the continuum (the set of real numbers). In this case formula_34

Similarly, the generalized continuum hypothesis (GCH) states that for every infinite cardinal formula_28, there are no cardinals strictly between formula_28 and formula_37. Both the continuum hypothesis and the generalized continuum hypothesis have been proved to be independent of the usual axioms of set theory, the Zermelo–Fraenkel axioms together with the axiom of choice (ZFC).

Indeed, Easton&#x27;s theorem shows that, for regular cardinals formula_28, the only restrictions ZFC places on the cardinality of formula_37 are that formula_40, and that the exponential function is non-decreasing.

== See also ==
* Aleph number
* Beth number
* The paradox of the greatest cardinal
* Cardinal number (linguistics)
* Counting
* Inclusion–exclusion principle
* Large cardinal
* Names of numbers in English
* Nominal number
* Ordinal number
* Regular cardinal
== References ==
Notes
Bibliography
*Hahn, Hans, &quot;Infinity&quot;, Part IX, Chapter 2, Volume 3 of &quot;The World of Mathematics&quot;. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1956.
*Halmos, Paul, &quot;Naive set theory&quot;. Princeton, NJ: D. Van Nostrand Company, 1960. Reprinted by Springer-Verlag, New York, 1974. (Springer-Verlag edition).

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="18" end="33" title="Cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="38" end="46" title="Cardinal number" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="113" end="116" title="set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="135" end="145" title="finite set" label="finite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="171" end="182" title="cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="198" end="212" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="243" end="255" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069891" start="262" end="286" title="transfinite number" label="infinite cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="343" end="356" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15033" start="368" end="373" title="Aleph (Hebrew)" label="aleph"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="485" end="503" title="bijective function" label="bijective function"/>
<link wikidata="Q949972" start="541" end="556" title="if, and only if" label="if, and only if"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="569" end="594" title="one-to-one correspondence" label="one-to-one correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="823" end="835" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="961" end="972" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="1063" end="1076" title="proper subset" label="proper subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="1222" end="1242" title="transfinite sequence" label="transfinite sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="1305" end="1319" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="1382" end="1394" title="aleph number" label="aleph number"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="1430" end="1444" title="ordinal number" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="1454" end="1469" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="1638" end="1649" title="Cardinality" label="Cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="1689" end="1699" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="1761" end="1773" title="model theory" label="model theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q76592" start="1775" end="1788" title="combinatorics" label="combinatorics"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="1790" end="1806" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754" start="1811" end="1832" title="mathematical analysis" label="mathematical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217413" start="1837" end="1852" title="category theory" label="category theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2291918" start="1882" end="1890" title="Skeleton (category theory)" label="skeleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518298" start="1898" end="1914" title="category of sets" label="category of sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="1996" end="2008" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="2028" end="2038" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="2283" end="2292" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="2568" end="2617" title="Countable set" label="&amp;quot;denumerable (countably infinite) sets&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="2703" end="2713" title="Aleph number" label="aleph-null"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069891" start="2763" end="2791" title="transfinite cardinal numbers" label="transfinite cardinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q726212" start="2817" end="2833" title="Bounded set" label="unbounded subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q191290" start="2965" end="2977" title="ordered pair" label="ordered pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="3047" end="3062" title="rational number" label="rational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q168817" start="3189" end="3205" title="algebraic number" label="algebraic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q356702" start="3783" end="3844" title="On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers" label="On a Property of the Collection of All Real Algebraic Numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638245" start="4026" end="4042" title="nested intervals" label="nested intervals"/>
<link wikidata="Q729471" start="4129" end="4146" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument" label="diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="4213" end="4241" title="cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="4541" end="4561" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q216809" start="4832" end="4842" title="Paul Cohen (mathematician)" label="Paul Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41390" start="4874" end="4884" title="Kurt Gödel" label="Kurt Gödel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="4990" end="5005" title="counting number" label="counting number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="5087" end="5102" title="natural numbers" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="5190" end="5196" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="5277" end="5282" title="logic" label="logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="5859" end="5871" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="6026" end="6041" title="ordinal numbers" label="ordinal numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="6574" end="6583" title="injective function" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q370502" start="6584" end="6591" title="map (mathematics)" label="mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="7246" end="7255" title="bijective" label="bijective"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="7399" end="7403" title="Set (mathematics)" label="sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="7504" end="7513" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033910" start="7562" end="7589" title="Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem" label="Schroeder–Bernstein theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941494" start="7978" end="8009" title="von Neumann cardinal assignment" label="von Neumann cardinal assignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488476" start="8155" end="8178" title="well-ordering principle" label="well-ordering principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q828646" start="8371" end="8412" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249754" start="9115" end="9136" title="Dedekind-infinite set" label="Dedekind-infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="9652" end="9660" title="Ordinal number" label="ordinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="9893" end="9904" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q729471" start="9995" end="10026" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="10079" end="10099" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="10741" end="10756" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="10810" end="10824" title="ordinal number" label="ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941494" start="10919" end="10950" title="von Neumann cardinal assignment" label="von Neumann cardinal assignment"/>
<link wikidata="Q163335" start="11144" end="11165" title="Principia Mathematica" label="Principia Mathematica"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="11281" end="11284" title="ZFC" label="ZFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="11313" end="11333" title="axiomatic set theory" label="axiomatic set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q836475" start="11588" end="11615" title="axiom of limitation of size" label="axiom of limitation of size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056428" start="11688" end="11699" title="type theory" label="type theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q649337" start="11707" end="11722" title="New Foundations" label="New Foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q77887" start="11845" end="11849" title="rank (set theory)" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q49823" start="11893" end="11903" title="Dana Scott" label="Dana Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="13115" end="13124" title="injective" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033910" start="13175" end="13209" title="Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem" label="Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249754" start="13544" end="13561" title="Dedekind-infinite" label="Dedekind-infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="13580" end="13593" title="proper subset" label="proper subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249754" start="13669" end="13684" title="Dedekind-finite" label="Dedekind-finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="13722" end="13728" title="finite set" label="finite"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="13752" end="13767" title="natural numbers" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="13938" end="13946" title="infinite set" label="infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="14106" end="14116" title="aleph null" label="aleph null"/>
<link wikidata="Q33513" start="14168" end="14183" title="Hebrew alphabet" label="Hebrew alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="14551" end="14561" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186007" start="15065" end="15086" title="Hartogs number" label="Hartogs&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191286" start="15306" end="15323" title="successor ordinal" label="successor ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="15391" end="15399" title="Disjoint sets" label="disjoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="15426" end="15431" title="union (set theory)" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q177251" start="15778" end="15789" title="associative" label="associative"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="15902" end="15913" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q173740" start="16622" end="16639" title="Cartesian product" label="Cartesian product"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="16996" end="17007" title="commutative" label="commutative"/>
<link wikidata="Q187959" start="17291" end="17302" title="distributivity" label="distributes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="18271" end="18280" title="function (mathematics)" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="18443" end="18457" title="empty function" label="empty function"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="19149" end="19158" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q729471" start="19188" end="19219" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="19448" end="19453" title="class (set theory)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="19472" end="19484" title="proper class" label="proper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q649337" start="19534" end="19549" title="New Foundations" label="New Foundations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077462" start="20116" end="20136" title="König&amp;#x27;s theorem (set theory)" label="König&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283623" start="20316" end="20326" title="cofinality" label="cofinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352241" start="21204" end="21222" title="cardinal invariant" label="cardinal invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="21227" end="21244" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="21373" end="21393" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="21549" end="21577" title="cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="21590" end="21601" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="21645" end="21677" title="generalized continuum hypothesis" label="generalized continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705017" start="21897" end="21908" title="Independence (mathematical logic)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="22007" end="22010" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory" label="ZFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226644" start="22022" end="22043" title="Easton&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Easton&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193137" start="22060" end="22076" title="regular cardinal" label="regular cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="22248" end="22260" title="Aleph number" label="Aleph number"/>
<link wikidata="Q831092" start="22263" end="22274" title="Beth number" label="Beth number"/>
<link wikidata="Q379078" start="22277" end="22313" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="The paradox of the greatest cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329258" start="22316" end="22345" title="Cardinal number (linguistics)" label="Cardinal number (linguistics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q247154" start="22348" end="22356" title="Counting" label="Counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q849335" start="22359" end="22388" title="Inclusion–exclusion principle" label="Inclusion–exclusion principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548262" start="22391" end="22405" title="Large cardinal" label="Large cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q38890985" start="22408" end="22435" title="Names of numbers in English" label="Names of numbers in English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004972" start="22438" end="22452" title="Nominal number" label="Nominal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="22455" end="22469" title="Ordinal number" label="Ordinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193137" start="22472" end="22488" title="Regular cardinal" label="Regular cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q84552" start="22526" end="22536" title="Hans Hahn (mathematician)" label="Hahn, Hans"/>
<link wikidata="Q370085" start="22667" end="22679" title="Paul Halmos" label="Halmos, Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6959839" start="22687" end="22703" title="Naive Set Theory (book)" label="Naive set theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6174" wikidata="Q4049983" url="?curid=6174" title="Cardinality">
<text>In mathematics, cardinality describes a relationship between sets which compares their relative size. For example, the sets formula_1 and formula_2 are the same size as they each contain 3 elements. Beginning in the late 19th century, this concept was generalized to infinite sets, which allows one to distinguish between different types of infinity, and to perform arithmetic on them. There are two notions often used when referring to cardinality: one which compares sets directly using bijections and injections, and another which uses cardinal numbers.
The cardinality of a set may also be called its size, when no confusion with other notions of size is possible.

When two sets, and , have the same cardinality, it is usually written as formula_3; however, if referring to the &quot;cardinal number&quot; of an individual set formula_4, it is simply denoted formula_5, with a vertical bar on each side; this is the same notation as absolute value, and the meaning depends on context. The cardinal number of a set formula_4 may alternatively be denoted by formula_7, formula_4, formula_9, or formula_10.

==History==
A crude sense of cardinality, an awareness that groups of things or events compare with other groups by containing more, fewer, or the same number of instances, is observed in a variety of present-day animal species, suggesting an origin millions of years ago. Human expression of cardinality is seen as early as years ago, with equating the size of a group with a group of recorded notches, or a representative collection of other things, such as sticks and shells. The abstraction of cardinality as a number is evident by 3000 BCE, in Sumerian mathematics and the manipulation of numbers without reference to a specific group of things or events.

From the 6th century BCE, the writings of Greek philosophers show hints of the cardinality of infinite sets. While they considered the notion of infinity as an endless series of actions, such as adding 1 to a number repeatedly, they did not consider the size of an infinite set of numbers to be a thing. The ancient Greek notion of infinity also considered the division of things into parts repeated without limit. In Euclid&#x27;s &quot;Elements&quot;, commensurability was described as the ability to compare the length of two line segments, &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot;, as a ratio, as long as there were a third segment, no matter how small, that could be laid end-to-end a whole number of times into both &quot;a&quot; and &quot;b&quot;. But with the discovery of irrational numbers, it was seen that even the infinite set of all rational numbers was not enough to describe the length of every possible line segment. Still, there was no concept of infinite sets as something that had cardinality.

To better understand infinite sets, a notion of cardinality was formulated by Georg Cantor, the originator of set theory. He examined the process of equating two sets with bijection, a one-to-one correspondence between the elements of two sets based on a unique relationship. In 1891, with the publication of Cantor&#x27;s diagonal argument, he demonstrated that there are sets of numbers that cannot be placed in one-to-one correspondence with the set of natural numbers, i.e. uncountable sets that contain more elements than there are in the infinite set of natural numbers.

==Comparing sets==

While the cardinality of a finite set is simply comparable to its number of elements, extending the notion to infinite sets usually starts with defining the notion of comparison of arbitrary sets (some of which are possibly infinite).

===Definition 1: = ===
Two sets have the same cardinality if there exists a bijection (a.k.a., one-to-one correspondence) from to , that is, a function from to that is both injective and surjective. Such sets are said to be &quot;equipotent&quot;, &quot;equipollent&quot;, or &quot;equinumerous&quot;. 

For example, the set formula_11 of non-negative even numbers has the same cardinality as the set formula_12 of natural numbers, since the function formula_13 is a bijection from to (see picture).

For finite sets and , if &quot;some&quot; bijection exists from to , then &quot;each&quot; injective or surjective function from to is a bijection. This is no longer true for infinite and . For example, the function from to , defined by formula_14 is injective, but not surjective since 2, for instance, is not mapped to, and from to , defined by formula_15 (see: modulo operation) is surjective, but not injective, since 0 and 1 for instance both map to 0. Neither nor can challenge formula_16, which was established by the existence of .

===Definition 2: ≤ ===
 has cardinality less than or equal to the cardinality of , if there exists an injective function from into .

If formula_17 and formula_18, then formula_3 (a fact known as Schröder–Bernstein theorem). The axiom of choice is equivalent to the statement that formula_17 or formula_18 for every and .

===Definition 3: &lt; ===
 has cardinality strictly less than the cardinality of , if there is an injective function, but no bijective function, from to .

For example, the set of all natural numbers has cardinality strictly less than its power set , because formula_22 is an injective function from to , and it can be shown that no function from to can be bijective (see picture). By a similar argument, has cardinality strictly less than the cardinality of the set of all real numbers. For proofs, see Cantor&#x27;s diagonal argument or Cantor&#x27;s first uncountability proof.

==Cardinal numbers==
In the above section, &quot;cardinality&quot; of a set was defined functionally. In other words, it was not defined as a specific object itself. However, such an object can be defined as follows.

The relation of having the same cardinality is called equinumerosity, and this is an equivalence relation on the class of all sets. The equivalence class of a set &quot;A&quot; under this relation, then, consists of all those sets which have the same cardinality as &quot;A&quot;. There are two ways to define the &quot;cardinality of a set&quot;:

#The cardinality of a set &quot;A&quot; is defined as its equivalence class under equinumerosity.
#A representative set is designated for each equivalence class. The most common choice is the initial ordinal in that class. This is usually taken as the definition of cardinal number in axiomatic set theory.

Assuming the axiom of choice, the cardinalities of the infinite sets are denoted
:formula_23
For each ordinal formula_24, formula_25 is the least cardinal number greater than formula_26.

The cardinality of the natural numbers is denoted aleph-null (formula_27), while the cardinality of the real numbers is denoted by &quot;formula_28&quot; (a lowercase fraktur script &quot;c&quot;), and is also referred to as the cardinality of the continuum. Cantor showed, using the diagonal argument, that formula_29. We can show that formula_30, this also being the cardinality of the set of all subsets of the natural numbers.

The continuum hypothesis says that formula_31, i.e. formula_32 is the smallest cardinal number bigger than formula_27, i.e. there is no set whose cardinality is strictly between that of the integers and that of the real numbers. The continuum hypothesis is independent of ZFC, a standard axiomatization of set theory; that is, it is impossible to prove the continuum hypothesis or its negation from ZFC—provided that ZFC is consistent. For more detail, see § Cardinality of the continuum below.

==Finite, countable and uncountable sets==
If the axiom of choice holds, the law of trichotomy holds for cardinality. Thus we can make the following definitions:

*Any set &quot;X&quot; with cardinality less than that of the natural numbers, or | &quot;X&quot; | &lt; | N |, is said to be a finite set.
*Any set &quot;X&quot; that has the same cardinality as the set of the natural numbers, or | &quot;X&quot; | = | N | = formula_27, is said to be a countably infinite set.
*Any set &quot;X&quot; with cardinality greater than that of the natural numbers, or | &quot;X&quot; | &gt; | N |, for example | R | = formula_35 &gt; | N |, is said to be uncountable.

==Infinite sets==
Our intuition gained from finite sets breaks down when dealing with infinite sets. In the late 19th century Georg Cantor, Gottlob Frege, Richard Dedekind and others rejected the view that the whole cannot be the same size as the part. One example of this is Hilbert&#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel.
Indeed, Dedekind defined an infinite set as one that can be placed into a one-to-one correspondence with a strict subset (that is, having the same size in Cantor&#x27;s sense); this notion of infinity is called Dedekind infinite. Cantor introduced the cardinal numbers, and showed—according to his bijection-based definition of size—that some infinite sets are greater than others. The smallest infinite cardinality is that of the natural numbers (formula_27).

===Cardinality of the continuum===
One of Cantor&#x27;s most important results was that the cardinality of the continuum (formula_37) is greater than that of the natural numbers (formula_27); that is, there are more real numbers R than natural numbers N. Namely, Cantor showed that formula_39 (see Beth one) satisfies:
:formula_40
:(see Cantor&#x27;s diagonal argument or Cantor&#x27;s first uncountability proof).

The continuum hypothesis states that there is no cardinal number between the cardinality of the reals and the cardinality of the natural numbers, that is,
:formula_41

However, this hypothesis can neither be proved nor disproved within the widely accepted ZFC axiomatic set theory, if ZFC is consistent.

Cardinal arithmetic can be used to show not only that the number of points in a real number line is equal to the number of points in any segment of that line, but that this is equal to the number of points on a plane and, indeed, in any finite-dimensional space. These results are highly counterintuitive, because they imply that there exist proper subsets and proper supersets of an infinite set &quot;S&quot; that have the same size as &quot;S&quot;, although &quot;S&quot; contains elements that do not belong to its subsets, and the supersets of &quot;S&quot; contain elements that are not included in it.

The first of these results is apparent by considering, for instance, the tangent function, which provides a one-to-one correspondence between the interval (−½π, ½π) and R (see also Hilbert&#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel).

The second result was first demonstrated by Cantor in 1878, but it became more apparent in 1890, when Giuseppe Peano introduced the space-filling curves, curved lines that twist and turn enough to fill the whole of any square, or cube, or hypercube, or finite-dimensional space. These curves are not a direct proof that a line has the same number of points as a finite-dimensional space, but they can be used to obtain such a proof.

Cantor also showed that sets with cardinality strictly greater than formula_28 exist (see his generalized diagonal argument and theorem). They include, for instance:

:* the set of all subsets of R, i.e., the power set of R, written &quot;P&quot;(R) or 2R
:* the set RR of all functions from R to R

Both have cardinality
:formula_43
:(see Beth two).

The cardinal equalities formula_44 formula_45 and formula_46 can be demonstrated using cardinal arithmetic:
:formula_47
:formula_48
:formula_49

==Examples and properties==
* If &quot;X&quot; = {&quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, &quot;c&quot;} and &quot;Y&quot; = {apples, oranges, peaches}, where &quot;a&quot;, &quot;b&quot;, and &quot;c&quot; are distinct, then | &quot;X&quot; | = | &quot;Y&quot; | because { (&quot;a&quot;, apples), (&quot;b&quot;, oranges), (&quot;c&quot;, peaches)} is a bijection between the sets &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot;. The cardinality of each of &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; is 3.
* If | &quot;X&quot; | ≤ | &quot;Y&quot; |, then there exists &quot;Z&quot; such that | &quot;X&quot; | = | &quot;Z&quot; | and &quot;Z&quot; ⊆ &quot;Y&quot;.
*If | &quot;X&quot; | ≤ | &quot;Y&quot; | and | &quot;Y&quot; | ≤ | &quot;X&quot; |, then | &quot;X&quot; | = | &quot;Y&quot; |. This holds even for infinite cardinals, and is known as Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem.
* Sets with cardinality of the continuum include the set of all real numbers, the set of all irrational numbers and the interval formula_50.

==Union and intersection==
If &quot;A&quot; and &quot;B&quot; are disjoint sets, then
:formula_51

From this, one can show that in general, the cardinalities of unions and intersections are related by the following equation:
:formula_52

==Definition of cardinality in class theory (NBG or MK)==
Here formula_53 denote a class of all sets, and formula_54 denotes the class of all ordinal numbers.
:formula_55
We use the intersection of a class which is defined by formula_56, therefore formula_57.
In this case 
:formula_58.
This definition allows also obtain a cardinality of any proper class formula_59, in particular
:formula_60
This definition is natural since it agrees with the axiom of limitation of size which implies bijection between formula_53 and any proper class.

==See also==
* Aleph number
* Beth number
* Cantor&#x27;s paradox
* Cantor&#x27;s theorem
* Countable set
* Counting
* Ordinality
* Pigeonhole principle

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="3" end="14" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="16" end="27" title="Cardinality" label="cardinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="61" end="65" title="set (mathematics)" label="sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q379825" start="189" end="197" title="Element (mathematics)" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="267" end="279" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="366" end="376" title="Cardinal arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="489" end="498" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="504" end="513" title="injective function" label="injection"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="539" end="554" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049983" start="605" end="609" title="Cardinality" label="size"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132051" start="882" end="894" title="vertical bar" label="vertical bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="938" end="952" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q185264" start="1668" end="1679" title="History of mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q172891" start="2210" end="2218" title="Euclid&amp;#x27;s Elements" label="Elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091134" start="2226" end="2242" title="commensurability (mathematics)" label="commensurability"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="2544" end="2561" title="irrational number" label="irrational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="2856" end="2868" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="2888" end="2898" title="set theory" label="set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="2950" end="2959" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q729471" start="3087" end="3118" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="3256" end="3271" title="uncountable set" label="uncountable set"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="3688" end="3697" title="bijection" label="bijection"/>
<link wikidata="Q11348" start="3755" end="3763" title="function (mathematics)" label="function"/>
<link wikidata="Q182003" start="3785" end="3794" title="injective" label="injective"/>
<link wikidata="Q229102" start="3799" end="3809" title="surjective" label="surjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914225" start="3894" end="3906" title="equinumerous" label="equinumerous"/>
<link wikidata="Q230967" start="3964" end="3975" title="even number" label="even number"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="4027" end="4042" title="natural numbers" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799665" start="4477" end="4493" title="modulo operation" label="modulo operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033910" start="4850" end="4876" title="Schröder–Bernstein theorem" label="Schröder–Bernstein theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="4883" end="4898" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="5161" end="5176" title="natural numbers" label="natural numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="5216" end="5225" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="5451" end="5462" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q729471" start="5481" end="5512" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q356702" start="5516" end="5556" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s first uncountability proof" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s first uncountability proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914225" start="5831" end="5845" title="equinumerosity" label="equinumerosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="5862" end="5882" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q217594" start="5890" end="5895" title="class (set theory)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="5913" end="5930" title="equivalence class" label="equivalence class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211071" start="6227" end="6241" title="representative (mathematics)" label="representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941494" start="6318" end="6347" title="Von Neumann cardinal assignment" label="initial ordinal in that class"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="6392" end="6407" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="6411" end="6431" title="axiomatic set theory" label="axiomatic set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="6447" end="6462" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="6489" end="6501" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q191780" start="6536" end="6543" title="Ordinal number" label="ordinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="6645" end="6659" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="6672" end="6682" title="aleph number" label="aleph-null"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="6726" end="6737" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q148443" start="6789" end="6803" title="fraktur (script)" label="fraktur script"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="6851" end="6879" title="cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q729471" start="6906" end="6923" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument" label="diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="7058" end="7078" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705017" start="7311" end="7322" title="independence (mathematical logic)" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="7326" end="7329" title="Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of choice" label="ZFC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7511" end="7541" title="Cardinality#Cardinality of the continuum" label="§ Cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179692" start="7600" end="7615" title="axiom of choice" label="axiom of choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713184" start="7627" end="7644" title="trichotomy (mathematics)" label="law of trichotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21199" start="7775" end="7789" title="natural number" label="natural number"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="7841" end="7851" title="finite set" label="finite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="8000" end="8018" title="countably infinite" label="countably infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128796" start="8196" end="8207" title="uncountable set" label="uncountable"/>
<link wikidata="Q272404" start="8254" end="8264" title="finite set" label="finite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q205140" start="8296" end="8308" title="infinite set" label="infinite set"/>
<link wikidata="Q76420" start="8336" end="8348" title="Georg Cantor" label="Georg Cantor"/>
<link wikidata="Q60028" start="8350" end="8363" title="Gottlob Frege" label="Gottlob Frege"/>
<link wikidata="Q76556" start="8365" end="8381" title="Richard Dedekind" label="Richard Dedekind"/>
<link wikidata="Q828646" start="8486" end="8527" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249754" start="8740" end="8757" title="Dedekind infinite" label="Dedekind infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q22952648" start="9083" end="9111" title="cardinality of the continuum" label="cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9289" end="9297" title="Beth number#Beth one" label="Beth one"/>
<link wikidata="Q729471" start="9328" end="9359" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q356702" start="9363" end="9403" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s first uncountability proof" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s first uncountability proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q208416" start="9411" end="9431" title="continuum hypothesis" label="continuum hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="9456" end="9471" title="cardinal number" label="cardinal number"/>
<link wikidata="Q191849" start="9663" end="9666" title="ZFC" label="ZFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q12482" start="9667" end="9687" title="axiomatic set theory" label="axiomatic set theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="9792" end="9808" title="real number line" label="real number line"/>
<link wikidata="Q166154" start="9849" end="9856" title="line segment" label="segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="10054" end="10067" title="proper subset" label="proper subset"/>
<link wikidata="Q177646" start="10073" end="10088" title="proper superset" label="proper superset"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="10396" end="10412" title="tangent function" label="tangent function"/>
<link wikidata="Q180907" start="10431" end="10456" title="one-to-one correspondence" label="one-to-one correspondence"/>
<link wikidata="Q185148" start="10469" end="10477" title="Interval (mathematics)" label="interval"/>
<link wikidata="Q828646" start="10504" end="10545" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s paradox of the Grand Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191029" start="10651" end="10665" title="Giuseppe Peano" label="Giuseppe Peano"/>
<link wikidata="Q567843" start="10681" end="10700" title="space-filling curve" label="space-filling curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q213723" start="10788" end="10797" title="hypercube" label="hypercube"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10968" end="10980" title="Space-filling curve#Proof that a square and its side contain the same number of points" label="such a proof"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11077" end="11106" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s diagonal argument#General sets" label="generalized diagonal argument"/>
<link wikidata="Q474881" start="11111" end="11118" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q205170" start="11192" end="11201" title="power set" label="power set"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11323" end="11331" title="Beth number#Beth two" label="Beth two"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11339" end="11358" title="Cardinality of the continuum#Cardinal equalities" label="cardinal equalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q163875" start="11422" end="11441" title="cardinal arithmetic" label="cardinal arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033910" start="12295" end="12329" title="Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem" label="Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12333" end="12371" title="Cardinality of the continuum#Sets with cardinality of the continuum" label="Sets with cardinality of the continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q607728" start="12424" end="12441" title="irrational number" label="irrational number"/>
<link wikidata="Q215382" start="12539" end="12552" title="disjoint sets" label="disjoint sets"/>
<link wikidata="Q185359" start="12634" end="12640" title="Union (set theory)" label="unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q185837" start="12645" end="12658" title="Intersection (set theory)" label="intersections"/>
<link wikidata="Q278770" start="12756" end="12759" title="von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory" label="NBG"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490369" start="12763" end="12765" title="Morse–Kelley set theory" label="MK"/>
<link wikidata="Q908627" start="13266" end="13278" title="Aleph number" label="Aleph number"/>
<link wikidata="Q831092" start="13281" end="13292" title="Beth number" label="Beth number"/>
<link wikidata="Q379078" start="13295" end="13316" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s paradox" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s paradox"/>
<link wikidata="Q474881" start="13319" end="13340" title="Cantor&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Cantor&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q66707394" start="13343" end="13356" title="Countable set" label="Countable set"/>
<link wikidata="Q247154" start="13359" end="13367" title="Counting" label="Counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q620006" start="13370" end="13380" title="Ordinality" label="Ordinality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188276" start="13383" end="13403" title="Pigeonhole principle" label="Pigeonhole principle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6176" wikidata="Q72267" url="?curid=6176" title="Cecil B. DeMille">
<text>Cecil Blount DeMille (; August 12, 1881January 21, 1959) was an American filmmaker and actor. Between 1914 and 1958, he made 70 features, both silent and sound films. He is acknowledged as a founding father of American cinema and the most commercially successful producer-director in film history, with many films dominating the box office three or four at a time. His films were distinguished by their epic scale and by his cinematic showmanship. His silent films included social dramas, comedies, Westerns, farces, morality plays, and historical pageants. He was an active Freemason and member of Prince of Orange Lodge #16 in New York City.

DeMille was born in Ashfield, Massachusetts, where his parents were vacationing for the summer. He grew up in New York City. He began his career as a stage actor in 1900. He later began to write and direct stage plays, a few with his older brother William de Mille, and some with Jesse L. Lasky, who was then a vaudeville producer. 

DeMille&#x27;s first film, &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; (1914), was the first full-length feature film shot in Hollywood. Its interracial love story was commercially successful, and the film marked Hollywood as the new home of the U.S. film industry. It had previously been based in New York and New Jersey. Based on continued film successes, DeMille founded Famous Players Lasky which was later reverse merged into Paramount Pictures with Lasky and Adolph Zukor. His first biblical epic, &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; (1923), was both a critical and commercial success; it held the Paramount revenue record for 25 years.

DeMille directed &quot;The King of Kings&quot; (1927), a biography of Jesus, which gained approval for its sensitivity and reached more than 800 million viewers. &quot;The Sign of the Cross&quot; (1932) is said to be the first sound film to integrate all aspects of cinematic technique. &quot;Cleopatra&quot; (1934) was his first film to be nominated for the Academy Award for Best Picture. 

After more than 30 years in film production, DeMille reached a pinnacle in his career with &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot; (1949), a biblical epic that became the highest-grossing film of 1950. Along with biblical and historical narratives, he also directed films oriented toward &quot;neo-naturalism&quot;, which tried to portray the laws of man fighting the forces of nature.

DeMille received his first nomination for the Academy Award for Best Director for his circus drama &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; (1952), which won both the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama. His last and best-known film, &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; (1956), also a Best Picture Academy Award nominee, and it is the eighth-highest-grossing film of all time, adjusted for inflation. 

In addition to his Best Picture Awards, DeMille received an Academy Honorary Award for his film contributions, the Palme d&#x27;Or (posthumously) for &quot;Union Pacific&quot; (1939), a DGA Award for Lifetime Achievement, and the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award. He was the first recipient of the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award, which was named in his honor. DeMille&#x27;s reputation had a renaissance in the 2010s, and his work has influenced numerous other films and directors.

==Biography==

===1881–1899: early years===

Cecil Blount DeMille was of paternal Dutch ancestry. His surname was spelled de Mil before his grandfather William added an &quot;le&quot; for &quot;visual symmetry&quot;. 

As an adult, Cecil De Mille adopted the spelling &quot;DeMille&quot; because he believed it would look better on a marquee, but continued to use &quot;de Mille&quot; in private life. The family name &quot;de Mille&quot; was used by his children Cecilia, John, Richard, and Katherine. Cecil&#x27;s brother, William, and his daughters, Margaret and Agnes, as well as DeMille&#x27;s granddaughter, Cecilia de Mille Presley, also used the &quot;de Mille&quot; spelling.

DeMille was born on August 12, 1881, in a boarding house on Main Street in Ashfield, Massachusetts, where his parents had been vacationing for the summer. On September 1, 1881, the family returned with the newborn DeMille to their flat in New York. DeMille was named after his grandmothers Cecelia Wolff and Margarete Blount. He was the second of three children of Henry Churchill de Mille (September 4, 1853 – February 10, 1893) and his wife, Matilda Beatrice deMille (née Samuel; January 30, 1853 – October 8, 1923), known as Beatrice. His older brother, William C. deMille, was born on July 25, 1878. 

Henry de Mille, whose ancestors were of English and Dutch-Belgian descent, was a North Carolina-born dramatist, actor, and lay reader in the Episcopal Church. In New York, Henry also taught English at Columbia College (now Columbia University). He worked as a playwright, administrator, and faculty member during the early years of the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, established in New York City in 1884. Henry de Mille frequently collaborated with David Belasco in playwriting; their best-known collaborations included &quot;The Wife&quot;, &quot;Lord Chumley&quot;, &quot;The Charity Ball&quot;, and &quot;Men and Women&quot;.

Cecil B. DeMille&#x27;s mother, Beatrice, a literary agent and scriptwriter, was the daughter of German Jews. She had emigrated from England with her parents in 1871 when she was 18; the newly arrived family settled in Brooklyn, New York, where they maintained a middle-class, English-speaking household.

DeMille&#x27;s parents met as members of a music and literary society in New York. Henry was a tall, red-headed student. Beatrice was intelligent, educated, forthright, and strong-willed. They married on July 1, 1876, despite Beatrice&#x27;s parents&#x27; objections because of the young couple&#x27;s differing religions; Beatrice converted to Episcopalianism.

DeMille was a brave and confident child. He gained his love of theater while watching his father and Belasco rehearse their plays. A lasting memory for DeMille was a lunch with his father and actor Edwin Booth. As a child, DeMille created an alter ego, Champion Driver, a Robin Hood-like character, evidence of his creativity and imagination. 

His father and his family had lived in Washington, North Carolina, until Henry built a three-story Victorian-style house for his family in Pompton Lakes, New Jersey; they named this estate &quot;Pamlico&quot;. John Philip Sousa was a friend of the family, and DeMille recalled throwing mud balls in the air so neighbor Annie Oakley could practice her shooting. DeMille&#x27;s sister, Agnes, was born on April 23, 1891; his mother nearly did not survive the birth. Agnes died on February 11, 1894, from spinal meningitis. 

DeMille&#x27;s parents operated a private school in Pompton Lakes and attended Christ Episcopal Church. DeMille recalled that this church was the place where he visualized the story of his 1923 version of &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;.

On January 8, 1893, at age 40, Henry de Mille died suddenly from typhoid fever, leaving Beatrice with three children. To provide for her family, she opened the Henry C. de Mille School for Girls in her home in February 1893. The aim of the school was to teach young women to properly understand and fulfill the women&#x27;s duty to themselves, their home, and their country. Beatrice had &quot;enthusiastically supported&quot; Henry&#x27;s theatrical aspirations. She later became the second female play broker on Broadway. On Henry&#x27;s deathbed, he told his wife that he did not want his sons to become playwrights. DeMille&#x27;s mother sent him to Pennsylvania Military College (now Widener University) in Chester, Pennsylvania, at age 15. He fled the school to join the Spanish–American War, but failed to meet the age requirement. At the military college, even though his grades were average, he reportedly excelled in personal conduct. 

DeMille attended the American Academy of Dramatic Arts (tuition-free due to his father&#x27;s service to the academy). He graduated in 1900, and for graduation, his performance was the play &quot;The Arcady Trail&quot;. In the audience was Charles Frohman, who cast DeMille in his play &quot;Hearts are Trumps&quot;, DeMille&#x27;s Broadway debut.

===1900–1912: theater===

====Charles Frohman, Constance Adams, and David Belasco====
Cecil B. DeMille began his career as an actor on stage in 1900 in the theatrical company of Charles Frohman. He debuted on February 21, 1900, in the play &quot;Hearts Are Trumps&quot; at New York&#x27;s Garden Theater. In 1901, DeMille starred in productions of &quot;A Repentance&quot;, &quot;To Have and to Hold&quot;, and &quot;Are You a Mason?&quot; At age 21, he married Constance Adams on August 16, 1902, at Adams&#x27;s father&#x27;s home in East Orange, New Jersey. The wedding party was small. Beatrice DeMille&#x27;s family did not attend. Simon Louvish suggests that this was to conceal DeMille&#x27;s Jewish heritage. Adams was 29 years old at the time of the marriage. They had met in a theater in Washington D.C. while they were both acting in &quot;Hearts Are Trumps&quot;.

They were sexually incompatible; according to DeMille, Adams was too &quot;pure&quot; to &quot;feel such violent and evil passions&quot; as he. DeMille had more violent sexual preferences and fetishes than his wife. Adams allowed DeMille to have several long-term mistresses during their marriage as an outlet while maintaining an appearance of a faithful marriage. One of DeMille&#x27;s affairs was with his screenwriter Jeanie MacPherson. Despite his reputation for extramarital affairs, DeMille did not like to have affairs with his stars, as he believed it would cause him to lose control as a director. He once said he maintained his self-control when Gloria Swanson sat on his lap, and refused to touch her.

In 1902, he played a small part in &quot;Hamlet&quot;. Publicists wrote that he became an actor in order to learn how to direct and produce, but DeMille admitted that he became an actor in order to pay the bills. From 1904 to 1905, he attempted to make a living as a stock theater actor with his wife, Constance. DeMille made a 1905 reprise in &quot;Hamlet&quot; as Osric. In the summer of 1905, DeMille joined the stock cast at the Elitch Theatre in Denver, Colorado. He appeared in 11 of the 15 plays presented that season, all in minor roles. Maude Fealy was the featured actress in several productions that summer and developed a lasting friendship with DeMille. (He later cast her in &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;.)

His brother, William, was establishing himself as a playwright and sometimes invited DeMille to collaborate. DeMille and William collaborated on &quot;The Genius&quot;, &quot;The Royal Mounted&quot;, and &quot;After Five&quot;. None of these was very successful. William de Mille was most successful when he worked alone. 

DeMille and his brother at times worked with the legendary impresario David Belasco, who had been a friend and collaborator of their father. DeMille later adapted Belasco&#x27;s &quot;The Girl of the Golden West&quot;, &quot;Rose of the Rancho&quot;, and &quot;The Warrens of Virginia&quot; into films. He was credited with the conception of Belasco&#x27;s &quot;The Return of Peter Grimm&quot;. &quot;The Return of Peter Grimm&quot; sparked controversy, because Belasco had taken DeMille&#x27;s unnamed screenplay, changed the characters, and named it &quot;The Return of Peter Grimm&quot;, producing and presenting it as his own work. DeMille was credited in small print as &quot;based on an idea by Cecil DeMille&quot;. The play was successful, and DeMille was distraught that his childhood idol had plagiarized his work.

====Losing interest in theater====
DeMille performed on stage with actors he later directed in films: Charlotte Walker, Mary Pickford, and Pedro de Cordoba. He also produced and directed plays. His 1905 performance in &quot;The Prince Chap&quot; as the Earl of Huntington was well received by audiences. 

DeMille wrote a few of his own plays in between stage performances, but his playwriting was less successful. His first play was &quot;The Pretender-A Play in a Prologue and 4 Acts&quot; set in 17th-century Russia. Another unperformed play he wrote was &quot;Son of the Winds&quot;, a mythological Native American story. Life was difficult for DeMille and his wife as traveling actors, but travel allowed him to experience parts of the United States he had not yet seen. DeMille sometimes worked with the director E. H. Sothern, who influenced DeMille&#x27;s later perfectionism. In 1907, due to a scandal with one of Beatrice&#x27;s students, Evelyn Nesbit, the Henry de Mille School lost students. The school closed, and Beatrice filed for bankruptcy. DeMille wrote another play originally called &quot;Sergeant Devil May Care&quot; and renamed &quot;The Royal Mounted&quot;. He also toured with the Standard Opera Company, but there are few records of his singing ability. 

On November 5, 1908, Constance and DeMille had a daughter, Cecilia, their only biological child. In the 1910s, DeMille began directing and producing other writers&#x27; plays.

DeMille was poor and struggled to find work. Consequently, his mother hired him for her agency, The DeMille Play Company, and taught him how to be an agent and a playwright. He became the agency&#x27;s manager and later a junior partner with his mother. In 1911, DeMille became acquainted with vaudeville producer Jesse Lasky when Lasky was searching for a writer for his new musical. He initially sought out William deMille. William had been a successful playwright, but DeMille was suffering from the failure of his plays &quot;The Royal Mounted&quot; and &quot;The Genius&quot;. 

Beatrice introduced Lasky to Cecil DeMille instead. The collaboration of DeMille and Lasky produced a successful musical, &quot;California&quot;, which opened in New York in January 1912. Another DeMille-Lasky production that opened in January 1912 was &quot;The Antique Girl&quot;. In the spring of 1913, DeMille found success producing &quot;Reckless Age&quot; by Lee Wilson, a play about a high-society girl wrongly accused of manslaughter, starring Frederick Burton and Sydney Shields. But changes in the theater rendered DeMille&#x27;s melodramas obsolete before they were produced, and true theatrical success eluded him. He produced many flops. Having become uninterested in working in theater, DeMille became ignited by passion for film when he watched the 1912 French film &quot;Les Amours de la reine Élisabeth&quot;.

===1913–1914: entering films===

Desiring a change of scene, DeMille, Lasky, Sam Goldfish (later Samuel Goldwyn), and a group of East Coast businessmen created the Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company in 1913, of which DeMille became director-general. Lasky and DeMille were said to have sketched out the organization of the company on the back of a restaurant menu. As director-general, DeMille&#x27;s job was to make the films. In addition to directing, he was the supervisor and consultant for the first year of films the company made. Sometimes, he directed scenes for other directors at the company in order to release films on time. Moreover, he co-authored other Lasky Company scripts and created screen adaptations that others directed.

The Lasky Play Company tried to recruit William de Mille, but he rejected the offer because he did not believe there was any promise in a film career. When William found out that DeMille had begun working in the motion picture industry, he wrote his brother a letter, saying that he was disappointed that Cecil was willing &quot;to throw away [his] future&quot; when he was &quot;born and raised in the finest traditions of the theater&quot;. 

The Lasky Company wanted to attract high-class audiences to their films, so it began producing films from literary works. The company bought the rights to Edwin Milton Royle&#x27;s play &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; and cast Dustin Farnum in the lead role. It offered Farnum a choice between a quarter stock in the company or $250 in weekly salary. Farnum chose the salary. Already $15,000 in debt to Royle for the screenplay of &quot;The Squaw Man&quot;, Lasky&#x27;s relatives bought the $5,000 stock to save the Lasky Company from bankruptcy. With no knowledge of filmmaking, DeMille was introduced to observe the process at film studios. He was eventually introduced to Oscar Apfel, a stage director who had been a director with the Edison Company.

On December 12, 1913, DeMille, his cast, and crew boarded a Southern Pacific train bound for Flagstaff via New Orleans. His tentative plan was to shoot a film in Arizona, but he felt that Arizona lacked the Western look they were searching for. They also learned that other filmmakers were successfully shooting in Los Angeles, even in winter. He continued to Los Angeles. Once there, he chose not to shoot in Edendale, where many studios were, but in Hollywood. DeMille rented a barn to function as their film studio. Filming began on December 29, 1913, and lasted three weeks. Apfel filmed most of &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; due to DeMille&#x27;s inexperience, but DeMille learned quickly and was particularly adept at impromptu screenwriting as necessary. He made his first film run 60 minutes, as long as a short play. &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; (1914), co-directed by Apfel, was a sensation, and it established the Lasky Company. It was the first feature-length film made in Hollywood. There were problems with the perforation of the film stock, and it was discovered the DeMille had brought a cheap British film perforator that had punched in 65 holes per foot instead of the industry standard of 64. Lasky and DeMille convinced film pioneer Siegmund Lubin of the Lubin Manufacturing Company to have his experienced technicians reperforate the film. 

This was the first American feature film, according to its release date. D. W. Griffith&#x27;s &quot;Judith of Bethulia&quot; was filmed earlier than &quot;The Squaw Man&quot;, but released later. This as the only film in which DeMille shared director&#x27;s credit with Apfel.

&quot;The Squaw Man&quot; was a success, which led to the eventual founding of Paramount Pictures and Hollywood becoming the &quot;film capital of the world&quot;. The film grossed more than ten times its budget after its New York premiere in February 1914. DeMille&#x27;s next project was to aid Apfel in directing &quot;Brewster&#x27;s Millions&quot;, which was wildly successful. In December 1914, Constance Adams brought home John DeMille, a 15-month-old boy, whom the couple legally adopted three years later. Biographer Scott Eyman suggested that she may have decided to adopt after recently having had a miscarriage.

===1915–1928: silent era===

====Westerns, Paradise, and World War I====

Cecil B. DeMille&#x27;s second film, credited exclusively to him, was &quot;The Virginian&quot;. It is the earliest of DeMille&#x27;s films available in a quality, color-tinted video format, but that version is actually a 1918 rerelease. The Lasky Company&#x27;s first few years were spent making films nonstop. DeMille directed 20 films by 1915. The most successful films during this period were &quot;Brewster&#x27;s Millions&quot; (co-directed by DeMille), &quot;Rose of the Rancho&quot;, and &quot;The Ghost Breaker&quot;. DeMille adapted Belasco&#x27;s dramatic lighting techniques to film technology, mimicking moonlight with U.S. cinema&#x27;s first attempts at &quot;motivated lighting&quot; in &quot;The Warrens of Virginia&quot;. This was the first of a few film collaborations with his brother William. They struggled to adapt the play from the stage to the set. After the film was shown, viewers complained that the shadows and lighting prevented the audience from seeing the actors&#x27; full faces and said they would pay only half price. Sam Goldwyn suggested that if they called it &quot;Rembrandt&quot; lighting, the audience would pay double the price. Additionally, because of DeMille&#x27;s cordiality after the &quot;Peter Grimm&quot; incident, DeMille was able to rekindle his partnership with Belasco. He adapted several of Belasco&#x27;s screenplays into film.

DeMille&#x27;s most successful film was &quot;The Cheat&quot;; his direction in the film was acclaimed. In 1916, exhausted from three years of nonstop filmmaking, DeMille purchased land in the Angeles National Forest for a ranch that would become his getaway. He called this place &quot;Paradise&quot;, declaring it a wildlife sanctuary; no shooting of animals besides snakes was allowed. His wife did not like Paradise, so DeMille often brought his mistresses there with him, including actress Julia Faye. In 1921, DeMille purchased a yacht he called &quot;The Seaward&quot;.

While filming &quot;The Captive&quot; in 1915, an extra, Charles Chandler, died on set when another extra failed to heed DeMille&#x27;s orders to unload all guns for rehearsal. DeMille instructed the guilty man to leave town and never revealed his name. Lasky and DeMille maintained Chandler&#x27;s widow on the payroll and, according to leading actor House Peters Sr., DeMille refused to stop production for Chandler&#x27;s funeral. Peters said that he encouraged the cast to attend the funeral with him anyway since DeMille would not be able to shoot the film without him. On July 19, 1916, the Jesse Lasky Feature Play Company merged with Adolph Zukor&#x27;s Famous Players Film Company, becoming Famous Players–Lasky. Zukor became president, Lasky vice president, DeMille director-general, and Goldwyn chairman of the board. Famous Players–Lasky later fired Goldwyn for frequent clashes with Lasky, DeMille, and Zukor. While on a European vacation in 1921, DeMille contracted rheumatic fever in Paris. He was confined to bed and unable to eat. His poor physical condition upon his return home affected the production of his 1922 film &quot;Manslaughter&quot;. According to Richard Birchard, DeMille&#x27;s weakened state during production may have led to the film being received as uncharacteristically substandard.

During World War I, the Famous Players–Lasky organized a military company underneath the National Guard, the Home Guard, made up of film studio employees, with DeMille as captain. Eventually, the Guard was enlarged to a battalion and recruited soldiers from other film studios. They took time off weekly to practice military drills. Additionally, during the war, DeMille volunteered for the Justice Department&#x27;s Intelligence Office, investigating friends, neighbors, and others he came in contact with in connection with the Famous Players–Lasky. He also volunteered for the Intelligence Office during World War II. DeMille considered enlisting in World War I, but stayed in the U.S. and made films. He did take a few months to set up a movie theater for the French front. Famous Players–Lasky donated the films. DeMille and Adams adopted Katherine Lester in 1920, whom Adams had found in the orphanage she directed. In 1922, the couple adopted Richard deMille.

====Scandalous dramas, Biblical epics, and departure from Paramount====
Film started becoming more sophisticated and the Lasky company&#x27;s subsequent films were criticized for primitive and unrealistic set design. Consequently, Beatrice deMille introduced the Famous Players–Lasky to Wilfred Buckland, whom DeMille knew from his time at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts, and he became DeMille&#x27;s art director. William deMille reluctantly became a story editor. William later converted from theater to Hollywood and spent the rest of his career as a film director. DeMille frequently remade his own films. In 1917, he remade &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; (1918), only four years after the original. Despite its quick turnaround, the film was fairly successful. DeMille&#x27;s second remake at MGM in 1931 was a failure.

After five years and 30 hit films, DeMille became the American film industry&#x27;s most successful director. In the silent era, he was renowned for &quot;Male and Female&quot; (1919), &quot;Manslaughter&quot; (1922), &quot;The Volga Boatman&quot; (1926), and &quot;The Godless Girl&quot; (1928). His trademark scenes included bathtubs, lion attacks, and Roman orgies. Many of his films featured scenes in two-color Technicolor. In 1923, DeMille released the modern melodrama &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;, a significant change from his previous irreligious films. The film was produced on a budget of $600,000, Paramount&#x27;s most expensive production. This concerned Paramount executives, but the film was the studio&#x27;s highest-grossing film. It held the Paramount record for 25 years until DeMille broke the record again.
In the early 1920s, scandal surrounded Paramount; religious groups and the media opposed portrayals of immorality in films. A censorship board called the Hays Code was established. DeMille&#x27;s film &quot;The Affairs of Anatol&quot; came under fire. Furthermore, DeMille argued with Zukor over his extravagant and over-budget production costs. Consequently, DeMille left Paramount in 1924 despite having helped establish it. He joined the Producers Distributing Corporation. His first film in the new production company, DeMille Pictures Corporation, was &quot;The Road to Yesterday&quot; in 1925. He directed and produced four films on his own, working with Producers Distributing Corporation because he found front office supervision too restricting. Aside from &quot;The King of Kings,&quot; none of DeMille&#x27;s films away from Paramount were successful. &quot;The King of Kings&quot; established DeMille as &quot;master of the grandiose and of biblical sagas&quot;. Considered at the time the most successful Christian film of the silent era, DeMille calculated that it had been viewed over 800 million times around the world. After the release of DeMille&#x27;s &quot;The Godless Girl&quot;, silent films in America became obsolete, and DeMille was forced to shoot a shoddy final reel with the new sound production technique. Although this final reel looked so different from the first 11 reels that it appeared to be from another movie, according to Simon Louvish, the film is one of DeMille&#x27;s strangest and most &quot;DeMillean&quot; film.

The immense popularity of DeMille&#x27;s silent films enabled him to branch out into other areas. The Roaring Twenties were the boom years and DeMille took full advantage, opening the Mercury Aviation Company, one of America&#x27;s first commercial airlines. He was also a real estate speculator, an underwriter of political campaigns, vice president of Bank of America, and vice president of the Commercial National Trust and Savings Bank in Los Angeles, where he approved loans for other filmmakers. In 1916, DeMille purchased a mansion in Hollywood. Charlie Chaplin lived next door for a time, and after he moved, DeMille purchased the other house and combined the estates.

===1929–1956: sound era===
====MGM and return to Paramount====
When &quot;talking pictures&quot; were invented in 1928, DeMille made a successful transition, offering his own innovations to the painful process; he devised a microphone boom and a soundproof camera blimp. He also popularized the camera crane. His first three sound films, &quot;Dynamite&quot;, &quot;Madame Satan&quot;, and his 1931 remake of &quot;The Squaw Man&quot;, were produced at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer. These films were critically and financially unsuccessful. He had completely adapted to the production of sound film despite the film&#x27;s poor dialogue. After his contract ended at MGM, he left, but no production studios would hire him. He attempted to create a guild of a half a dozen directors with the same creative desires called the Director&#x27;s Guild, but the idea failed due to lack of funding and commitment. Moreover, the Internal Revenue Service audited DeMille due to issues with his production company. This was, according to DeMille, the lowest point of his career. He traveled abroad to find employment until he was offered a deal at Paramount.

In 1932, DeMille returned to Paramount at Lasky&#x27;s request, bringing with him his own production unit. His first film back at Paramount, &quot;The Sign of the Cross&quot;, was also his first success since leaving Paramount besides &quot;The King of Kings&quot;. Zukor approved DeMille&#x27;s return on the condition that DeMille not exceed his production budget of $650,000 for &quot;The Sign of the Cross&quot;. Produced in eight weeks without exceeding budget, the film was financially successful. &quot;The Sign of the Cross&quot; was the first film to integrate all cinematic techniques. The film was considered a &quot;masterpiece&quot; and surpassed the quality of other sound films of the time. DeMille followed this epic with two dramas released in 1933 and 1934, &quot;This Day and Age&quot; and &quot;Four Frightened People&quot;. These were box-office disappointments, though &quot;Four Frightened People&quot; received good reviews. DeMille stuck to large-budget spectaculars for the rest of his career.

====Politics and &quot;Lux Radio Theatre&quot;====
DeMille was outspoken about his Episcopalian integrity, but his private life included mistresses and adultery. He was a conservative Republican activist, becoming more conservative as he aged. He was known as anti-union and worked to prevent the unionization of film production studios. But according to DeMille himself, he was not anti-union and belonged to a few unions. He said he was rather against union leaders such as Walter Reuther and Harry Bridges, whom he compared to dictators. He supported Herbert Hoover and in 1928 made his largest campaign donation to Hoover. But DeMille also liked Franklin D. Roosevelt, finding him charismatic, tenacious, and intelligent, and agreeing with Roosevelt&#x27;s abhorrence of Prohibition. DeMille lent Roosevelt a car for his 1932 United States presidential election campaign and voted for him. He never again voted for a Democratic candidate in a presidential election.

From June 1, 1936, until January 22, 1945, DeMille hosted and directed &quot;Lux Radio Theatre&quot;, a weekly digest of current feature films. Broadcast on the Columbia Broadcasting System (CBS) from 1935 to 1954, &quot;Lux Radio&quot; was one of the most popular weekly shows in radio history. While DeMille was host, the show had 40 million weekly listeners and DeMille had an annual salary of $100,000. From 1936 to 1945, he produced, hosted, and directed every show, with the occasional exception of a guest director. He resigned from &quot;Lux Radio&quot; because he refused to pay a dollar to the American Federation of Radio Artists (AFRA), on the principle that no organization had the right to &quot;levy a compulsory assessment upon any member&quot;.

DeMille sued the union for reinstatement but lost. He appealed to the California Supreme Court and lost again. When the AFRA expanded to television, DeMille was banned from television appearances. Consequently, he formed the DeMille Foundation for Political Freedom to campaign for the right to work. He gave speeches across the nation for the next few years. DeMille&#x27;s primary criticism was of closed shops, but later included criticism of communism and unions in general. The U.S. Supreme Court declined to review his case, but DeMille lobbied for the Taft–Hartley Act, which passed. It prohibited denying anyone the right to work if they refuse to pay a political assessment. But the law did not apply retroactively, so DeMille&#x27;s television and radio appearance ban lasted the rest of his life, though he was permitted to appear on radio or television to publicize a movie. William Keighley replaced him. DeMille never worked in radio again.

====Adventure films and dramatic spectacles====
In 1939, DeMille&#x27;s &quot;Union Pacific&quot; was successful through DeMille&#x27;s collaboration with the Union Pacific Railroad. The Union Pacific gave DeMille access to historical data, early period trains, and expert crews, adding to the film&#x27;s authenticity. During pre-production, DeMille was dealing with his first serious health issue. In March 1938, he underwent a major emergency prostatectomy. He had a post-surgery infection from which he nearly did not recover, citing streptomycin as his saving grace. The surgery caused him to suffer from sexual dysfunction for the rest of his life, according to some family members. After his surgery and the success of &quot;Union Pacific&quot;, DeMille first used three-strip Technicolor in 1940, in &quot;North West Mounted Police&quot;. DeMille wanted to film in Canada, but due to budget constraints, the film was instead shot in Oregon and Hollywood. Critics were impressed with the visuals but found the scripts dull, calling it DeMille&#x27;s &quot;poorest Western&quot;. Despite the criticism, it was Paramount&#x27;s highest-grossing film of the year. Audiences liked its highly saturated color, so DeMille made no further black-and-white features. DeMille was anti-communist and abandoned a project in 1940 to film Ernest Hemingway&#x27;s &quot;For Whom the Bell Tolls&quot; due to its communist themes, even though he had already paid $100,000 for the rights to the novel. He was so eager to produce the film that he hadn&#x27;t yet read it. He claimed he abandoned the project in order to complete a different project, but it was actually to preserve his reputation and avoid appearing reactionary. While concurrently filmmaking, he served during World War II at age 60 as his neighborhood air-raid warden.

In 1942, DeMille worked with Jeanie MacPherson and William deMille to produce a film, &quot;Queen of Queens&quot;, that was intended to be about Mary, mother of Jesus. After reading the screenplay, Daniel A. Lord warned DeMille that Catholics would find the film too irreverent while non-Catholics would consider it Catholic propaganda. Consequently, the film was never made. MacPherson worked as a scriptwriter on many of DeMille&#x27;s films. In 1938, DeMille supervised the film compilation &quot;Land of Liberty&quot; as the American film industry&#x27;s contribution to the 1939 New York World&#x27;s Fair. He used clips from his own films in it. &quot;Land of Liberty&quot; was not high-grossing, but it was well-received, and DeMille was asked to shorten its running time to allow for more showings per day. MGM distributed the film in 1941 and donated profits to World War II relief charities.

In 1942, DeMille released Paramount&#x27;s most successful film, &quot;Reap the Wild Wind&quot;. It had a large budget and many special effects, including an electronically operated giant squid. After working on it, DeMille was the master of ceremonies at a rally organized by David O. Selznick in the Los Angeles Coliseum in support of the Dewey–Bricker presidential ticket as well as Governor Earl Warren of California. DeMille&#x27;s 1947 film &quot;Unconquered&quot; had the longest running time (146 minutes), longest filming schedule (102 days), and largest budget ($5 million). Its sets and effects were so realistic that 30 extras needed to be hospitalized due to a scene with fireballs and flaming arrows. It was commercially very successful.

DeMille&#x27;s next film, &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot; (1949), was Paramount&#x27;s highest-grossing film up to that time. A Biblical epic with sex, it was a characteristically DeMille film. 1952&#x27;s &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; became Paramount&#x27;s highest-grossing film to that point and won the Academy Award for Best Picture and the Academy Award for Best Story. It began production in 1949. Ringling Brothers-Barnum and Bailey were paid $250,000 for use of the title and facilities. DeMille toured with the circus while helping write the script. Noisy and bright, the film was not well-liked by critics but was an audience favorite. In 1953, DeMille signed a contract with Prentice Hall to publish an autobiography. He reminisced into a voice recorder, the recording was transcribed, and the information was organized by topic. Art Arthur also interviewed people for the autobiography. DeMille did not like the biography&#x27;s first draft, saying he thought the person portrayed in it was an egotistical &quot;SOB&quot;. In the early 1950s, Allen Dulles and Frank Wisner recruited DeMille to serve on the board of the anti-communist National Committee for a Free Europe, the public face of the organization that oversaw Radio Free Europe. In 1954, Secretary of the Air Force Harold E. Talbott asked DeMille for help designing the cadet uniforms at the newly established United States Air Force Academy. DeMille&#x27;s designs, most notably that of the cadet parade uniform, were praised by Air Force and Academy leadership, adopted, and still worn.

====Final works and unrealized projects====
In 1952, DeMille sought approval for a lavish remake of his 1923 silent film &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;. He went before the Paramount board of directors, which was mostly Jewish-American. The board rejected his proposal, even though his last two films, &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot; and &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot;, had been record-breaking hits. Adolph Zukor convinced the board to change its mind on the grounds of morality. DeMille did not have an exact budget proposal for the project, and it promised to be the most costly in U.S. film history. Still, the board unanimously approved it. &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;, released in 1956, was DeMille&#x27;s final film. It was the longest (3 hours, 39 minutes) and most expensive ($13 million) film in Paramount history. Production began in October 1954. The Exodus scene was filmed on-site in Egypt with four Technicolor-VistaVision cameras filming 12,000 people. Filming continued in 1955 in Paris and Hollywood on 30 different sound stages. They even expanded to RKO sound studios for filming. Post-production lasted a year, and the film premiered in Salt Lake City. Nominated for an Academy Award for Best Picture, it grossed over $80 million, which surpassed the gross of &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; and every other film in history except &quot;Gone with the Wind&quot;. DeMille offered ten percent of his profit to the crew, a unique practice at the time.

On November 7, 1954, while in Egypt filming the Exodus sequence for &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;, DeMille (who was 73) climbed a ladder to the top of the set and had a serious heart attack. Despite the urging of his associate producer, DeMille wanted to return to the set right away. He developed a plan with his doctor to allow him to continue directing while reducing his physical stress. DeMille completed the film, but his health was diminished by several more heart attacks. His daughter Cecilia took over as director as DeMille sat behind the camera with Loyal Griggs as the cinematographer. This film was his last.

Due to his frequent heart attacks, DeMille asked his son-in-law, actor Anthony Quinn, to direct a remake of his 1938 film &quot;The Buccaneer&quot;. DeMille served as executive producer, overseeing producer Henry Wilcoxon. Despite a cast led by Charlton Heston and Yul Brynner, the 1958 film &quot;The Buccaneer&quot; was a disappointment. DeMille attended its Santa Barbara premiere in December 1958. He was unable to attend its Los Angeles premiere. In the months before his death, DeMille was researching a film biography of Robert Baden-Powell, the founder of the Scout Movement. DeMille asked David Niven to star in the film, but it was never made. DeMille also was planning a film about the space race and a biblical epic based on the Book of Revelation. His autobiography was mostly complete when he died, and was published in November 1959.

====Death====
DeMille suffered a series of heart attacks from June 1958 to January 1959, and died on January 21, 1959, following an attack. His funeral was held on January 23 at St. Stephen&#x27;s Episcopal Church. He was entombed at the Hollywood Memorial Cemetery (now known as Hollywood Forever). After his death, news outlets such as &quot;The New York Times&quot;, the &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, and &quot;The Guardian&quot; called DeMille a &quot;pioneer of movies&quot;, &quot;the greatest creator and showman of our industry&quot;, and &quot;the founder of Hollywood&quot;. DeMille left his multi-million dollar estate in Los Feliz, Los Angeles, in Laughlin Park to his daughter Cecilia because his wife had dementia and was unable to care for an estate. She died a year later. His personal will drew a line between Cecilia and his three adopted children, with Cecilia receiving a majority of DeMille&#x27;s inheritance and estate. The other three children were surprised by this, as DeMille had not treated them differently in life. Cecilia lived in the house until her death in 1984. The house was auctioned by his granddaughter Cecilia DeMille Presley, who also lived there in the late 1980s.

==Filmmaking==
===Influences===
DeMille believed his first influences to be his parents, Henry and Beatrice DeMille. His playwright father introduced him to the theater at a young age. Henry was heavily influenced by the work of Charles Kingsley, whose ideas trickled down to DeMille. DeMille noted that his mother had a &quot;high sense of the dramatic&quot; and was determined to continue the artistic legacy of her husband after he died. Beatrice became a play broker and author&#x27;s agent, influencing DeMille&#x27;s early life and career. DeMille&#x27;s father worked with David Belasco who was a theatrical producer, impresario, and playwright. Belasco was known for adding realistic elements in his plays such as real flowers, food, and aromas that could transport his audiences into the scenes. While working in theatre, DeMille used real fruit trees in his play &quot;California&quot;, as influenced by Belasco. Similar to Belasco, DeMille&#x27;s theatre revolved around entertainment rather than artistry. Generally, Belasco&#x27;s influence of DeMille&#x27;s career can be seen in DeMille&#x27;s showmanship and narration. E. H. Sothern&#x27;s early influence on DeMille&#x27;s work can be seen in DeMille&#x27;s perfectionism. DeMille recalled that one of the most influential plays he saw was &quot;Hamlet&quot;, directed by Sothern.

===Method===
DeMille&#x27;s filmmaking process always began with extensive research. Next, he would work with writers to develop the story that he was envisioning. Then, he would help writers construct a script. Finally, he would leave the script with artists and allow them to create artistic depictions and renderings of each scene. Plot and dialogue were not a strong point of DeMille&#x27;s films. Consequently, he focused his efforts on his films&#x27; visuals. He worked with visual technicians, editors, art directors, costume designers, cinematographers, and set carpenters in order to perfect the visual aspects of his films. With his editor, Anne Bauchens, DeMille used editing techniques to allow the visual images to bring the plot to climax rather than dialogue. DeMille had large and frequent office conferences to discuss and examine all aspects of the working film including story-boards, props, and special effects.

DeMille rarely gave direction to actors; he preferred to &quot;office-direct&quot;, where he would work with actors in his office, going over characters and reading through scripts. Any problems on the set were often fixed by writers in the office rather than on the set. DeMille did not believe a large movie set was the place to discuss minor character or line issues. DeMille was particularly adept at directing and managing large crowds in his films. Martin Scorsese recalled that DeMille had the skill to maintain control of not only the lead actors in a frame but the many extras in the frame as well. DeMille was adept at directing &quot;thousands of extras&quot;, and many of his pictures include spectacular set pieces: the toppling of the pagan temple in &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot;; train wrecks in &quot;The Road to Yesterday&quot;, &quot;Union Pacific&quot; and &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot;; the destruction of an airship in &quot;Madam Satan&quot;; and the parting of the Red Sea in both versions of &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;.

In his early films, DeMille experimented with photographic light and shade, which created dramatic shadows instead of glare. His specific use of lighting, influenced by his mentor David Belasco, was for the purpose of creating &quot;striking images&quot; and heightening &quot;dramatic situations&quot;. DeMille was unique in using this technique. In addition to his use of volatile and abrupt film editing, his lighting and composition were innovative for the time period as filmmakers were primarily concerned with a clear, realistic image. Another important aspect of DeMille&#x27;s editing technique was to put the film away for a week or two after an initial edit in order to re-edit the picture with a fresh mind. This allowed for the rapid production of his films in the early years of the Lasky Company. The cuts were sometimes rough, but the movies were always interesting.

DeMille often edited in a manner that favored psychological space rather than physical space through his cuts. In this way, the characters&#x27; thoughts and desires are the visual focus rather than the circumstances regarding the physical scene. As DeMille&#x27;s career progressed, he increasingly relied on artist Dan Sayre Groesbeck&#x27;s concept, costume, and storyboard art. Groesbeck&#x27;s art was circulated on set to give actors and crew members a better understanding of DeMille&#x27;s vision. His art was even shown at Paramount meetings when pitching new films. DeMille adored the art of Groesbeck, even hanging it above his fireplace, but film staff found it difficult to convert his art into three-dimensional sets. As DeMille continued to rely on Groesbeck, the nervous energy of his early films transformed into more steady compositions of his later films. While visually appealing, this made the films appear more old-fashioned.

Composer Elmer Bernstein described DeMille as &quot;sparing no effort&quot; when filmmaking. Bernstein recalled that DeMille would scream, yell, or flatter—whatever it took to achieve the perfection he required in his films. DeMille was painstakingly attentive to details on set and was as critical of himself as he was of his crew. Costume designer Dorothy Jeakins, who worked with DeMille on &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; (1956), said that he was skilled in humiliating people. Jeakins admitted that she received quality training from him, but that it was necessary to become a perfectionist on a DeMille set to avoid being fired. DeMille had an authoritarian persona on set; he required absolute attention from the cast and crew. He had a band of assistants who catered to his needs. He would speak to the entire set, sometimes enormous with countless numbers of crew members and extras, via a microphone to maintain control of the set. He was disliked by many inside and outside of the film industry for his cold and controlling reputation.

DeMille was known for autocratic behavior on the set, singling out and berating extras who were not paying attention. Many of these displays were thought to be staged, however, as an exercise in discipline. He despised actors who were unwilling to take physical risks, especially when he had first demonstrated that the required stunt would not harm them. This occurred with Victor Mature in &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot;. Mature refused to wrestle Jackie the Lion, even though DeMille had just tussled with the lion, proving that he was tame. DeMille told the actor that he was &quot;one hundred percent yellow&quot;. Paulette Goddard&#x27;s refusal to risk personal injury in a scene involving fire in &quot;Unconquered&quot; cost her DeMille&#x27;s favor and a role in &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot;. DeMille did receive help in his films, notably from Alvin Wyckoff, who shot forty-three of DeMille&#x27;s films; brother William deMille who would occasionally serve as his screenwriter; and Jeanie Macpherson, who served as DeMille&#x27;s exclusive screenwriter for fifteen years; and Eddie Salven, DeMille&#x27;s favorite assistant director.

DeMille made stars of unknown actors: Gloria Swanson, Bebe Daniels, Rod La Rocque, William Boyd, Claudette Colbert, and Charlton Heston. He also cast established stars such as Gary Cooper, Robert Preston, Paulette Goddard and Fredric March in multiple pictures. DeMille cast some of his performers repeatedly, including Henry Wilcoxon, Julia Faye, Joseph Schildkraut, Ian Keith, Charles Bickford, Theodore Roberts, Akim Tamiroff, and William Boyd. DeMille was credited by actor Edward G. Robinson with saving his career following his eclipse in the Hollywood blacklist.

===Style and themes===
Cecil B. DeMille&#x27;s film production career evolved from critically significant silent films to financially significant sound films. He began his career with reserved yet brilliant melodramas; from there, his style developed into marital comedies with outrageously melodramatic plots. In order to attract a high-class audience, DeMille based many of his early films on stage melodramas, novels, and short stories. He began the production of epics earlier in his career until they began to solidify his career in the 1920s. By 1930, DeMille had perfected his film style of mass-interest spectacle films with Western, Roman, or Biblical themes. DeMille was often criticized for making his spectacles too colorful and for being too occupied with entertaining the audience rather than accessing the artistic and auteur possibilities that film could provide. However, others interpreted DeMille&#x27;s work as visually impressive, thrilling, and nostalgic. Along the same lines, critics of DeMille often qualify him by his later spectacles and fail to consider several decades of ingenuity and energy that defined him during his generation. Throughout his career, he did not alter his films to better adhere to contemporary or popular styles. Actor Charlton Heston admitted DeMille was, &quot;terribly unfashionable&quot; and Sidney Lumet called DeMille, &quot;the cheap version of D. W. Griffith&quot;, adding that DeMille, &quot;[didn&#x27;t have]...an original thought in his head&quot;, though Heston added that DeMille was much more than that.

According to Scott Eyman, DeMille&#x27;s films were at the same time masculine and feminine due to his thematic adventurousness and his eye for the extravagant. DeMille&#x27;s distinctive style can be seen through camera and lighting effects as early as &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; with the use of daydream images; moonlight and sunset on a mountain; and side-lighting through a tent flap. In the early age of cinema, DeMille differentiated the Lasky Company from other production companies due to the use of dramatic, low-key lighting they called &quot;Lasky lighting&quot; and marketed as &quot;Rembrandt lighting&quot; to appeal to the public. DeMille achieved international recognition for his unique use of lighting and color tint in his film &quot;The Cheat&quot;. DeMille&#x27;s 1956 version of &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;, according to director Martin Scorsese, is renowned for its level of production and the care and detail that went into creating the film. He stated that &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; was the final culmination of DeMille&#x27;s style.

DeMille was interested in art and his favorite artist was Gustave Doré; DeMille based some of his most well-known scenes on the work of Doré. DeMille was the first director to connect art to filmmaking; he created the title of &quot;art director&quot; on the film set. DeMille was also known for his use of special effects without the use of digital technology. Notably, DeMille had cinematographer John P. Fulton create the parting of the Red Sea scene in his 1956 film &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;, which was one of the most expensive special effects in film history, and has been called by Steven Spielberg &quot;the greatest special effect in film history&quot;. The actual parting of the sea was created by releasing 360,000 gallons of water into a huge water tank split by a U-shaped trough, overlaying it with a film of a giant waterfall that was built on the Paramount backlot, and playing the clip backward.

Aside from his Biblical and historical epics, which are concerned with how man relates to God, some of DeMille&#x27;s films contained themes of &quot;neo-naturalism&quot;, which portray the conflict between the laws of man and the laws of nature. Although he is known for his later &quot;spectacular&quot; films, his early films are held in high regard by critics and film historians. DeMille discovered the possibilities of the &quot;bathroom&quot; or &quot;boudoir&quot; in the film without being &quot;vulgar&quot; or &quot;cheap&quot;. DeMille&#x27;s films &quot;Male and Female&quot;, &quot;Why Change Your Wife?&quot;, and &quot;The Affairs of Anatol&quot; can be retrospectively described as high camp and are categorized as &quot;early DeMille films&quot; due to their particular style of production and costume and set design. However, his earlier films &quot;The Captive&quot;, &quot;Kindling&quot;, &quot;Carmen&quot;, and &quot;The Whispering Chorus&quot; are more serious films. It is difficult to typify DeMille&#x27;s films into one specific genre. His first three films were Westerns, and he filmed many Westerns throughout his career. However, throughout his career, he filmed comedies, periodic and contemporary romances, dramas, fantasies, propaganda, Biblical spectacles, musical comedies, suspense, and war films. At least one DeMille film can represent each film genre. DeMille produced the majority of his films before the 1930s, and by the time sound films were invented, film critics saw DeMille as antiquated, with his best filmmaking years behind him.

DeMille&#x27;s films contained many similar themes throughout his career. However, the films of his silent era were often thematically different from the films of his sound era. His silent-era films often included the &quot;battle of the sexes&quot; theme due to the era of women&#x27;s suffrage and the enlarging role of women in society. Moreover, before his religious-themed films, many of his silent era films revolved around &quot;husband-and-wife-divorce-and-remarry satires&quot;, considerably more adult-themed. According to Simon Louvish, these films reflected DeMille&#x27;s inner thoughts and opinions about marriage and human sexuality. Religion was a theme that DeMille returned to throughout his career. Of his seventy films, five revolved around stories of the Bible and the New Testament; however many others, while not direct retellings of Biblical stories, had themes of faith and religious fanaticism in films such as &quot;The Crusades&quot; and &quot;The Road to Yesterday&quot;. Western and frontier American were also themes that DeMille returned to throughout his career. His first several films were Westerns, and he produced a chain of westerns during the sound era. Instead of portraying the danger and anarchy of the West, he portrayed the opportunity and redemption found in Western America. Another common theme in DeMille&#x27;s films is the reversal of fortune and the portrayal of the rich and the poor, including the war of the classes and man versus society conflicts such as in &quot;The Golden Chance&quot; and &quot;The Cheat&quot;. In relation to his own interests and sexual preferences, sadomasochism was a minor theme present in some of his films. Another minor characteristic of DeMille&#x27;s films include train crashes, which can be found in several of his films.

==Legacy==

Known as the father of the Hollywood motion picture industry, Cecil B. DeMille made 70 films including several box-office hits. DeMille is one of the more commercially successful film directors in history, with his films before the release of &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; estimated to have grossed $650  million worldwide. Adjusted for inflation, DeMille&#x27;s remake of &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; is the eighth highest-grossing film in the world.

According to Sam Goldwyn, critics did not like DeMille&#x27;s films, but the audiences did, and &quot;they have the final word&quot;. Similarly, scholar David Blanke, argued that DeMille had lost the respect of his colleagues and film critics by his late film career. However, his final films maintained that DeMille was still respected by his audiences. Five of DeMille&#x27;s films were the highest-grossing films at the year of their release, with only Spielberg topping him with six of his films as the highest-grossing films of the year. DeMille&#x27;s highest-grossing films include: &quot;The Sign of the Cross&quot; (1932), &quot;Unconquered&quot; (1947), &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot; (1949), &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; (1952), and &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; (1956). Director Ridley Scott has been called &quot;the Cecil B. DeMille of the digital era&quot; due to his classical and medieval epics.

Despite his box-office success, awards, and artistic achievements, DeMille has been dismissed and ignored by critics both during his life and posthumously. He was consistently criticized for producing shallow films without talent or artistic care. Compared to other directors, few film scholars have taken the time to academically analyze his films and style. During the French New Wave, critics began to categorize certain filmmakers as auteurs such as Howard Hawks, John Ford, and Raoul Walsh. DeMille was omitted from the list, thought to be too unsophisticated and antiquated to be considered an auteur. However, Simon Louvish wrote &quot;he was the complete master and auteur of his films&quot;, and Anton Kozlovic called him the &quot;unsung American auteur&quot;. Andrew Sarris, a leading proponent of the auteur theory, ranked DeMille highly as an auteur in the &quot;Far Side of Paradise&quot;, just below the &quot;Pantheon&quot;. Sarris added that despite the influence of the styles of contemporary directors throughout his career, DeMille&#x27;s style remained unchanged. Robert Birchard wrote that one could argue the auteurship of DeMille on the basis that DeMille&#x27;s thematic and visual style remained consistent throughout his career. However, Birchard acknowledged that Sarris&#x27;s point was more likely that DeMille&#x27;s style was behind the development of film as an art form. Meanwhile, Sumiko Higashi sees DeMille as &quot;not only a figure who was shaped and influenced by the forces of his era but as a filmmaker who left his own signature on the culture industry.&quot; The critic Camille Paglia has called &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; one of the ten greatest films of all time.

DeMille was one of the first directors to become a celebrity in his own right. He cultivated the image of the omnipotent director, complete with megaphone, riding crop, and jodhpurs. He was known for his unique working wardrobe, which included riding boots, riding pants, and soft, open necked shirts. Joseph Henabery recalled that DeMille looked like &quot;a king on a throne surrounded by his court&quot; while directing films on a camera platform.

DeMille was liked by some of his fellow directors and disliked by others, though his actual films were usually dismissed by his peers as a vapid spectacle. Director John Huston intensely disliked both DeMille and his films. &quot;He was a thoroughly bad director&quot;, Huston said. &quot;A dreadful showoff. Terrible. To diseased proportions.&quot; Said fellow director William Wellman: &quot;Directorially, I think his pictures were the most horrible things I&#x27;ve ever seen in my life. But he put on pictures that made a fortune. In that respect, he was better than any of us.&quot; Producer David O. Selznick wrote: &quot;There has appeared only one Cecil B. DeMille. He is one of the most extraordinarily able showmen of modern times. However much I may dislike some of his pictures, it would be very silly of me, as a producer of commercial motion pictures, to demean for an instant his unparalleled skill as a maker of mass entertainment.&quot; Salvador Dalí wrote that DeMille, Walt Disney, and the Marx Brothers were &quot;the three great American Surrealists&quot;. DeMille appeared as himself in numerous films, including the MGM comedy &quot;Free and Easy&quot;. He often appeared in his coming-attraction trailers and narrated many of his later films, even stepping on screen to introduce &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;. DeMille was immortalized in Billy Wilder&#x27;s &quot;Sunset Boulevard&quot; when Gloria Swanson spoke the line: &quot;All right, Mr. DeMille. I&#x27;m ready for my close-up.&quot; DeMille plays himself in the film. DeMille&#x27;s reputation had a renaissance in the 2010s.

As a filmmaker, DeMille was the aesthetic inspiration of many directors and films due to his early influence during the crucial development of the film industry. DeMille&#x27;s early silent comedies influenced the comedies of Ernst Lubitsch and Charlie Chaplin&#x27;s &quot;A Woman of Paris&quot;. Additionally, DeMille&#x27;s epics such as &quot;The Crusades&quot; influenced Sergei Eisenstein&#x27;s &quot;Alexander Nevsky&quot;. Moreover, DeMille&#x27;s epics inspired directors such as Howard Hawks, Nicholas Ray, Joseph L. Mankiewicz, and George Stevens to try producing epics. Cecil B. DeMille has influenced the work of several well-known directors. Alfred Hitchcock cited DeMille&#x27;s 1921 film &quot;Forbidden Fruit&quot; as an influence of his work and one of his top ten favorite films. DeMille has influenced the careers of many modern directors. Martin Scorsese cited &quot;Unconquered&quot;, &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot;, and &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; as DeMille films that have imparted lasting memories on him. Scorsese said he had viewed &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; forty or fifty times. Famed director Steven Spielberg stated that DeMille&#x27;s &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot; was one of the films that influenced him to become a filmmaker. Furthermore, DeMille influenced about half of Spielberg&#x27;s films, including &quot;War of the Worlds&quot;. &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; inspired DreamWorks Animation&#x27;s later film about Moses, &quot;The Prince of Egypt&quot;. As one of the establishing members of Paramount Pictures and co-founder of Hollywood, DeMille had a role in the development of the film industry. Consequently, the name &quot;DeMille&quot; has become synonymous with filmmaking.

Publicly Episcopalian, DeMille drew on his Christian and Jewish ancestors to convey a message of tolerance. DeMille received more than a dozen awards from Christian and Jewish religious and cultural groups, including B&#x27;nai B&#x27;rith. However, not everyone received DeMille&#x27;s religious films favorably. DeMille was accused of antisemitism after the release of &quot;The King of Kings&quot;, and director John Ford despised DeMille for what he saw as &quot;hollow&quot; biblical epics meant to promote DeMille&#x27;s reputation during the politically turbulent 1950s. In response to the claims, DeMille donated some of the profits from &quot;The King of Kings&quot; to charity. In the 2012 &quot;Sight &amp; Sound&quot; poll, both DeMille&#x27;s &quot;Samson and Delilah&quot; and 1923 version of &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; received votes, but did not make the top 100 films. Although many of DeMille&#x27;s films are available on DVD and Blu-ray release, only 20 of his silent films are commercially available on DVD.

===Commemoration and tributes===
The original Lasky-DeMille Barn in which &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; was filmed was converted into a museum named the &quot;Hollywood Heritage Museum&quot;. It opened on December 13, 1985, and features some of DeMille&#x27;s personal artifacts. The Lasky-DeMille Barn was dedicated as a California historical landmark in a ceremony on December 27, 1956; DeMille was the keynote speaker. It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2014. The Dunes Center in Guadalupe, California, contains an exhibition of artifacts uncovered in the desert near Guadalupe from DeMille&#x27;s set of his 1923 version of &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot;, known as the &quot;Lost City of Cecil B. DeMille&quot;. Donated by the Cecil B. DeMille Foundation in 2004, the moving image collection of Cecil B. DeMille is held at the Academy Film Archive and includes home movies, outtakes, and never-before-seen test footage.

In summer 2019, The Friends of the Pompton Lakes Library hosted a Cecil B DeMille film festival to celebrate DeMille&#x27;s achievements and connection to Pompton Lakes. They screened four of his films at Christ Church, where DeMille and his family attended church when they lived there. Two schools have been named after him: Cecil B. DeMille Middle School, in Long Beach, California, which was closed and demolished in 2010 to make way for a new high school; and Cecil B. DeMille Elementary School in Midway City, California. The former film building at Chapman University in Orange, California, is named in honor of DeMille. During the Apollo 11 mission, Buzz Aldrin referred to himself in one instance as &quot;Cecil B. DeAldrin&quot;, as a humorous nod to DeMille. The title of the 2000 John Waters film &quot;Cecil B. Demented&quot; alludes to DeMille.

DeMille&#x27;s legacy is maintained by his granddaughter Cecilia DeMille Presley who serves as the president of the Cecil B. DeMille Foundation, which strives to support higher education, child welfare, and film in Southern California. In 1963, the Cecil B. DeMille Foundation donated the &quot;Paradise&quot; ranch to the Hathaway Foundation, which cares for emotionally disturbed and abused children. A large collection of DeMille&#x27;s materials including scripts, storyboards, and films resides at Brigham Young University in L. Tom Perry Special Collections.

==Awards and recognition==
Cecil B. DeMille received many awards and honors, especially later in his career.
In August 1941, DeMille was honored with a block in the forecourt of Grauman&#x27;s Chinese Theatre.

The American Academy of Dramatic Arts honored DeMille with an Alumni Achievement Award in 1958.
In 1957, DeMille gave the commencement address for the graduation ceremony of Brigham Young University, wherein he received an honorary Doctorate of Letter degree. Additionally, in 1958, he received an honorary Doctorate of Law degree from Temple University.

From the film industry, DeMille received the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award at the Academy Awards in 1953, and a Lifetime Achievement Award from the Directors Guild of America Award the same year. In the same ceremony, DeMille received a nomination from Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures for &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot;. In 1952, DeMille was awarded the first Cecil B. DeMille Award at the Golden Globes. An annual award, the Golden Globe&#x27;s Cecil B. DeMille Award recognizes lifetime achievement in the film industry. For his contribution to the motion picture and radio industry, DeMille has two stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. The first, for radio contributions, is located at 6240 Hollywood Blvd. The second star is located at 1725 Vine Street.

DeMille received two Academy Awards: an Honorary Award for &quot;37 years of brilliant showmanship&quot; in 1950 and a Best Picture award in 1953 for &quot;The Greatest Show on Earth&quot;. DeMille received a Golden Globe Award for Best Director and was additionally nominated for the Best Director category at the 1953 Academy Awards for the same film. He was further nominated in the Best Picture category for &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; at the 1957 Academy Awards. DeMille&#x27;s &quot;Union Pacific&quot; received a Palme d&#x27;Or in retrospect at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival.

Two of DeMille&#x27;s films have been selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress: &quot;The Cheat&quot; (1915) and &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; (1956).

==Filmography==
DeMille made 70 features, 52 of which are silent. The first 24 of his silents were produced during the first three years of his career (1913–1916). Eight of his films were &quot;epics&quot; with five classified as &quot;Biblical&quot;. Six of DeMille&#x27;s films — &quot;The Arab&quot;, &quot;The Wild Goose Chase&quot;, &quot;The Dream Girl&quot;, &quot;The Devil-Stone&quot;, &quot;We Can&#x27;t Have Everything&quot;, and &quot;The Squaw Man&quot; (1918) — were destroyed by nitrate decomposition, and are considered lost. &quot;The Ten Commandments&quot; is broadcast every Saturday at Passover in the United States on the ABC Television Network.

===Directed features===
Filmography obtained from &quot;Fifty Hollywood Directors&quot;.

Silent films

Sound films
===Directing or producing credit===
These films represent those which DeMille produced or assisted in directing, credited or uncredited.
* &quot;Brewster&#x27;s Millions&quot; (1914, lost)
* &quot;The Master Mind&quot; (1914)
* &quot;The Only Son&quot; (1914, lost)
* &quot;The Man on the Box&quot; (1914)
* &quot;The Ghost Breaker&quot; (1914, lost)
* &quot;After Five&quot; (1915)
* &quot;Nan of Music Mountain&quot; (1917)
* &quot;Chicago&quot; (1927, Producer, uncredited)
* &quot;When Worlds Collide&quot; (1951, executive producer)
* &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot; (1953, executive producer)
* &quot;The Buccaneer&quot; (1958, producer)

===Acting and cameos===
DeMille frequently made cameos as himself in other Paramount films. Additionally, he often starred in prologues and special trailers that he created for his films, having an opportunity to personally address the audience.
==Explanatory notes==
==Citations==
==General sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Orrison, Katherine. &quot;Written in Stone: Making Cecil B. DeMille&#x27;s Epic, The Ten Commandments&quot;. New York: Vestal Press, 1990. .
* 
* 


==External links==

* by the Cecil B. DeMille Foundation
* 
* 
* Cecil B. DeMille at Virtual History
* Cecil B. DeMille&#x27;s Early Films&#x27; Costs and Grosses by David Pierce
*Silent Film Bookshelf

===Archival materials===
* Cecil B. DeMille papers, Vault MSS 1400, L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University, DeMille&#x27;s personal and business papers including correspondence, audio, and video recordings, financial ledgers, and memorabilia
* Other collections related to DeMille at the L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University
* The Mary Roberts Rinehart Papers, Vault SC.1958.03, ULS Special Collections, University of Pittsburgh Library, includes conversations with DeMille about her plays</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q72267" start="0" end="20" title="Cecil B. DeMille" label="Cecil Blount DeMille"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="143" end="149" title="Silent film" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="154" end="164" title="sound film" label="sound film"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="210" end="225" title="cinema of the United States" label="American cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="575" end="584" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536103" start="665" end="688" title="Ashfield, Massachusetts" label="Ashfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q454464" start="893" end="909" title="William de Mille" label="William de Mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384661" start="925" end="939" title="Jesse L. Lasky" label="Jesse L. Lasky"/>
<link wikidata="Q186286" start="956" end="966" title="vaudeville" label="vaudeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613688" start="1012" end="1025" title="The Squaw Man (1914 film)" label="The Squaw Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="1087" end="1096" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q159846" start="1392" end="1410" title="Paramount Pictures" label="Paramount Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q361208" start="1426" end="1438" title="Adolph Zukor" label="Adolph Zukor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217715" start="1471" end="1491" title="The Ten Commandments (1923 film)" label="The Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795989" start="1625" end="1642" title="The King of Kings (1927 film)" label="The King of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546143" start="1770" end="1791" title="The Sign of the Cross (1932 film)" label="The Sign of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100552" start="1895" end="1904" title="Cleopatra (1934 film)" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1961" end="1991" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q426352" start="2092" end="2110" title="Samson and Delilah (1949 film)" label="Samson and Delilah"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="2419" end="2450" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Academy Award for Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q641061" start="2478" end="2504" title="The Greatest Show on Earth (film)" label="The Greatest Show on Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q614408" start="2538" end="2568" title="25th Academy Awards" label="Academy Award for Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011509" start="2577" end="2627" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q746733" start="2665" end="2685" title="The Ten Commandments (1956 film)" label="The Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q392108" start="2757" end="2821" title="List of highest-grossing films adjusted for inflation" label="eighth-highest-grossing film of all time, adjusted for inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q727328" start="2885" end="2907" title="Academy Honorary Award" label="Academy Honorary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="2940" end="2955" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930992" start="2981" end="2994" title="Union Pacific (film)" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111310" start="3011" end="3020" title="Directors Guild of America Award" label="DGA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q844273" start="3055" end="3088" title="Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award" label="Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q640353" start="3124" end="3159" title="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award" label="Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1558858" start="4042" end="4056" title="boarding house" label="boarding house"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536103" start="4075" end="4098" title="Ashfield, Massachusetts" label="Ashfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784910" start="4365" end="4389" title="Henry Churchill de Mille" label="Henry Churchill de Mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q3637241" start="4444" end="4468" title="Beatrice deMille" label="Matilda Beatrice deMille"/>
<link wikidata="Q454464" start="4557" end="4575" title="William C. deMille" label="William C. deMille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="4687" end="4701" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="4747" end="4763" title="Episcopal Church in the United States of America" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="4829" end="4848" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q389336" start="4942" end="4975" title="American Academy of Dramatic Arts" label="American Academy of Dramatic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q562719" start="5059" end="5072" title="David Belasco" label="David Belasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="5337" end="5348" title="History of the Jews in Germany" label="German Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="5459" end="5467" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="5891" end="5906" title="Episcopalianism" label="Episcopalianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q798506" start="6107" end="6118" title="Edwin Booth" label="Edwin Booth"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="6181" end="6191" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026008" start="6293" end="6319" title="Washington, North Carolina" label="Washington, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="6353" end="6362" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089359" start="6393" end="6418" title="Pompton Lakes, New Jersey" label="Pompton Lakes, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q295935" start="6464" end="6481" title="John Philip Sousa" label="John Philip Sousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q230935" start="6573" end="6585" title="Annie Oakley" label="Annie Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q48143" start="6756" end="6773" title="spinal meningitis" label="spinal meningitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="7082" end="7095" title="typhoid fever" label="typhoid fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="7531" end="7539" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443325" start="7671" end="7700" title="Widener University" label="Pennsylvania Military College"/>
<link wikidata="Q368045" start="7729" end="7750" title="Chester, Pennsylvania" label="Chester, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="7794" end="7814" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q713997" start="8204" end="8219" title="Charles Frohman" label="Charles Frohman"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="8296" end="8304" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q713997" start="8491" end="8506" title="Charles Frohman" label="Charles Frohman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522335" start="8602" end="8616" title="Garden Theater" label="Garden Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163494" start="8775" end="8790" title="Constance Adams DeMille" label="Constance Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q607123" start="8950" end="8963" title="Simon Louvish" label="Simon Louvish"/>
<link wikidata="Q229232" start="9847" end="9861" title="Gloria Swanson" label="Gloria Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="9946" end="9952" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361887" start="10338" end="10352" title="Elitch Theatre" label="Elitch Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2210593" start="10451" end="10462" title="Maude Fealy" label="Maude Fealy"/>
<link wikidata="Q562719" start="11024" end="11037" title="David Belasco" label="David Belasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7736603" start="11138" end="11165" title="The Girl of the Golden West (play)" label="The Girl of the Golden West"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878238" start="11215" end="11238" title="The Warrens of Virginia (play)" label="The Warrens of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086182" start="11882" end="11898" title="Charlotte Walker (actress)" label="Charlotte Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q104109" start="11900" end="11913" title="Mary Pickford" label="Mary Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374148" start="11919" end="11935" title="Pedro de Cordoba (actor)" label="Pedro de Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321908" start="12599" end="12612" title="E. H. Sothern" label="E. H. Sothern"/>
<link wikidata="Q434304" start="12729" end="12742" title="Evelyn Nesbit" label="Evelyn Nesbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497446" start="14277" end="14293" title="Frederick Burton (actor)" label="Frederick Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660140" start="14298" end="14312" title="Sydney Shields" label="Sydney Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="14365" end="14374" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637138" start="14612" end="14644" title="Les Amours de la reine Élisabeth" label="Les Amours de la reine Élisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q72579" start="14750" end="14764" title="Samuel Goldwyn" label="Samuel Goldwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384661" start="14817" end="14852" title="Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company" label="Jesse L. Lasky Feature Play Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048797" start="15998" end="16016" title="Edwin Milton Royle" label="Edwin Milton Royle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989443" start="16035" end="16048" title="The Squaw Man (play)" label="The Squaw Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267709" start="16064" end="16077" title="Dustin Farnum" label="Dustin Farnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613688" start="16274" end="16287" title="The Squaw Man (1914 film)" label="The Squaw Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356950" start="16513" end="16524" title="Oscar Apfel" label="Oscar Apfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21022090" start="16576" end="16590" title="Edison Company" label="Edison Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q79842" start="16686" end="16695" title="Flagstaff, Arizona" label="Flagstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="16700" end="16711" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="16755" end="16762" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336982" start="17003" end="17011" title="Edendale, Los Angeles" label="Edendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q593145" start="17839" end="17853" title="Siegmund Lubin" label="Siegmund Lubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q116439" start="17861" end="17888" title="Lubin Manufacturing Company" label="Lubin Manufacturing Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18022" end="18036" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q768664" start="18050" end="18068" title="Judith of Bethulia" label="Judith of Bethulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644415" start="18550" end="18574" title="Brewster&amp;#x27;s Millions (1914 film)" label="Brewster&amp;#x27;s Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523234" start="19003" end="19016" title="The Virginian (1914 film)" label="The Virginian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941439" start="19393" end="19411" title="Rose of the Rancho (1914 film)" label="Rose of the Rancho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987212" start="19429" end="19446" title="The Ghost Breaker (1914 film)" label="The Ghost Breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523294" start="19636" end="19659" title="The Warrens of Virginia (1915 film)" label="The Warrens of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246289" start="20359" end="20368" title="The Cheat (1915 film)" label="The Cheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079095" start="20506" end="20529" title="Angeles National Forest" label="Angeles National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189043" start="20808" end="20818" title="Julia Faye" label="Julia Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721300" start="20911" end="20922" title="The Captive (1915 film)" label="The Captive"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581033" start="21243" end="21259" title="House Peters Sr." label="House Peters Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5433479" start="21553" end="21580" title="Famous Players Film Company" label="Famous Players Film Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739165" start="21591" end="21611" title="Famous Players–Lasky" label="Famous Players–Lasky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751536" start="22035" end="22047" title="Manslaughter (1922 film)" label="Manslaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q454944" start="23056" end="23072" title="Katherine DeMille" label="Katherine Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q646421" start="23467" end="23483" title="Wilfred Buckland" label="Wilfred Buckland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224290" start="23822" end="23835" title="The Squaw Man (1918 film)" label="The Squaw Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="23980" end="23983" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116550" start="24163" end="24178" title="Male and Female" label="Male and Female"/>
<link wikidata="Q913865" start="24232" end="24249" title="The Volga Boatman (1926 film)" label="The Volga Boatman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208932" start="24274" end="24290" title="The Godless Girl" label="The Godless Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q674564" start="24424" end="24435" title="Technicolor" label="Technicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q610292" start="24996" end="25005" title="Hays Code" label="Hays Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q931215" start="25049" end="25070" title="The Affairs of Anatol" label="The Affairs of Anatol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247697" start="25283" end="25317" title="Producers Distributing Corporation" label="Producers Distributing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989055" start="25405" end="25426" title="The Road to Yesterday" label="The Road to Yesterday"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="26502" end="26518" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q107072136" start="26584" end="26608" title="Mercury Aviation Company" label="Mercury Aviation Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q487907" start="26754" end="26769" title="Bank of America" label="Bank of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="26953" end="26968" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q884097" start="27335" end="27347" title="Sound blimp" label="camera blimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269007" start="27422" end="27430" title="Dynamite (1929 film)" label="Dynamite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750317" start="27444" end="27456" title="Madame Satan" label="Madame Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224286" start="27493" end="27506" title="The Squaw Man (1931 film)" label="The Squaw Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="27988" end="28012" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785676" start="28999" end="29015" title="This Day and Age (film)" label="This Day and Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079980" start="29032" end="29054" title="Four Frightened People" label="Four Frightened People"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="29422" end="29432" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055932" start="29714" end="29728" title="Walter Reuther" label="Walter Reuther"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586314" start="29733" end="29746" title="Harry Bridges" label="Harry Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="29792" end="29806" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="29888" end="29909" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="30013" end="30024" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="30063" end="30103" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="1932 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706176" start="30286" end="30303" title="Lux Radio Theatre" label="Lux Radio Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="30370" end="30398" title="Columbia Broadcasting System" label="Columbia Broadcasting System"/>
<link wikidata="Q743212" start="31531" end="31547" title="Taft–Hartley Act" label="Taft–Hartley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092903" start="31859" end="31875" title="William Keighley" label="William Keighley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930992" start="32006" end="32019" title="Union Pacific (film)" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="32087" end="32109" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765251" start="32374" end="32387" title="prostatectomy" label="prostatectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192717" start="32466" end="32478" title="streptomycin" label="streptomycin"/>
<link wikidata="Q963688" start="32742" end="32767" title="North West Mounted Police (film)" label="North West Mounted Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="32869" end="32875" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="33260" end="33276" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q200920" start="33290" end="33313" title="For Whom the Bell Tolls" label="For Whom the Bell Tolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q452602" start="33784" end="33801" title="Jeanie MacPherson" label="Jeanie MacPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="33900" end="33921" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216332" start="33953" end="33967" title="Daniel A. Lord" label="Daniel A. Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q18636467" start="34255" end="34270" title="Land of Liberty" label="Land of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="34334" end="34365" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q31971" start="34729" end="34747" title="Reap the Wild Wind" label="Reap the Wild Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q13537131" start="34840" end="34851" title="giant squid" label="giant squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="34890" end="34910" title="master of ceremonies" label="master of ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q72291" start="34935" end="34952" title="David O. Selznick" label="David O. Selznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q849784" start="34960" end="34980" title="Los Angeles Coliseum" label="Los Angeles Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q320061" start="34999" end="35004" title="Thomas E. Dewey" label="Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q885374" start="35005" end="35012" title="John W. Bricker" label="Bricker"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="35044" end="35052" title="governor of California" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q311197" start="35053" end="35064" title="Earl Warren" label="Earl Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217011" start="35111" end="35122" title="Unconquered (1947 film)" label="Unconquered"/>
<link wikidata="Q504298" start="35766" end="35794" title="Academy Award for Best Story" label="Academy Award for Best Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q443253" start="36107" end="36120" title="Prentice Hall" label="Prentice Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="36476" end="36488" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1313258" start="36493" end="36505" title="Frank Wisner" label="Frank Wisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="36553" end="36567" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383233" start="36568" end="36604" title="National Committee for a Free Europe" label="National Committee for a Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q485500" start="36655" end="36672" title="Radio Free Europe" label="Radio Free Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497642" start="36710" end="36727" title="Harold E. Talbott" label="Harold E. Talbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331280" start="36805" end="36836" title="United States Air Force Academy" label="United States Air Force Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="38156" end="38170" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875" start="38363" end="38381" title="Gone with the Wind (film)" label="Gone with the Wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290338" start="38524" end="38530" title="The Exodus" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q568941" start="39041" end="39053" title="Loyal Griggs" label="Loyal Griggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83484" start="39174" end="39187" title="Anthony Quinn" label="Anthony Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795982" start="39231" end="39244" title="The Buccaneer (1958 film)" label="The Buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372180" start="39310" end="39324" title="Henry Wilcoxon" label="Henry Wilcoxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="39348" end="39363" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q102813" start="39368" end="39379" title="Yul Brynner" label="Yul Brynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795982" start="39401" end="39414" title="The Buccaneer (1958 film)" label="The Buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12665" start="39631" end="39650" title="Robert Baden-Powell, 1st Baron Baden-Powell" label="Robert Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="39671" end="39685" title="Scouting" label="Scout Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181917" start="39701" end="39712" title="David Niven" label="David Niven"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="39844" end="39862" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624932" start="40191" end="40218" title="Hollywood Forever Cemetery" label="Hollywood Memorial Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="40333" end="40350" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682727" start="40587" end="40609" title="Los Feliz, Los Angeles" label="Los Feliz, Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q353238" start="41391" end="41407" title="Charles Kingsley" label="Charles Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q274244" start="43164" end="43177" title="Anne Bauchens" label="Anne Bauchens"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="43901" end="43916" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="44195" end="44200" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23406" start="44445" end="44452" title="Red Sea" label="Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q111436" start="46350" end="46365" title="Elmer Bernstein" label="Elmer Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q358317" start="47765" end="47778" title="Victor Mature" label="Victor Mature"/>
<link wikidata="Q95050" start="48010" end="48026" title="Paulette Goddard" label="Paulette Goddard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840609" start="48255" end="48268" title="Alvin Wyckoff" label="Alvin Wyckoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q229232" start="48585" end="48599" title="Gloria Swanson" label="Gloria Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q255577" start="48601" end="48613" title="Bebe Daniels" label="Bebe Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696164" start="48615" end="48628" title="Rod La Rocque" label="Rod La Rocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477751" start="48630" end="48642" title="William Boyd (actor)" label="William Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q203819" start="48644" end="48661" title="Claudette Colbert" label="Claudette Colbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="48667" end="48682" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q93957" start="48723" end="48734" title="Gary Cooper" label="Gary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q451811" start="48736" end="48750" title="Robert Preston (actor)" label="Robert Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q181819" start="48773" end="48786" title="Fredric March" label="Fredric March"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189043" start="48883" end="48893" title="Julia Faye" label="Julia Faye"/>
<link wikidata="Q93632" start="48895" end="48913" title="Joseph Schildkraut" label="Joseph Schildkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q541016" start="48915" end="48924" title="Ian Keith" label="Ian Keith"/>
<link wikidata="Q710538" start="48926" end="48942" title="Charles Bickford" label="Charles Bickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384458" start="48944" end="48960" title="Theodore Roberts" label="Theodore Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q418424" start="48962" end="48975" title="Akim Tamiroff" label="Akim Tamiroff"/>
<link wikidata="Q83812" start="49025" end="49043" title="Edward G. Robinson" label="Edward G. Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864771" start="49096" end="49115" title="Hollywood blacklist" label="Hollywood blacklist"/>
<link wikidata="Q51559" start="50465" end="50477" title="Sidney Lumet" label="Sidney Lumet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50521" end="50535" title="D. W. Griffith" label="D. W. Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796472" start="51284" end="51302" title="Rembrandt lighting" label="Rembrandt lighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682" start="51818" end="51830" title="Gustave Doré" label="Gustave Doré"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701288" start="52159" end="52173" title="John P. Fulton" label="John P. Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233823" start="52185" end="52207" title="Crossing the Red Sea" label="parting of the Red Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="52357" end="52373" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673228" start="53278" end="53299" title="Why Change Your Wife?" label="Why Change Your Wife?"/>
<link wikidata="Q857784" start="53381" end="53390" title="camp (style)" label="high camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815379" start="53576" end="53584" title="Kindling (1915 film)" label="Kindling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749069" start="53598" end="53604" title="Carmen (1915 Cecil B. DeMille film)" label="Carmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968908" start="53622" end="53643" title="The Whispering Chorus" label="The Whispering Chorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211650" start="55890" end="55903" title="sadomasochism" label="sadomasochism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="57349" end="57361" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q193541" start="57843" end="57858" title="French New Wave" label="French New Wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q788514" start="57910" end="57916" title="auteur" label="auteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q51581" start="57926" end="57938" title="Howard Hawks" label="Howard Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="57940" end="57949" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q72756" start="57955" end="57966" title="Raoul Walsh" label="Raoul Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q607123" start="58089" end="58102" title="Simon Louvish" label="Simon Louvish"/>
<link wikidata="Q507162" start="58243" end="58256" title="Andrew Sarris" label="Andrew Sarris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791776" start="59051" end="59067" title="culture industry" label="culture industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q255463" start="59086" end="59100" title="Camille Paglia" label="Camille Paglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216217" start="59334" end="59343" title="megaphone" label="megaphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515419" start="59345" end="59356" title="riding crop" label="riding crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q770562" start="59362" end="59370" title="jodhpurs" label="jodhpurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474020" start="59491" end="59506" title="Joseph Henabery" label="Joseph Henabery"/>
<link wikidata="Q51575" start="59806" end="59817" title="John Huston" label="John Huston"/>
<link wikidata="Q290962" start="60012" end="60027" title="William Wellman" label="William Wellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577" start="60596" end="60609" title="Salvador Dalí" label="Salvador Dalí"/>
<link wikidata="Q8704" start="60630" end="60641" title="Walt Disney" label="Walt Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="60651" end="60664" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39427" start="60701" end="60712" title="Surrealism" label="Surrealists"/>
<link wikidata="Q16879723" start="60798" end="60811" title="Free and Easy (1930 film)" label="Free and Easy"/>
<link wikidata="Q51547" start="61008" end="61020" title="Billy Wilder" label="Billy Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q193570" start="61034" end="61050" title="Sunset Boulevard (film)" label="Sunset Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q51562" start="61481" end="61495" title="Ernst Lubitsch" label="Ernst Lubitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q470895" start="61529" end="61545" title="A Woman of Paris" label="A Woman of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003" start="61632" end="61649" title="Sergei Eisenstein" label="Sergei Eisenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q118976" start="61663" end="61679" title="Alexander Nevsky (film)" label="Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q240677" start="61759" end="61771" title="Nicholas Ray" label="Nicholas Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q51583" start="61773" end="61793" title="Joseph L. Mankiewicz" label="Joseph L. Mankiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q51490" start="61799" end="61813" title="George Stevens" label="George Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="61912" end="61928" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747922" start="61966" end="61981" title="Forbidden Fruit (1921 film)" label="Forbidden Fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q202028" start="62630" end="62647" title="War of the Worlds (2005 film)" label="War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q500088" start="62697" end="62717" title="DreamWorks Animation" label="DreamWorks Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q245227" start="62755" end="62774" title="The Prince of Egypt" label="The Prince of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q248686" start="63228" end="63250" title="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith" label="B&amp;#x27;nai B&amp;#x27;rith"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="63426" end="63435" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546271" start="63717" end="63734" title="Sight &amp;amp; Sound" label="Sight &amp;amp; Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="63966" end="63973" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911675" start="64093" end="64111" title="Lasky-DeMille Barn" label="Lasky-DeMille Barn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3911675" start="64202" end="64227" title="Hollywood Heritage Museum" label="Hollywood Heritage Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="64486" end="64522" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q24335" start="64552" end="64573" title="Guadalupe, California" label="Guadalupe, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671357" start="64902" end="64922" title="Academy Film Archive" label="Academy Film Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="65358" end="65380" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313488" start="65499" end="65522" title="Midway City, California" label="Midway City, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805085" start="65552" end="65570" title="Chapman University" label="Chapman University"/>
<link wikidata="Q491350" start="65574" end="65592" title="Orange, California" label="Orange, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q314926" start="65788" end="65799" title="John Waters" label="John Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518695" start="65811" end="65828" title="Cecil B. Demented" label="Cecil B. Demented"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="66359" end="66383" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811431" start="66387" end="66419" title="L. Tom Perry Special Collections" label="L. Tom Perry Special Collections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122565" start="66600" end="66630" title="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre" label="Grauman&amp;#x27;s Chinese Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q389336" start="66637" end="66670" title="American Academy of Dramatic Arts" label="American Academy of Dramatic Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="66807" end="66831" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="66969" end="66986" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="67451" end="67463" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="67676" end="67698" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="67841" end="67855" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q103360" start="68105" end="68118" title="Academy Award for Best Director" label="Best Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="68345" end="68360" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q823422" start="68481" end="68503" title="National Film Registry" label="National Film Registry"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="68525" end="68544" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="68679" end="68685" title="silent film" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="69116" end="69137" title="Film base#Nitrate" label="nitrate decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268687" start="69158" end="69162" title="lost film" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q746733" start="69170" end="69190" title="The Ten Commandments (1956 film)" label="The Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="69228" end="69236" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="69265" end="69287" title="ABC Television Network" label="ABC Television Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644415" start="69551" end="69575" title="Brewster&amp;#x27;s Millions (1914 film)" label="Brewster&amp;#x27;s Millions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988253" start="69603" end="69618" title="The Master Mind (1914 film)" label="The Master Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988560" start="69640" end="69652" title="The Only Son (1914 film)" label="The Only Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q3988216" start="69680" end="69698" title="The Man on the Box" label="The Man on the Box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3987212" start="69720" end="69737" title="The Ghost Breaker (1914 film)" label="The Ghost Breaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690501" start="69765" end="69775" title="After Five" label="After Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962242" start="69797" end="69818" title="Nan of Music Mountain" label="Nan of Music Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281484" start="69840" end="69847" title="Chicago (1927 film)" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199203" start="69891" end="69910" title="When Worlds Collide (1951 film)" label="When Worlds Collide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1113303" start="69952" end="69973" title="The War of the Worlds (1953 film)" label="The War of the Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795982" start="70015" end="70028" title="The Buccaneer (1958 film)" label="The Buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811431" start="70798" end="70830" title="L. Tom Perry Special Collections" label="L. Tom Perry Special Collections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659990" start="70832" end="70853" title="Harold B. Lee Library" label="Harold B. Lee Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="70855" end="70879" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811431" start="71061" end="71093" title="L. Tom Perry Special Collections" label="L. Tom Perry Special Collections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659990" start="71095" end="71116" title="Harold B. Lee Library" label="Harold B. Lee Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="71118" end="71142" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6181" wikidata="Q1046779" url="?curid=6181" title="Chinese Islamic cuisine">
<text>Chinese Islamic cuisine consists of variations of regionally popular foods that are typical of Han Chinese cuisine, in particular to make them halal. Dishes borrow ingredients from Middle Eastern, Turkic, Iranian and South Asian cuisines, notably mutton and spices. Much like other northern Chinese cuisines, Chinese Islamic cuisine uses wheat noodles as the staple, rather than rice. Chinese Islamic dishes include clear-broth beef noodle soup and &quot;chuanr&quot;.

The Hui (ethnic Chinese Muslims), Bonan, Dongxiang, Salar and Uyghurs of China, as well as the Dungans of Central Asia and the Panthays of Burma, collectively contribute to Chinese Islamic cuisine.

==History==
Due to the large Muslim population in Western China, many Chinese restaurants cater to or are run by Muslims. Northern Chinese Islamic cuisine originated in China proper. It is heavily influenced by Beijing cuisine, with nearly all cooking methods identical and differs only in material due to religious restrictions. As a result, northern Islamic cuisine is often included in home Beijing cuisine though seldom in east coast restaurants.

During the Yuan dynasty, halal and kosher methods of slaughtering animals and preparing food was banned and forbidden by the Mongol emperors, starting with Genghis Khan who banned Muslims and Jews from slaughtering their animals their own way and made them follow the Mongol method.
Among all the [subject] alien peoples only the Hui-hui say &quot;we do not eat Mongol food.&quot; [Cinggis Qa&#x27;an replied:] &quot;By the aid of heaven we have pacified you; you are our slaves. Yet you do not eat our food or drink. How can this be right?&quot; He thereupon made them eat. &quot;If you slaughter sheep, you will be considered guilty of a crime.&quot; He issued a regulation to that effect ... [In 1279/1280 under Qubilai] all the Muslims say: “if someone else slaughters [the animal] we do not eat.&quot; Because the poor people are upset by this, from now on, Musuluman [Muslim] Huihui and Zhuhu [Jewish] Huihui, no matter who kills [the animal] will eat [it] and must cease slaughtering sheep themselves, and cease the rite of circumcision.

Traditionally, there is a distinction between Northern and Southern Chinese Islamic cuisine despite both using lamb and mutton. Northern Chinese Islamic cuisine relies heavily on beef, but rarely ducks, geese, shrimp or seafood, while southern Islamic cuisine is the reverse. The reason for this difference is due to availability of the ingredients. Oxen have been long used for farming and Chinese governments have frequently strictly prohibited the slaughter of oxen for food. However, due to the geographic proximity of the northern part of China to minority-dominated regions that were not subjected to such restrictions, beef could be easily purchased and transported to Northern China. At the same time, ducks, geese and shrimp are rare in comparison to Southern China due to the arid climate of Northern China.

A Chinese Islamic restaurant () can be similar to a Mandarin restaurant with the exception that there is no pork on the menu and the dishes are primarily noodle/soup based.

In most major eastern cities in China, there are very limited Islamic/Halal restaurants, which are typically run by migrants from Western China (e.g., Uyghurs). They primarily offer inexpensive noodle soups only. These restaurants are typically decorated with Islamic motifs such as Islamic writing.

Another difference is that lamb and mutton dishes are more commonly available than in other Chinese restaurants, due to the greater prevalence of these meats in the cuisine of Western Chinese regions. (Refer to image 1.)

Other Muslim ethnic minorities like the Bonan, Dongxiang, Salar and Tibetan Muslims have their own cuisines as well. Dongxiang people operate their own restaurants serving their cuisine.

Many cafeterias (canteens) at Chinese universities have separate sections or dining areas for Muslim students (Hui or Western Chinese minorities), typically labeled &quot;qingzhen&quot;. Student ID cards sometimes indicate whether a student is Muslim and will allow access to these dining areas or will allow access on special occasions such as the Eid feast following Ramadan.

Several Hui restaurants serving Chinese Islamic cuisine exist in Los Angeles. San Francisco, despite its huge number of Chinese restaurants, appears to have only one whose cuisine would qualify as halal.

Many Chinese Hui Muslims who moved from Yunnan to Burma (Myanmar) are known as Panthays operate restaurants and stalls serving Chinese Islamic cuisine such as noodles. Chinese Hui Muslims from Yunnan who moved to Thailand are known as Chin Haw and they also own restaurants and stalls serving Chinese Islamic food.

In Central Asia, Dungan people, descendants of Hui, operate restaurants serving Chinese Islamic cuisine, which is respectively referred to as &quot;Dungan cuisine&quot; there. They cater to Chinese businessmen. Chopsticks are used by Dungans. The cuisine of the Dungan resembles northwestern Chinese cuisine.

Most Chinese regard Hui halal food as cleaner than food made by non-Muslims so their restaurants are popular in China. Hui who migrated to Northeast China (Manchuria) after the Chuang Guandong opened many new inns and restaurants to cater to travelers, which were regarded as clean.

The Hui who migrated to Taiwan operate Qingzhen restaurants and stalls serving Chinese Islamic cuisine in Taipei and other big cities.

The Thai Department of Export Promotion claims that &quot;China&#x27;s halal food producers are small-scale entrepreneurs whose products have little value added and lack branding and technology to push their goods to international standards&quot; to encourage Thai private sector halal producers to market their products in China.

A 1903-started franchise serving Muslim food is Dong Lai Shun in Hankou.

400 meters have to be kept as a distance from each restaurant serving beef noodles to another of its type if they belong to Hui Muslims, since Hui have a pact between each other in Ningxia, Gansu and Shaanxi.

Halal restaurants are checked up upon by clerics from mosques.

Halal food manufacture has been sanctioned by the government of the Ningxia Autonomous Region.

==Famous dishes==

===Lamian===

Lamian (, Dungan: Ламян) is a Chinese dish of hand-made noodles, usually served in a beef or mutton-flavored soup (湯麪, даңмян, tāngmiàn), but sometimes stir-fried (炒麪, Чаомян, chǎomiàn) and served with a tomato-based sauce. Literally, 拉, ла (lā) means to pull or stretch, while 麪, мян (miàn) means noodle. The hand-making process involves taking a lump of dough and repeatedly stretching it to produce a single very long noodle. There exists a local variant in Lanzhou, the Lanzhou beef noodles, also known as Lanzhou lamian.

Words that begin with L are not native to Turkic — läghmän is a loanword as stated by Uyghur linguist Abdlikim: It is of Chinese derivation and not originally Uyghur.

===Beef noodle soup===

Beef noodle soup is a noodle soup dish composed of stewed beef, beef broth, vegetables and wheat noodles. It exists in various forms throughout East and Southeast Asia. It was created by the Hui people during the Qing dynasty of China.

In the west, this food may be served in a small portion as a soup. In China, a large bowl of it is often taken as a whole meal with or without any side dish.

===Chuanr===

Chuanr (Chinese: 串儿, Dungan: Чўанр, Pinyin: chuànr (shortened from &quot;chuan er&quot;), &quot;kebab&quot;), originating in the Xinjiang (新疆) province of China and in recent years has been disseminated throughout the rest of that country, most notably in Beijing. It is a product of the Chinese Islamic cuisine of the Uyghur (维吾尔) people and other Chinese Muslims. Yang rou chuan or lamb kebabs, is particularly popular.

===Suan cai===

Suan cai is a traditional fermented vegetable dish, similar to Korean kimchi and German sauerkraut, used in a variety of ways. It consists of pickled Chinese cabbage. Suan cai is a unique form of pao cai due to the material used and the method of production. Although &quot;suan cai&quot; is not exclusive to Chinese Islamic cuisine, it is used in Chinese Islamic cuisine to top off noodle soups, especially beef noodle soup.

===Nang===
&quot;Nang&quot; (Chinese: 馕, Dungan: Нәң) is a type of round unleavened bread, topped with sesame. It is similar to South and Central Asia naan.

==Image gallery==
==See also==
* Chinese cuisine
* Islam in China
* Uyghur cuisine
* Dali City
* Gansu
* Kunming
* Lanzhou
* Ningxia
* Qinghai
* Shaanxi
* Xi&#x27;an
* Yunnan
==References==
==External links==

*article on a Chinese Islamic restaurant in the San Francisco Bay area, &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;.
*chinaheritagequarterly.org 
*The Famous Dungan Noodles or Lyu Mian with Eight Seasoning Dishes!
*More pictures of the Dungan Cuisine</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1046779" start="0" end="23" title="Chinese Islamic cuisine" label="Chinese Islamic cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="99" end="114" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="143" end="148" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="416" end="444" title="Beef noodle soup#Clear broth beef noodles" label="clear-broth beef noodle soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q519761" start="455" end="461" title="Chuan (food)" label="chuanr"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="474" end="477" title="Hui people" label="Hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q816691" start="504" end="509" title="Bonan people" label="Bonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="511" end="520" title="Dongxiangs" label="Dongxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q336258" start="522" end="527" title="Salar people" label="Salar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="532" end="539" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="565" end="572" title="Dungan people" label="Dungans"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="576" end="588" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083581" start="597" end="605" title="Panthays" label="Panthays"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="609" end="614" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="698" end="704" title="Muslims" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079794" start="838" end="850" title="China proper" label="China proper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206613" start="880" end="895" title="Beijing cuisine" label="Beijing cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="1132" end="1144" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q177823" start="1146" end="1151" title="halal" label="halal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191498" start="1156" end="1162" title="kosher" label="kosher"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="1277" end="1289" title="Genghis Khan" label="Genghis Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523" start="1836" end="1843" title="Kublai Khan" label="Qubilai"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="2278" end="2293" title="lamb and mutton" label="lamb and mutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206613" start="3038" end="3057" title="Beijing cuisine" label="Mandarin restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="3094" end="3098" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="3311" end="3318" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q123122627" start="3488" end="3503" title="lamb and mutton" label="lamb and mutton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3663" end="3679" title="Chinese Islamic cuisine#Image gallery" label="Refer to image 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q816691" start="3723" end="3728" title="Bonan people" label="Bonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="3730" end="3739" title="Dongxiangs" label="Dongxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q336258" start="3741" end="3746" title="Salar people" label="Salar"/>
<link wikidata="Q765779" start="3751" end="3766" title="Tibetan Muslims" label="Tibetan Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q464458" start="4220" end="4223" title="Eid ul-Fitr" label="Eid"/>
<link wikidata="Q41662" start="4240" end="4247" title="Ramadan" label="Ramadan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4315" end="4326" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="4328" end="4341" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="4495" end="4501" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="4505" end="4510" title="Myanmar" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083581" start="4534" end="4542" title="Panthays" label="Panthays"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="4668" end="4676" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4498550" start="4690" end="4698" title="Chin Haw" label="Chin Haw"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="4774" end="4786" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q868841" start="4788" end="4801" title="Dungan people" label="Dungan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="5220" end="5235" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="5237" end="5246" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q988493" start="5258" end="5273" title="Chuang Guandong" label="Chuang Guandong"/>
<link wikidata="Q93567" start="5369" end="5395" title="Islam in Taiwan" label="Hui who migrated to Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867" start="5471" end="5477" title="Taipei" label="Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="5505" end="5509" title="Thailand" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208250" start="5898" end="5904" title="Hankou" label="Hankou"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="6097" end="6102" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="6107" end="6114" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q57448" start="6249" end="6274" title="Ningxia" label="Ningxia Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q33050" start="6320" end="6326" title="Dungan language" label="Dungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q183584" start="6771" end="6778" title="Lanzhou" label="Lanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6127173" start="6784" end="6804" title="Lanzhou beef noodles" label="Lanzhou beef noodles"/>
<link wikidata="Q35778572" start="6888" end="6895" title="laghman (food)" label="läghmän"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939235" start="7051" end="7062" title="noodle soup" label="noodle soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="7087" end="7091" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q11004" start="7105" end="7114" title="vegetable" label="vegetable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723400" start="7120" end="7132" title="wheat noodle" label="wheat noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27231" start="7173" end="7177" title="East Asia" label="East"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="7182" end="7196" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="7242" end="7254" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7258" end="7263" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="7447" end="7454" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q33050" start="7460" end="7466" title="Dungan language" label="Dungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="7475" end="7481" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q34800" start="7568" end="7576" title="Xinjiang" label="Xinjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7695" end="7702" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q46118" start="7758" end="7764" title="Uyghurs" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="7788" end="7803" title="Islam in China" label="Chinese Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q141898" start="7948" end="7954" title="kimchi" label="kimchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q154166" start="7966" end="7976" title="sauerkraut" label="sauerkraut"/>
<link wikidata="Q697498" start="8286" end="8302" title="beef noodle soup" label="beef noodle soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q689950" start="8456" end="8460" title="naan" label="naan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="8496" end="8511" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2078412" start="8514" end="8528" title="Islam in China" label="Islam in China"/>
<link wikidata="Q25696283" start="8531" end="8545" title="Uyghur cuisine" label="Uyghur cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q855228" start="8548" end="8557" title="Dali City" label="Dali City"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="8560" end="8565" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q182852" start="8568" end="8575" title="Kunming" label="Kunming"/>
<link wikidata="Q183584" start="8578" end="8585" title="Lanzhou" label="Lanzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q57448" start="8588" end="8595" title="Ningxia" label="Ningxia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="8598" end="8605" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q47974" start="8608" end="8615" title="Shaanxi" label="Shaanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5826" start="8618" end="8628" title="Xi&amp;#x27;an" label="Xi&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="8631" end="8637" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6182" wikidata="Q1154790" url="?curid=6182" title="Cantonese cuisine">
<text>Cantonese or Guangdong cuisine, also known as Yue cuisine ( or ), is the cuisine of Cantonese people, associated with the Guangdong province of China, particularly the provincial capital Guangzhou, and the surrounding regions in the Pearl River Delta including Hong Kong and Macau. Strictly speaking, Cantonese cuisine is the cuisine of Guangzhou or of Cantonese speakers, but it often includes the cooking styles of all the speakers of Yue Chinese languages in Guangdong. 

The Teochew cuisine and Hakka cuisine of Guangdong are considered their own styles. However, scholars may categorize Guangdong cuisine into three major groups based on the region&#x27;s dialect: Cantonese, Hakka and Chaozhou cuisines. Neighboring Guangxi&#x27;s cuisine is also considered separate despite eastern Guangxi being considered culturally Cantonese due to the presence of ethnic Zhuang influences in the rest of the province. 

Cantonese cuisine is one of the Eight Great Traditions of Chinese cuisine. Its prominence outside China is due to the large number of Cantonese emigrants. Chefs trained in Cantonese cuisine are highly sought after throughout China. Until the late 20th century, most Chinese restaurants in the West served largely Cantonese dishes.

==Background==
Guangzhou (Canton) City, the provincial capital of Guangdong and the centre of Cantonese culture, has long been a trading hub and many imported foods and ingredients are used in Cantonese cuisine. Besides pork, beef and chicken, Cantonese cuisine incorporates almost all edible meats, including offal, chicken feet, duck&#x27;s tongue, frog legs, snakes and snails. However, lamb and goat are less commonly used than in the cuisines of northern or western China. Many cooking methods are used, with steaming and stir-frying being the most favoured due to their convenience and rapidity. Other techniques include shallow frying, double steaming, braising and deep frying.

Compared to other Chinese regional cuisines, the flavours of most traditional Cantonese dishes should be well-balanced and not greasy. Apart from that, spices should be used in modest amounts to avoid overwhelming the flavours of the primary ingredients, and these ingredients in turn should be at the peak of their freshness and quality. There is no widespread use of fresh herbs in Cantonese cooking, in contrast with their liberal use in other cuisines such as Sichuanese, Vietnamese, Lao, Thai and European. Garlic chives and coriander leaves are notable exceptions, although the former are often used as a vegetable and the latter are usually used as mere garnish in most dishes.

== Foods ==

=== Sauces and condiments ===
In Cantonese cuisine, ingredients such as sugar, salt, soy sauce, rice wine, corn starch, vinegar, scallion and sesame oil suffice to enhance flavour, although garlic is heavily used in some dishes, especially those in which internal organs, such as entrails, may emit unpleasant odours. Ginger, chili peppers, five-spice powder, powdered black pepper, star anise and a few other spices are also used, but often sparingly.

===Dried and preserved ingredients===
Although Cantonese cooks pay much attention to the freshness of their primary ingredients, Cantonese cuisine also uses a long list of preserved food items to add flavour to a dish. This may be influenced by Hakka cuisine, since the Hakkas were once a dominant group occupying imperial Hong Kong and other southern territories.

Some items gain very intense flavours during the drying/preservation/oxidation process and some foods are preserved to increase their shelf life. Some chefs combine both dried and fresh varieties of the same items in a dish. Dried items are usually soaked in water to rehydrate before cooking. These ingredients are generally not served &quot;a la carte&quot;, but rather with vegetables or other Cantonese dishes.

===Traditional dishes===
A number of dishes have been part of Cantonese cuisine since the earliest territorial establishments of Guangdong. While many of these are on the menus of typical Cantonese restaurants, some simpler ones are more commonly found in Cantonese homes. Home-made Cantonese dishes are usually served with plain white rice.


===Deep fried dishes===

There are a small number of deep-fried dishes in Cantonese cuisine, which can often be found as street food. They have been extensively documented in colonial Hong Kong records of the 19th and 20th centuries. A few are synonymous with Cantonese breakfast and lunch, even though these are also part of other cuisines.

=== Soups ===

Old fire soup, or &quot;lou fo tong&quot; (), is a clear broth prepared by simmering meat and other ingredients over a low heat for several hours. Chinese herbs are often used as ingredients. There are basically two ways to make old fire soup – put ingredients and water in the pot and heat it directly on fire, which is called &quot;bou tong&quot; (); or put the ingredients in a small stew pot, and put it in a bigger pot filled with water, then heat the bigger pot on fire directly, which is called &quot;dun tong&quot; (). The latter way can keep the most original taste of the soup.

Soup chain stores or delivery outlets in cities with significant Cantonese populations, such as Hong Kong, serve this dish due to the long preparation time required of slow-simmered soup.

=== Seafood ===
Due to Guangdong&#x27;s location along the South China Sea coast, fresh seafood is prominent in Cantonese cuisine, and many Cantonese restaurants keep aquariums or seafood tanks on the premises. In Cantonese cuisine, as in cuisines from other parts of Asia, if seafood has a repugnant odour, strong spices and marinating juices are added; the freshest seafood is odourless and, in Cantonese culinary arts, is best cooked by steaming. For instance, in some recipes, only a small amount of soy sauce, ginger and spring onion is added to steamed fish. In Cantonese cuisine, the light seasoning is used only to bring out the natural sweetness of the seafood. As a rule of thumb, the spiciness of a dish is usually negatively correlated to the freshness of the ingredients.

=== Noodle dishes ===

Noodles are served either in soup broth or fried. These are available as home-cooked meals, on dim sum side menus, or as street food at dai pai dongs, where they can be served with a variety of toppings such as fish balls, beef balls, or fish slices.

===Siu mei===

&quot;Siu mei&quot; () is essentially the Chinese rotisserie style of cooking. Unlike most other Cantonese dishes, &quot;siu mei&quot; solely consists of meat, with no vegetables.

===Lou mei===
Lou mei () is the name given to dishes made from internal organs, entrails and other left-over parts of animals. It is widely available in southern Chinese regions.

===Siu laap===
All Cantonese-style cooked meats, including siu mei, lou mei and preserved meat can be classified as siu laap (). &quot;Siu laap&quot; also includes dishes such as:

A typical dish may consist of offal and half an order of multiple varieties of roasted meat. The majority of siu laap is white meat.

===Little pot rice===
Little pot rice () are dishes cooked and served in a flat-bottomed pot (as opposed to a round-bottomed wok). Usually this is a saucepan or braising pan (see clay pot cooking). Such dishes are cooked by covering and steaming, making the rice and ingredients very hot and soft. Usually the ingredients are layered on top of the rice with little or no mixing in between. Many standard combinations exist.

===Banquet/dinner dishes===

A number of dishes are traditionally served in Cantonese restaurants only at dinner time. Dim sum restaurants stop serving bamboo-basket dishes after the yum cha period (equivalent to afternoon tea) and begin offering an entirely different menu in the evening. Some dishes are standard while others are regional. Some are customised for special purposes such as Chinese marriages or banquets. Salt and pepper dishes are one of the few spicy dishes.

===Dessert===

After the evening meal, most Cantonese restaurants offer &quot;tong sui&quot; (), a sweet soup. Many varieties of &quot;tong sui&quot; are also found in other Chinese cuisines. Some desserts are traditional, while others are recent innovations. The more expensive restaurants usually offer their specialty desserts. Sugar water is the general name of dessert in Guangdong province. It is cooked by adding water and sugar to some other cooking ingredients. 

===Delicacies===

Certain Cantonese delicacies consist of parts taken from rare or endangered animals, which raises controversy over animal rights and environmental issues. This is often due to alleged health benefits of certain animal products. For example, the continued spreading of the idea that shark cartilage can cure cancer has led to decreased shark populations even though scientific research has found no evidence to support the credibility of shark cartilage as a cancer cure.

==See also==
* Cantonese culture
* Chinese food therapy
* Dim sum
* Hong Kong cuisine
* List of Chinese dishes
* Macanese cuisine
* Restaurant industry in Guangzhou

== References ==
==Further reading==

*&quot;Eight Immortal Flavors: Secrets of Cantonese Cookery from San Francisco&#x27;s Chinatown&quot;, Johnny Kan and Charles L. Leong. Berkeley, California: Howell-North Books, 1963</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="0" end="9" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="13" end="30" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Guangdong cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="46" end="57" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Yue cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="73" end="80" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423803" start="84" end="100" title="Cantonese people" label="Cantonese people"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="122" end="140" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong province"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="144" end="149" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="187" end="196" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144286" start="233" end="250" title="Pearl River Delta" label="Pearl River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="261" end="270" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="275" end="280" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="337" end="346" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q9186" start="353" end="362" title="Cantonese" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7033959" start="437" end="448" title="Yue Chinese" label="Yue Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183553" start="479" end="494" title="Teochew cuisine" label="Teochew cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q709287" start="499" end="512" title="Hakka cuisine" label="Hakka cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="722" end="729" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379979" start="737" end="744" title="Guangxi cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038134" start="814" end="834" title="Cantonese culture" label="culturally Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36692" start="858" end="871" title="Zhuang people" label="ethnic Zhuang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="946" end="968" title="Chinese regional cuisine#Eight Great Traditions" label="Eight Great Traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876842" start="972" end="987" title="Chinese cuisine" label="Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q423803" start="1048" end="1057" title="Cantonese people" label="Cantonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q779191" start="1058" end="1067" title="Overseas Chinese" label="emigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="1261" end="1284" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou (Canton) City"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="1312" end="1321" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038134" start="1340" end="1357" title="Lingnan culture" label="Cantonese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="1556" end="1561" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258910" start="1597" end="1606" title="frog legs" label="frog legs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415859" start="1760" end="1768" title="steaming" label="steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="1773" end="1784" title="stir-frying" label="stir-frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487285" start="1873" end="1887" title="shallow frying" label="shallow frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300093" start="1889" end="1904" title="double steaming" label="double steaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="1906" end="1914" title="braising" label="braising"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="1919" end="1930" title="deep frying" label="deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q207123" start="2308" end="2312" title="herb" label="herb"/>
<link wikidata="Q691365" start="2397" end="2407" title="Sichuanese cuisine" label="Sichuanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q826059" start="2409" end="2419" title="Vietnamese cuisine" label="Vietnamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372774" start="2421" end="2424" title="Lao cuisine" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="2426" end="2430" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q579316" start="2435" end="2443" title="European cuisine" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q42285" start="2445" end="2458" title="Garlic chives" label="Garlic chives"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="2463" end="2472" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q11002" start="2704" end="2709" title="sugar" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11254" start="2711" end="2715" title="Edible salt" label="salt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2717" end="2726" title="Soy sauce#Chinese" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724403" start="2728" end="2737" title="Huangjiu" label="rice wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3393961" start="2739" end="2750" title="corn starch" label="corn starch"/>
<link wikidata="Q41354" start="2752" end="2759" title="vinegar" label="vinegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="2761" end="2769" title="scallion" label="scallion"/>
<link wikidata="Q212317" start="2774" end="2784" title="sesame oil" label="sesame oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="2950" end="2956" title="Ginger" label="Ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q165199" start="2958" end="2970" title="chili pepper" label="chili pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051492" start="2973" end="2990" title="five-spice powder" label="five-spice powder"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="3001" end="3013" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2878644" start="3015" end="3025" title="star anise" label="star anise"/>
<link wikidata="Q709287" start="3331" end="3344" title="Hakka cuisine" label="Hakka cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q660947" start="3356" end="3362" title="Hakka people" label="Hakkas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864877" start="3400" end="3418" title="History of Hong Kong under Imperial China" label="imperial Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514687" start="3501" end="3507" title="Drying (food)" label="drying"/>
<link wikidata="Q173514" start="3508" end="3520" title="Food preservation" label="preservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="3521" end="3530" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="3720" end="3729" title="Hydrate" label="rehydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234959" start="4056" end="4076" title="Cantonese restaurant" label="Cantonese restaurant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674257" start="4198" end="4208" title="white rice" label="white rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316209" start="4333" end="4344" title="street food" label="street food"/>
<link wikidata="Q5864872" start="4387" end="4405" title="History of Colonial Hong Kong (1800s–1930s)" label="colonial Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q275068" start="4627" end="4632" title="broth" label="broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="5407" end="5422" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="5616" end="5620" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="5852" end="5861" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="5863" end="5869" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="5874" end="5886" title="spring onion" label="spring onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q339836" start="6252" end="6259" title="dim sum" label="dim sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q838385" start="6293" end="6305" title="dai pai dong" label="dai pai dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q705369" start="6368" end="6377" title="fish ball" label="fish ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238238" start="6380" end="6389" title="beef ball" label="beef ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q18131125" start="6395" end="6405" title="fish slice" label="fish slice"/>
<link wikidata="Q844314" start="6430" end="6437" title="Siu mei" label="Siu mei"/>
<link wikidata="Q22847" start="6474" end="6484" title="rotisserie" label="rotisserie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685836" start="6619" end="6626" title="Lou mei" label="Lou mei"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="6668" end="6683" title="offal" label="internal organs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="6685" end="6692" title="entrail" label="entrail"/>
<link wikidata="Q844314" start="6844" end="6851" title="siu mei" label="siu mei"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685836" start="6853" end="6860" title="lou mei" label="lou mei"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="6996" end="7001" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315904" start="7087" end="7097" title="white meat" label="white meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q208364" start="7225" end="7228" title="wok" label="wok"/>
<link wikidata="Q7724780" start="7249" end="7257" title="saucepan" label="saucepan"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="7261" end="7269" title="braising" label="braising"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499028" start="7279" end="7295" title="clay pot cooking" label="clay pot cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q339836" start="7644" end="7651" title="Dim sum" label="Dim sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="7677" end="7683" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602488" start="7708" end="7715" title="yum cha" label="yum cha"/>
<link wikidata="Q245009" start="7738" end="7751" title="afternoon tea" label="afternoon tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505911" start="7916" end="7932" title="Chinese marriage" label="Chinese marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718625" start="8082" end="8090" title="tong sui" label="tong sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="8610" end="8623" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381277" start="8628" end="8648" title="Environmental issues in China" label="environmental issues"/>
<link wikidata="Q623418" start="8777" end="8792" title="shark cartilage" label="shark cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038134" start="8982" end="8999" title="Cantonese culture" label="Cantonese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q604164" start="9002" end="9022" title="Chinese food therapy" label="Chinese food therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q339836" start="9025" end="9032" title="Dim sum" label="Dim sum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036629" start="9035" end="9052" title="Hong Kong cuisine" label="Hong Kong cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567064" start="9055" end="9077" title="List of Chinese dishes" label="List of Chinese dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045260" start="9080" end="9096" title="Macanese cuisine" label="Macanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q110245668" start="9099" end="9131" title="Restaurant industry in Guangzhou" label="Restaurant industry in Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q15040574" start="9274" end="9284" title="Johnny Kan" label="Johnny Kan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921659" start="9329" end="9347" title="Howell-North Books" label="Howell-North Books"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6183" wikidata="Q1183553" url="?curid=6183" title="Teochew cuisine">
<text>Teochew cuisine, also known as Chiuchow cuisine, Chaozhou cuisine or Teo-swa cuisine, originated from the Chaoshan region in the eastern part of China&#x27;s Guangdong Province, which includes the cities of Chaozhou, Shantou and Jieyang. Teochew cuisine bears more similarities to that of Fujian cuisine, particularly Southern Min cuisine, due to the similarity of Teochew&#x27;s and Fujian&#x27;s culture, language, and their geographic proximity to each other. However, Teochew cuisine is also influenced by Cantonese cuisine in its style and technique.

==Background==
Teochew cuisine is well known for its seafood and vegetarian dishes. Its use of flavouring is much less heavy-handed than most other Chinese cuisines and depends much on the freshness and quality of the ingredients for taste and flavour. As a delicate cuisine, oil is not often used in large quantities and there is a relatively heavy emphasis on poaching, steaming and braising, as well as the common Chinese method of stir-frying. Teochew cuisine is also known for serving congee (; or &quot;mue&quot;), in addition to steamed rice or noodles with meals. The Teochew &quot;&quot; is rather different from the Cantonese counterpart, being very watery with the rice sitting loosely at the bottom of the bowl, while the Cantonese dish is more a thin gruel.

Authentic Teochew restaurants serve very strong oolong tea called Tieguanyin in very tiny cups before and after the meal. Presented as &quot;gongfu&quot; tea, the tea has a thickly bittersweet taste, colloquially known as &quot;gam gam&quot; ().

A condiment that is popular in Fujian and Taiwanese cuisine and commonly associated with cuisine of certain Teochew groups is shacha sauce (). It is made from soybean oil, garlic, shallots, chilies, brill fish and dried shrimp. The paste has a savoury and slightly spicy taste. As an ingredient, it has multiple uses: as a base for soups, as a rub for barbecued meats, as a seasoning for stir-fried dishes, or as a component for dipping sauces.

In addition to soy sauce (widely used in all Chinese cuisines), Teochew people also use fish sauce in their cooking.

Teochew chefs often use a special stock called siang teng (), literally translates from the Teochew dialect as &quot;superior broth&quot;. This stock remains on the stove and is continuously replenished. Portrayed in popular media, some Hong Kong chefs allegedly use the same superior broth that is preserved for decades. This stock can as well be seen on Chaozhou TV&#x27;s cooking programmes.

There is a notable feast in Teochew cuisine called &quot;&quot; (). A myriad of dishes are often served, which include shark fin soup, bird&#x27;s nest soup, lobster, steamed fish, roasted suckling pig and braised goose.

Teochew chefs take pride in their skills of vegetable carving, and carved vegetables are used as garnishes on cold dishes and on the banquet table.

Teochew cuisine is also known for a late night meal known as &quot;meh siao&quot; () or &quot;daa laang&quot; () among the Cantonese. Teochew people enjoy eating out close to midnight in restaurants or at roadside food stalls. Some dai pai dong-like eateries stay open till dawn.

Unlike the typical menu selections of many other Chinese cuisines, Teochew restaurant menus often have a dessert section.

Many people of Teochew origin, also known as Teochiu or Teochew people, have settled in Hong Kong and places in Southeast Asia like Malaysia, Singapore, Cambodia and Thailand. Influences they bring can be noted in Singaporean cuisine and that of other settlements. A large number of Teochew people have also settled in Taiwan, evident in Taiwanese cuisine. Other notable Teochew diaspora communities are in Vietnam, Cambodia and France. A popular noodle soup in both Vietnam and Cambodia, known as hu tieu, originated from the Teochew . There is also a large diaspora of Teochew people (most were from Southeast Asia) in the United States - particularly in California. There is a Teochew Chinese Association in Paris called L&#x27;Amicale des Teochews en France.

==Notable dishes== 

==Gallery==
==See also==
*List of Chinese dishes
*Teochew porridge
*Teochew people

==References==
==External links==
*Yeo&#x27;s Teochew Popiah Recipe
*Jenius&#x27; Teochew peach shaped kueh Recipe </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1183553" start="0" end="15" title="Teochew cuisine" label="Teochew cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183553" start="31" end="47" title="Teochew cuisine" label="Chiuchow cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183553" start="49" end="65" title="Teochew cuisine" label="Chaozhou cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183553" start="69" end="84" title="Teochew cuisine" label="Teo-swa cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710356" start="106" end="114" title="Chaoshan" label="Chaoshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="158" end="176" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q59227" start="207" end="215" title="Chaozhou" label="Chaozhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q59100" start="217" end="224" title="Shantou" label="Shantou"/>
<link wikidata="Q26323" start="229" end="236" title="Jieyang" label="Jieyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156995" start="289" end="303" title="Fujian cuisine" label="Fujian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="318" end="330" title="Southern Min" label="Southern Min"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154790" start="510" end="527" title="Cantonese cuisine" label="Cantonese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="942" end="950" title="braising" label="braising"/>
<link wikidata="Q8980672" start="992" end="1003" title="stir-frying" label="stir-frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q878624" start="1047" end="1053" title="congee" label="congee"/>
<link wikidata="Q523224" start="1093" end="1105" title="steamed rice" label="steamed rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q231587" start="1377" end="1383" title="oolong" label="oolong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328947" start="1395" end="1405" title="Tieguanyin" label="Tieguanyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606657" start="1464" end="1486" title="Gongfu tea ceremony" label="&amp;quot;gongfu&amp;quot; tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q707908" start="1618" end="1635" title="Taiwanese cuisine" label="Taiwanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q60365" start="1702" end="1714" title="shacha sauce" label="shacha sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="2037" end="2046" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="2110" end="2120" title="fish sauce" label="fish sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="2232" end="2239" title="Teochew Min" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2257" end="2271" title="Asian soups#Traditional soup bases" label="superior broth"/>
<link wikidata="Q26081" start="2655" end="2669" title="shark fin soup" label="shark fin soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q860416" start="2671" end="2692" title="Edible bird&amp;#x27;s nest" label="bird&amp;#x27;s nest soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7221231" start="3001" end="3010" title="Daa Laang" label="daa laang"/>
<link wikidata="Q838385" start="3139" end="3151" title="dai pai dong" label="dai pai dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q182940" start="3293" end="3300" title="dessert" label="dessert"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="3443" end="3451" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="3453" end="3462" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="3464" end="3472" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="3477" end="3485" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q136726" start="3525" end="3544" title="Singaporean cuisine" label="Singaporean cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q707908" start="3649" end="3666" title="Taiwanese cuisine" label="Taiwanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27909648" start="3809" end="3816" title="hu tieu" label="hu tieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567064" start="4122" end="4144" title="List of Chinese dishes" label="List of Chinese dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944542" start="4146" end="4162" title="Teochew porridge" label="Teochew porridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959575" start="4164" end="4178" title="Teochew people" label="Teochew people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6184" wikidata="Q955748" url="?curid=6184" title="Co-NP">
<text>In computational complexity theory, co-NP is a complexity class. A decision problem X is a member of co-NP if and only if its complement is in the complexity class NP. The class can be defined as follows: a decision problem is in co-NP if and only if for every &quot;no&quot;-instance we have a polynomial-length &quot;certificate&quot; and there is a polynomial-time algorithm that can be used to verify any purported certificate.

That is, co-NP is the set of decision problems where there exists a polynomial and a polynomial-time bounded Turing machine &quot;M&quot; such that for every instance &quot;x&quot;, &quot;x&quot; is a &quot;no&quot;-instance if and only if: for some possible certificate &quot;c&quot; of length bounded by , the Turing machine &quot;M&quot; accepts the pair .

==Complementary problems==

While an NP problem asks whether a given instance is a &quot;yes&quot;-instance, its &quot;complement&quot; asks whether an instance is a &quot;no&quot;-instance, which means the complement is in co-NP. Any &quot;yes&quot;-instance for the original NP problem becomes a &quot;no&quot;-instance for its complement, and vice versa.

===Unsatisfiability===

An example of an NP-complete problem is the Boolean satisfiability problem: given a Boolean formula, is it &quot;satisfiable&quot; (is there a possible input for which the formula outputs true)? The complementary problem asks: &quot;given a Boolean formula, is it &quot;unsatisfiable&quot; (do all possible inputs to the formula output false)?&quot;. Since this is the &quot;complement&quot; of the satisfiability problem, a certificate for a &quot;no&quot;-instance is the same as for a &quot;yes&quot;-instance from the original NP problem: a set of Boolean variable assignments which make the formula true. On the other hand, a certificate of a &quot;yes&quot;-instance for the complementary problem (whatever form it might take) would be equally as complex as for the &quot;no&quot;-instance of the original NP satisfiability problem.

==co-NP-completeness==

A problem &quot;L&quot; is co-NP-complete if and only if &quot;L&quot; is in co-NP and for any problem in co-NP, there exists a polynomial-time reduction from that problem to &quot;L&quot;.

=== Tautology reduction ===
Determining if a formula in propositional logic is a tautology is co-NP-complete: that is, if the formula evaluates to true under every possible assignment to its variables.

==Relationship to other classes==


P, the class of polynomial time solvable problems, is a subset of both NP and co-NP. P is thought to be a strict subset in both cases. Because P is closed under complementation, and NP and co-NP are complementary, it cannot be strict in one case and not strict in the other: if P equals NP, it must also equal co-NP, and vice versa.

NP and co-NP are also thought to be unequal. If so, then no NP-complete problem can be in co-NP and no co-NP-complete problem can be in NP. This can be shown as follows. Suppose for the sake of contradiction there exists an NP-complete problem that is in co-NP. Since all problems in NP can be reduced to , it follows that for every problem in NP, we can construct a non-deterministic Turing machine that decides its complement in polynomial time; i.e., . From this, it follows that the set of complements of the problems in NP is a subset of the set of complements of the problems in co-NP; i.e., . Thus . The proof that no co-NP-complete problem can be in NP if is symmetrical.

co-NP is a subset of PH, which itself is a subset of PSPACE.

===Integer factorization===

An example of a problem that is known to belong to both NP and co-NP (but not known to be in P) is Integer factorization: given positive integers &quot;m&quot; and &quot;n&quot;, determine if &quot;m&quot; has a factor less than &quot;n&quot; and greater than one. Membership in NP is clear; if &quot;m&quot; does have such a factor, then the factor itself is a certificate. Membership in co-NP is also straightforward: one can just list the prime factors of &quot;m&quot;, all greater or equal to &quot;n&quot;, which the verifier can confirm to be valid by multiplication and the AKS primality test. It is presently not known whether there is a polynomial-time algorithm for factorization, equivalently that integer factorization is in P, and hence this example is interesting as one of the most natural problems known to be in NP and co-NP but not known to be in P.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205084" start="3" end="34" title="computational complexity theory" label="computational complexity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q955748" start="36" end="41" title="Co-NP" label="co-NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q908207" start="47" end="63" title="complexity class" label="complexity class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3262192" start="67" end="83" title="decision problem" label="decision problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4249733" start="126" end="136" title="complement (complexity)" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q628036" start="164" end="166" title="NP (complexity)" label="NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946816" start="319" end="330" title="Certificate (complexity)" label="certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q955748" start="442" end="447" title="Co-NP" label="co-NP"/>
<link wikidata="Q163310" start="542" end="556" title="Turing machine" label="Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q215206" start="1194" end="1205" title="NP-complete" label="NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q875276" start="1221" end="1251" title="Boolean satisfiability problem" label="Boolean satisfiability problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142354" start="2068" end="2082" title="co-NP-complete" label="co-NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q2103034" start="2169" end="2194" title="polynomial-time reduction" label="polynomial-time reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q200694" start="2288" end="2307" title="propositional logic" label="propositional logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q209555" start="2313" end="2322" title="tautology (logic)" label="tautology"/>
<link wikidata="Q846354" start="2471" end="2472" title="P (complexity)" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142354" start="2908" end="2922" title="co-NP-complete" label="co-NP-complete"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190223" start="3172" end="3204" title="non-deterministic Turing machine" label="non-deterministic Turing machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063380" start="3507" end="3509" title="PH (complexity)" label="PH"/>
<link wikidata="Q500716" start="3539" end="3545" title="PSPACE" label="PSPACE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4846249" start="3676" end="3697" title="Integer factorization" label="Integer factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q294284" start="4159" end="4177" title="AKS primality test" label="AKS primality test"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6185" wikidata="Q271939" url="?curid=6185" title="Chuck Yeager">
<text>Brigadier General Charles Elwood Yeager ( , February 13, 1923December 7, 2020) was a United States Air Force officer, flying ace, and record-setting test pilot who in October 1947 became the first pilot in history confirmed to have exceeded the speed of sound in level flight.

Yeager was raised in Hamlin, West Virginia. His career began in World War II as a private in the United States Army, assigned to the Army Air Forces in 1941. After serving as an aircraft mechanic, in September 1942, he entered enlisted pilot training and upon graduation was promoted to the rank of flight officer (the World War II Army Air Force version of the Army&#x27;s warrant officer), later achieving most of his aerial victories as a P-51 Mustang fighter pilot on the Western Front, where he was credited with shooting down 11.5 enemy aircraft (the half credit is from a second pilot assisting him in a single shootdown). On October 12, 1944, he attained &quot;ace in a day&quot; status, shooting down five enemy aircraft in one mission.

After the war, Yeager became a test pilot and flew many types of aircraft, including experimental rocket-powered aircraft for the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA). Through the NACA program, he became the first human to officially break the sound barrier on October 14, 1947, when he flew the experimental Bell X-1 at Mach 1.05 at an altitude of , for which he won both the Collier and Mackay trophies in 1948. He then went on to break several other speed and altitude records in the following years. In 1962, he became the first commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School, which trained and produced astronauts for NASA and the Air Force.

Yeager later commanded fighter squadrons and wings in Germany, as well as in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War. In recognition of his achievements and the outstanding performance ratings of those units, he was promoted to brigadier general in 1969 and inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame in 1973, retiring on March 1, 1975 (for its colloquial similarity to &quot;Mach 1&quot;). His three-war active-duty flying career spanned more than 30 years and took him to many parts of the world, including the Korean War zone and the Soviet Union during the height of the Cold War.

Yeager is referred to by many as one of the greatest pilots of all time, and was ranked fifth on &quot;Flying&quot; list of the 51 Heroes of Aviation in 2013. Throughout his life, he flew more than 360 different types of aircraft over a 70-year period, and continued to fly for two decades after retirement as a consultant pilot for the United States Air Force. In 2020 at the age of 97, Yeager died in a Los Angeles-area hospital.

== Early life and education ==
Yeager was born February 13, 1923, in Myra, West Virginia, to farming parents Albert Hal Yeager (1896–1963) and Susie Mae Yeager (; 1898–1987). When he was five years old, his family moved to Hamlin, West Virginia. Yeager had two brothers, Roy and Hal Jr., and two sisters, Doris Ann (accidentally killed at age two by four-year-old Roy playing with a firearm) and Pansy Lee.

He attended Hamlin High School, where he played basketball and football, receiving his best grades in geometry and typing. He graduated from high school in June 1941.

His first experience with the military was as a teen at the Citizens Military Training Camp at Fort Benjamin Harrison, Indianapolis, Indiana, during the summers of 1939 and 1940. On February 26, 1945, Yeager married Glennis Dickhouse, and the couple had four children. Glennis Yeager died in 1990, predeceasing her husband by 30 years.

His cousin, Steve Yeager, was a professional baseball catcher.

== Career ==
=== World War II ===
Yeager enlisted as a private in the U.S. Army Air Forces (USAAF) on September 12, 1941, and became an aircraft mechanic at George Air Force Base, Victorville, California. At enlistment, Yeager was not eligible for flight training because of his age and educational background, but the entry of the U.S. into World War II less than three months later prompted the USAAF to alter its recruiting standards. Yeager had unusually sharp vision (a visual acuity rated 20/10), which once enabled him to shoot a deer at .

At the time of his flight training acceptance, he was a crew chief on an AT-11. He received his pilot wings and a promotion to flight officer at Luke Field, Arizona, where he graduated from Class 43C on March 10, 1943. Assigned to the 357th Fighter Group at Tonopah, Nevada, he initially trained as a fighter pilot, flying Bell P-39 Airacobras (being grounded for seven days for clipping a farmer&#x27;s tree during a training flight), and shipped overseas with the group on November 23, 1943.
Stationed in the United Kingdom at RAF Leiston, Yeager flew P-51 Mustangs in combat with the 363d Fighter Squadron. He named his aircraft &quot;Glamorous Glen&quot; after his girlfriend, Glennis Faye Dickhouse, who became his wife in February 1945. Yeager had gained one victory before he was shot down over France in his first aircraft (P-51B-5-NA s/n 43-6763) on March 5, 1944, on his eighth mission. He escaped to Spain on March 30, 1944, with the help of the &quot;Maquis&quot; (French Resistance) and returned to England on May 15, 1944. During his stay with the &quot;Maquis&quot;, Yeager assisted the guerrillas in duties that did not involve direct combat; he helped construct bombs for the group, a skill that he had learned from his father. He was awarded the Bronze Star for helping a navigator, Omar M. &quot;Pat&quot; Patterson Jr., to cross the Pyrenees.

Despite a regulation prohibiting &quot;evaders&quot; (escaped pilots) from flying over enemy territory again, the purpose of which was to prevent resistance groups from being compromised by giving the enemy a second chance to possibly capture him, Yeager was reinstated to flying combat. He had joined another evader, fellow P-51 pilot 1st Lt Fred Glover, in speaking directly to the Supreme Allied Commander, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, on June 12, 1944. &quot;I raised so much hell that General Eisenhower finally let me go back to my squadron&quot; Yeager said. &quot;He cleared me for combat after D Day, because all the free Frenchmen – Maquis and people like that – had surfaced&quot;. Eisenhower, after gaining permission from the War Department to decide the requests, concurred with Yeager and Glover. In the meantime, Yeager shot down his second enemy aircraft, a German Junkers Ju 88 bomber, over the English Channel.
Yeager demonstrated outstanding flying skills and combat leadership. On October 12, 1944, he became the first pilot in his group to make &quot;ace in a day,&quot; downing five enemy aircraft in a single mission. Two of these victories were scored without firing a single shot: when he flew into firing position against a Messerschmitt Bf 109, the pilot of the aircraft panicked, breaking to port and colliding with his wingman. Yeager said both pilots bailed out. He finished the war with 11.5 official victories, including one of the first air-to-air victories over a jet fighter, a German Messerschmitt Me 262 that he shot down as it was on final approach for landing.

In his 1986 memoirs, Yeager recalled with disgust that &quot;atrocities were committed by both sides&quot;, and said he went on a mission with orders from the Eighth Air Force to &quot;strafe anything that moved&quot;. During the mission briefing, he whispered to Major Donald H. Bochkay, &quot;If we are going to do things like this, we sure as hell better make sure we are on the winning side&quot;. Yeager said, &quot;I&#x27;m certainly not proud of that particular strafing mission against civilians. But it is there, on the record and in my memory&quot;. He also expressed bitterness at his treatment in England during World War II, describing the British as &quot;arrogant&quot; and &quot;nasty&quot; on Twitter.

Yeager was commissioned a second lieutenant while at Leiston, and was promoted to captain before the end of his tour. He flew his 61st and final mission on January 15, 1945, and returned to the United States in early February 1945. As an evader, he received his choice of assignments and, because his new wife was pregnant, chose Wright Field to be near his home in West Virginia. His high number of flight hours and maintenance experience qualified him to become a functional test pilot of repaired aircraft, which brought him under the command of Colonel Albert Boyd, head of the Aeronautical Systems Flight Test Division.

=== Post-World War II ===
==== Test pilot – breaking the sound barrier ====

Yeager remained in the U.S. Army Air Forces after the war, becoming a test pilot at Muroc Army Air Field (now Edwards Air Force Base), following graduation from Air Materiel Command Flight Performance School (Class 46C). After Bell Aircraft test pilot Chalmers &quot;Slick&quot; Goodlin demanded to break the sound &quot;barrier&quot;, the USAAF selected the 24-year-old Yeager to fly the rocket-powered Bell XS-1 in a NACA program to research high-speed flight. Under the National Security Act of 1947, the USAAF became the United States Air Force (USAF) on September 18.

Such was the difficulty, that the answers to many of the inherent challenges were like &quot;Yeager better have paid-up insurance&quot;. Two nights before the scheduled flight date, Yeager broke two ribs when he fell from a horse. He was worried that the injury would remove him from the mission and reported that he went to a civilian doctor in nearby Rosamond, who taped his ribs. Besides his wife who was riding with him, Yeager told only his friend and fellow project pilot Jack Ridley about the accident. On the day of the flight, Yeager was in such pain that he could not seal the X-1&#x27;s hatch by himself. Ridley rigged up a device, using the end of a broom handle as an extra lever, to allow Yeager to seal the hatch.

Yeager broke the sound barrier on October 14, 1947, in level flight while piloting the X-1 &quot;Glamorous Glennis&quot; at Mach 1.05 at an altitude of over the Rogers Dry Lake of the Mojave Desert in California. The success of the mission was not announced to the public for nearly eight months, until June 10, 1948. Yeager was awarded the Mackay Trophy and the Collier Trophy in 1948 for his mach-transcending flight, and the Harmon International Trophy in 1954. The X-1 he flew that day was later put on permanent display at the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s National Air and Space Museum. During 1952, he attended the Air Command and Staff College.
Yeager continued to break many speed and altitude records. He was one of the first American pilots to fly a Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15, after its pilot, No Kum-sok, defected to South Korea. Returning to Muroc, during the latter half of 1953, Yeager was involved with the USAF team that was working on the X-1A, an aircraft designed to surpass Mach 2 in level flight. That year, he flew a chase aircraft for the civilian pilot Jackie Cochran as she became the first woman to fly faster than sound.

On November 20, 1953, the U.S. Navy program involving the Douglas D-558-II Skyrocket and its pilot, Scott Crossfield, became the first team to reach twice the speed of sound. After they were bested, Ridley and Yeager decided to beat rival Crossfield&#x27;s speed record in a series of test flights that they dubbed &quot;Operation NACA Weep&quot;. Not only did they beat Crossfield by setting a new record at Mach 2.44 on December 12, 1953, but they did it in time to spoil a celebration planned for the 50th anniversary of flight in which Crossfield was to be called &quot;the fastest man alive&quot;.

The new record flight, however, did not entirely go to plan, since shortly after reaching Mach 2.44, Yeager lost control of the X-1A at about due to inertia coupling, a phenomenon largely unknown at the time. With the aircraft simultaneously rolling, pitching, and yawing out of control, Yeager dropped in less than a minute before regaining control at around . He then managed to land without further incident. For this feat, Yeager was awarded the Distinguished Service Medal (DSM) in 1954.

==== Military command ====

Yeager was foremost a fighter pilot and held several squadron and wing commands. From 1954 to 1957, he commanded the F-86H Sabre-equipped 417th Fighter-Bomber Squadron (50th Fighter-Bomber Wing) at Hahn AB, West Germany, and Toul-Rosieres Air Base, France; and from 1957 to 1960 the F-100D Super Sabre-equipped 1st Fighter Day Squadron at George Air Force Base, California, and Morón Air Base, Spain.

He was a full colonel in 1962, after completion of a year&#x27;s studies and final thesis on STOL aircraft at the Air War College. He became the first commandant of the USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School, which produced astronauts for NASA and the USAF, after its redesignation from the USAF Flight Test Pilot School. He had only a high school education, so he was not eligible to become an astronaut like those he trained. In April 1962, Yeager made his only flight with Neil Armstrong. Their job, flying a T-33, was to evaluate Smith Ranch Dry Lake in Nevada for use as an emergency landing site for the North American X-15. In his autobiography, he wrote that he knew the lake bed was unsuitable for landings after recent rains, but Armstrong insisted on flying out anyway. As Armstrong suggested that they do a touch-and-go, Yeager advised against it, telling him &quot;You may touch, but you ain&#x27;t gonna go!&quot; When Armstrong did touch down, the wheels became stuck in the mud, bringing the plane to a sudden stop and provoking Yeager to fits of laughter. They had to wait for rescue.

Yeager&#x27;s participation in the test pilot training program for NASA included controversial behavior. Yeager reportedly did not believe that Ed Dwight, the first African American pilot admitted into the program, should be a part of it. In the 2019 documentary series &quot;Chasing the Moon&quot;, the filmmakers made the claim that Yeager instructed staff and participants at the school that &quot;Washington is trying to cram the nigger down our throats. [President] Kennedy is using this to make &#x27;racial equality,&#x27; so do not speak to him, do not socialize with him, do not drink with him, do not invite him over to your house, and in six months he&#x27;ll be gone.&quot; In his autobiography, Dwight details how Yeager&#x27;s leadership led to discriminatory treatment throughout his training at Edwards Air Force Base.

Between December 1963 and January 1964, Yeager completed five flights in the NASA M2-F1 lifting body. An accident during a December 1963 test flight in one of the school&#x27;s NF-104s resulted in serious injuries. After climbing to a near-record altitude, the plane&#x27;s controls became ineffective, and it entered a flat spin. After several turns, and an altitude loss of approximately 95,000 feet, Yeager ejected from the plane. During the ejection, the seat straps released normally, but the seat base slammed into Yeager, with the still-hot rocket motor breaking his helmet&#x27;s plastic faceplate and causing his emergency oxygen supply to catch fire. The resulting burns to his face required extensive and agonizing medical care. This was Yeager&#x27;s last attempt at setting test-flying records.

In 1966, Yeager took command of the 405th Tactical Fighter Wing at Clark Air Base, the Philippines, whose squadrons were deployed on rotational temporary duty (TDY) in South Vietnam and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. There he flew 127 missions. In February 1968, Yeager was assigned command of the 4th Tactical Fighter Wing at Seymour Johnson Air Force Base, North Carolina, and led the McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II wing in South Korea during the &quot;Pueblo&quot; crisis.

Yeager was promoted to brigadier general and was assigned in July 1969 as the vice-commander of the Seventeenth Air Force.

From 1971 to 1973, at the behest of Ambassador Joseph Farland, Yeager was assigned as the Air Attache in Pakistan to advise the Pakistan Air Force which was led by Abdur Rahim Khan (the first Pakistani to break the sound barrier). He arrived in Pakistan at a time when tensions with India were at a high level. One of Yeager&#x27;s jobs during this time was to assist Pakistani technicians in installing AIM-9 Sidewinders on PAF&#x27;s Shenyang F-6 fighters. He also had a keen interest in interacting with PAF personnel from various Pakistani Squadrons and helping them develop combat tactics. In one instance in 1972, while visiting the No. 15 Squadron &quot;Cobras&quot; at Peshawar Airbase, the Squadron&#x27;s OC Wing Commander Najeeb Khan escorted him to K2 in a pair of F-86Fs after Yeager requested a visit to the second highest mountain on Earth. After hostilities broke out in 1971, he decided to stay in West Pakistan and continued overseeing the PAF&#x27;s operations. Yeager recalled &quot;the Pakistanis whipped the Indians&#x27; asses in the sky... the Pakistanis scored a three-to-one kill ratio, knocking out 102 Russian-made Indian jets and losing 34 airplanes of their own&quot;. During the war, he flew around the western front in a helicopter documenting wreckages of Indian aircraft of Soviet origin which included Sukhoi Su-7s and MiG-21s. These aircraft were transported to the United States after the war for analysis. Yeager also flew around in his Beechcraft Queen Air, a small passenger aircraft that was assigned to him by the Pentagon, picking up shot-down Indian fighter pilots. The Beechcraft was later destroyed during an air raid by the IAF at a Pakistani airbase when Yeager was not present. Edward C. Ingraham, a U.S. diplomat who had served as political counselor to Ambassador Farland in Islamabad, recalled this incident in the &quot;Washington Monthly&quot; of October 1985: &quot;After Yeager&#x27;s Beechcraft was destroyed during an Indian air raid, he raged to his cowering colleagues that the Indian pilot had been specifically instructed by Indira Gandhi to blast his plane. &#x27;It was&#x27;, he later wrote, &#x27;the Indian way of giving Uncle Sam the finger&#x27;&quot;. Yeager was incensed over the incident and demanded U.S. retaliation.

=== Post-retirement and in popular culture ===

On March 1, 1975, Yeager retired from the Air Force at Norton Air Force Base, California.

Yeager made a cameo appearance in the movie &quot;The Right Stuff&quot; (1983). He played &quot;Fred&quot;, a bartender at &quot;Pancho&#x27;s Place&quot;, which was most appropriate, because he said, &quot;if all the hours were ever totaled, I reckon I spent more time at her place than in a cockpit over those years&quot;. Sam Shepard portrayed Yeager in the film, which chronicles in part his famous 1947 record-breaking flight.

Yeager has been referenced several times in the shared &quot;Star Trek&quot; universe, including having a namesake fictional type of starship, a dangerous starship formation-maneuver named after him called the &quot;Yeager Loop&quot; (most notably mentioned in the &quot;Star Trek: The Next Generation&quot; episode &quot;The First Duty&quot;), and appearing in archival footage within the opening title sequence for the series &quot;Star Trek: Enterprise&quot; (2001–2005). For &quot;Enterprise&quot;, executive producer Rick Berman said that he envisaged the lead character, Captain Jonathan Archer, as being &quot;halfway between Chuck Yeager and Han Solo&quot;.

For several years in the 1980s, Yeager was connected to General Motors, publicizing ACDelco, the company&#x27;s automotive parts division. In 1986, he was invited to drive the Chevrolet Corvette pace car for the 70th running of the Indianapolis 500. In 1988, Yeager was again invited to drive the pace car, this time at the wheel of an Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme. In 1986, President Reagan appointed Yeager to the Rogers Commission that investigated the explosion of the Space Shuttle &quot;Challenger&quot;.

During this time, Yeager also served as a technical adviser for three Electronic Arts flight simulator video games. The games include &quot;Chuck Yeager&#x27;s Advanced Flight Trainer&quot;, &quot;Chuck Yeager&#x27;s Advanced Flight Trainer 2.0&quot;, and &quot;Chuck Yeager&#x27;s Air Combat&quot;. The game manuals feature quotes and anecdotes from Yeager and were well received by players. Missions feature several of Yeager&#x27;s accomplishments and let players challenge his records. &quot;Chuck Yeager&#x27;s Advanced Flight Trainer&quot; was Electronic Art&#x27;s top-selling game for 1987.

In 2009, Yeager participated in the documentary &quot;The Legend of Pancho Barnes and the Happy Bottom Riding Club&quot;, a profile of his friend Pancho Barnes. The documentary was screened at film festivals, aired on public television in the United States, and won an Emmy Award.

On October 14, 1997, on the 50th anniversary of his historic flight past Mach 1, he flew a new &quot;Glamorous Glennis III&quot;, an F-15D Eagle, past Mach 1. The chase plane for the flight was an F-16 Fighting Falcon piloted by Bob Hoover, a longtime test, fighter, and aerobatic pilot who had been Yeager&#x27;s wingman for the first supersonic flight. At the end of his speech to the crowd in 1997, Yeager concluded, &quot;All that I am ... I owe to the Air Force&quot;. Later that month, he was the recipient of the Tony Jannus Award for his achievements.

On October 14, 2012, on the 65th anniversary of breaking the sound barrier, Yeager did it again at the age of 89, flying as co-pilot in a McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle piloted by Captain David Vincent out of Nellis Air Force Base.

In October 2016, Yeager reached international headlines when a Twitter argument he was having with an Irish teenager led to him lashing out at the British and Irish, namely calling Irish people British, and labeling all British people as &quot;nasty&quot; and &quot;arrogant&quot;. No stranger to controversy in his life, this was one of Yeager&#x27;s last major public faux-pas.

== Awards and decorations ==

In 1973, Yeager was inducted into the National Aviation Hall of Fame, arguably aviation&#x27;s highest honor. In 1974, Yeager received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement. In December 1975, the U.S. Congress awarded Yeager a silver medal &quot;equivalent to a noncombat Medal of Honor ... for contributing immeasurably to aerospace science by risking his life in piloting the X-1 research airplane faster than the speed of sound on October 14, 1947&quot;. President Gerald Ford presented the medal to Yeager in a ceremony at the White House on December 8, 1976.

Yeager never attended college and was often modest about his background, but is considered by many, including &quot;Flying Magazine&quot;, the California Hall of Fame, the State of West Virginia, National Aviation Hall of Fame, a few U.S. presidents, and the United States Army Air Force, to be one of the greatest pilots of all time. &quot;Air &amp; Space/Smithsonian&quot; magazine ranked him the fifth greatest pilot of all time in 2003. Regardless of his lack of higher education, West Virginia&#x27;s Marshall University named its highest academic scholarship the Society of Yeager Scholars in his honor. He was the chairman of Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA)&#x27;s Young Eagle Program from 1994 to 2004, and was named the program&#x27;s chairman emeritus.

In 1966, Yeager was inducted into the International Air &amp; Space Hall of Fame. He was inducted into the International Space Hall of Fame in 1981. He was inducted into the Aerospace Walk of Honor 1990 inaugural class.

Yeager Airport in Charleston, West Virginia, is named in his honor. The Interstate 64/Interstate 77 bridge over the Kanawha River in Charleston is named in his honor. He also flew directly under the Kanawha Bridge and West Virginia named it the Chuck E. Yeager Bridge. On October 19, 2006, the state of West Virginia also honored Yeager with a marker along Corridor G (part of U.S. Highway 119) in his home Lincoln County, and also renamed part of it the &quot;Yeager Highway&quot;.

Yeager was an honorary board member of the humanitarian organization Wings of Hope. On August 25, 2009, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and Maria Shriver announced that Yeager would be one of 13 California Hall of Fame inductees in The California Museum&#x27;s yearlong exhibit. The induction ceremony was on December 1, 2009, in Sacramento, California. &quot;Flying Magazine&quot; ranked Yeager number 5 on its 2013 list of The 51 Heroes of Aviation; for many years, he was the highest-ranked living person on the list.

The Civil Air Patrol, the volunteer auxiliary of the USAF, awards the Charles E. &quot;Chuck&quot; Yeager Award to its senior members as part of its Aerospace Education program.
=== Other achievements ===

* 1940–1949 – Harmon Trophy: Citation of Honorable Mention
* 1947 – Collier Trophy and Mackay Trophy, for breaking the sound barrier for the first time.
* 1953 – Harmon Trophy
* 1976 – Congressional Silver Medal

== Dates of rank ==

==Aerial victory credits==

== Personal life ==

Yeager named his plane after his wife, Glennis, as a good-luck charm: &quot;You&#x27;re my good-luck charm, hon. Any airplane I name after you always brings me home.&quot; Yeager and Glennis moved to Grass Valley, California, after his retirement from the Air Force in 1975. The couple prospered as a result of Yeager&#x27;s best-selling autobiography, speaking engagements, and commercial ventures. Glennis Yeager died of ovarian cancer in 1990. They had four children (Susan, Don, Mickey, and Sharon). Yeager&#x27;s son Mickey (Michael) died unexpectedly in Oregon, on March 26, 2011.

Yeager appeared in a Texas advertisement for George H. W. Bush&#x27;s 1988 presidential campaign.
In 2000, Yeager met actress Victoria Scott D&#x27;Angelo on a hiking trail in Nevada County. The pair started dating shortly thereafter, and married in August 2003. A bitter dispute arose between Yeager, his children, and D&#x27;Angelo. The children contended that she, at least 35 years Yeager&#x27;s junior, had married him for his fortune. Yeager and D&#x27;Angelo both denied the charge. Litigation ensued, in which his children accused D&#x27;Angelo of &quot;undue influence&quot; on Yeager, and Yeager accused his children of diverting millions of dollars from his assets. In August 2008, the California Court of Appeal ruled for Yeager, finding that his daughter Susan had breached her duty as trustee.

Yeager lived in Grass Valley, Northern California and died in the afternoon of December 7, 2020 (National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day), at age 97, in a Los Angeles hospital. Following his death, President Donald Trump issued a statement of condolences stating Yeager &quot;was one of the greatest pilots in history, a proud West Virginian, and an American original who relentlessly pushed the boundaries of human achievement&quot;.

== See also ==
* History of aviation
* List of firsts in aviation
* Society of Experimental Test Pilots

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* Wolfe, Tom &quot;The Right Stuff&quot; New York: Farrar-Straus-Giroux, 1979 
* Yeager, Chuck, Bob Cardenas, Bob Hoover, Jack Russell and James Young &quot;The Quest for Mach One: A First-Person Account of Breaking the Sound Barrier&quot; New York: Penguin Studio, 1997 
* Yeager, Chuck and Leo Janos, &quot;Yeager: An Autobiography&quot; New York: Bantam, 1985 
==External links==
* Biography from ChuckYeager.org
* U.S. Air Force: Chuck Yeager biography
* Yeager in Biography.com
* Biography in the National Aviation Hall of Fame 
* General Chuck Yeager, USAF, Biography and Interview with the American Academy of Achievement
* &quot;Airport Journals&quot;&#x27; &quot;Chuck Yeager: Booming And Zooming&quot; Part 1 and Part 2
* &quot;Chuck Yeager &amp; the Sound Barrier&quot; in Aerospaceweb.org
* Space.com: Chuck Yeager
* 
* Yeager obituary via &quot;The New York Times&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="0" end="17" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="Brigadier General"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="18" end="39" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Charles Elwood Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="85" end="108" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q222982" start="118" end="128" title="flying ace" label="flying ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q730242" start="149" end="159" title="test pilot" label="test pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q124003" start="245" end="259" title="speed of sound" label="speed of sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322308" start="299" end="320" title="Hamlin, West Virginia" label="Hamlin, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="342" end="354" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="360" end="367" title="Private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="375" end="393" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="411" end="426" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379090" start="505" end="513" title="Enlisted rank" label="enlisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q16200706" start="577" end="591" title="flight officer" label="flight officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840830" start="652" end="667" title="Warrant officer (United States)" label="warrant officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="720" end="732" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="P-51 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q618694" start="733" end="746" title="fighter pilot" label="fighter pilot"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="754" end="767" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828751" start="947" end="959" title="ace in a day" label="ace in a day"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="1155" end="1198" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031651" start="1283" end="1296" title="sound barrier" label="sound barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="1348" end="1356" title="Bell X-1" label="Bell X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="1360" end="1369" title="Mach number" label="Mach 1.05"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="1416" end="1423" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279027" start="1428" end="1434" title="Mackay Trophy" label="Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428253" start="1590" end="1626" title="U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School" label="USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="1655" end="1664" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="1670" end="1674" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1798" end="1809" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="1921" end="1938" title="brigadier general" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="1969" end="1999" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="2212" end="2222" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="2236" end="2248" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="2274" end="2282" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577908" start="2388" end="2394" title="Flying (magazine)" label="Flying"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948083" start="2787" end="2806" title="Myra, West Virginia" label="Myra, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322308" start="2941" end="2962" title="Hamlin, West Virginia" label="Hamlin, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="3174" end="3184" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="3189" end="3197" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q8087" start="3228" end="3236" title="geometry" label="geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215756" start="3241" end="3247" title="typing" label="typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122637" start="3354" end="3385" title="Citizens Military Training Camp" label="Citizens Military Training Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470807" start="3389" end="3411" title="Fort Benjamin Harrison" label="Fort Benjamin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="3413" end="3425" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614376" start="3643" end="3655" title="Steve Yeager" label="Steve Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q907328" start="3663" end="3684" title="professional baseball" label="professional baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050571" start="3685" end="3692" title="catcher" label="catcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="3765" end="3785" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101377" start="3852" end="3873" title="George Air Force Base" label="George Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q495353" start="3875" end="3898" title="Victorville, California" label="Victorville, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q555066" start="4170" end="4183" title="visual acuity" label="visual acuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q814006" start="4316" end="4321" title="Beechcraft Model 18" label="AT-11"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863038" start="4339" end="4350" title="U.S. Air Force aeronautical rating" label="pilot wings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4370" end="4384" title="Warrant Officer (United States)#Flight Officer" label="flight officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346991" start="4388" end="4398" title="Luke Air Force Base" label="Luke Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="4400" end="4407" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635524" start="4478" end="4497" title="357th Fighter Group" label="357th Fighter Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q988827" start="4501" end="4516" title="Tonopah, Nevada" label="Tonopah, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q385778" start="4566" end="4585" title="Bell P-39 Airacobra" label="Bell P-39 Airacobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275435" start="4772" end="4783" title="RAF Leiston" label="RAF Leiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q192075" start="4797" end="4810" title="North American P-51 Mustang" label="P-51 Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4551514" start="4830" end="4851" title="363d Fighter Squadron" label="363d Fighter Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q701165" start="5206" end="5212" title="Maquis (World War II)" label="Maquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q928314" start="5507" end="5518" title="Bronze Star Medal" label="Bronze Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="5596" end="5604" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050792" start="5991" end="6015" title="Supreme Allied Commander" label="Supreme Allied Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="6025" end="6045" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="6211" end="6216" title="D Day" label="D Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q155661" start="6490" end="6503" title="Junkers Ju 88" label="Junkers Ju 88"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="6521" end="6536" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828751" start="6681" end="6693" title="ace in a day" label="ace in a day"/>
<link wikidata="Q155639" start="6859" end="6879" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109" label="Messerschmitt Bf 109"/>
<link wikidata="Q140254" start="7129" end="7149" title="Messerschmitt Me 262" label="Messerschmitt Me 262"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="7369" end="7385" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="7395" end="7421" title="War crime" label="strafe anything that moved"/>
<link wikidata="Q123738892" start="7480" end="7497" title="Donald H. Bochkay" label="Donald H. Bochkay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7956" end="7973" title="Second lieutenant#United States" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519667" start="7983" end="7990" title="Leiston" label="Leiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="8012" end="8019" title="Captain (U.S. Air Force)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553382" start="8260" end="8272" title="Wright Field" label="Wright Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="8296" end="8309" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709780" start="8487" end="8498" title="Albert Boyd" label="Albert Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="8656" end="8676" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="U.S. Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q217563" start="8743" end="8765" title="Edwards Air Force Base" label="Edwards Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428253" start="8794" end="8840" title="U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School" label="Air Materiel Command Flight Performance School"/>
<link wikidata="Q815695" start="8860" end="8873" title="Bell Aircraft" label="Bell Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5069007" start="8885" end="8919" title="Chalmers &amp;quot;Slick&amp;quot; Goodlin" label="Chalmers &amp;quot;Slick&amp;quot; Goodlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="9037" end="9046" title="Bell X-1" label="Bell XS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q618604" start="9052" end="9056" title="National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics" label="NACA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967718" start="9106" end="9135" title="National Security Act of 1947" label="National Security Act of 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="9158" end="9181" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005156" start="9560" end="9568" title="Rosamond, California" label="Rosamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3805640" start="9685" end="9696" title="Jack Ridley (pilot)" label="Jack Ridley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031651" start="9954" end="9967" title="sound barrier" label="sound barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="10061" end="10070" title="Mach number" label="Mach 1.05"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451247" start="10098" end="10113" title="Rogers Dry Lake" label="Rogers Dry Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="10121" end="10134" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279027" start="10278" end="10291" title="Mackay Trophy" label="Mackay Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="10300" end="10314" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659178" start="10365" end="10392" title="Harmon International Trophy" label="Harmon International Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="10469" end="10492" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="10500" end="10529" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697817" start="10560" end="10589" title="Air Command and Staff College" label="Air Command and Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q187377" start="10699" end="10722" title="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15" label="Mikoyan-Gurevich MiG-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q497141" start="10741" end="10751" title="No Kum-sok" label="No Kum-sok"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="10765" end="10776" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10893" end="10897" title="Bell X-1#X-1A" label="X-1A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977227" start="10976" end="10990" title="chase plane" label="chase aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3993" start="11014" end="11028" title="Jacqueline Cochran" label="Jackie Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="11112" end="11121" title="United States Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60578" start="11144" end="11170" title="Douglas D-558-2 Skyrocket" label="Douglas D-558-II Skyrocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q955842" start="11186" end="11202" title="Scott Crossfield" label="Scott Crossfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q35820" start="11590" end="11616" title="Wright brothers" label="50th anniversary of flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696583" start="11839" end="11855" title="inertia coupling" label="inertia coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774648" start="12140" end="12167" title="Distinguished Service Medal (U.S. Army)" label="Distinguished Service Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="12329" end="12340" title="North American F-86 Sabre" label="F-86H Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q158211" start="12410" end="12417" title="Frankfurt-Hahn Airport" label="Hahn AB"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="12419" end="12431" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="12461" end="12467" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q531053" start="12495" end="12513" title="North American F-100 Super Sabre" label="F-100D Super Sabre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596332" start="12523" end="12547" title="1st Fighter Squadron (United States)" label="1st Fighter Day Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101377" start="12551" end="12572" title="George Air Force Base" label="George Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q924498" start="12590" end="12604" title="Morón Air Base" label="Morón Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="12606" end="12611" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q832489" start="12707" end="12711" title="STOL" label="STOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698251" start="12728" end="12743" title="Air War College" label="Air War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428253" start="12783" end="12819" title="U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School" label="USAF Aerospace Research Pilot School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="12836" end="12845" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="12851" end="12855" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="12864" end="12868" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615" start="13088" end="13102" title="Neil Armstrong" label="Neil Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q58725" start="13124" end="13128" title="T-33" label="T-33"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="13170" end="13176" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="13222" end="13241" title="North American X-15" label="North American X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q19803" start="13431" end="13443" title="Touch-and-go landing" label="touch-and-go"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="13782" end="13786" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q20730310" start="13859" end="13868" title="Ed Dwight" label="Ed Dwight"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751667" start="13991" end="14007" title="Chasing the Moon (2019 film)" label="Chasing the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="14186" end="14193" title="John F. Kennedy" label="Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959741" start="14628" end="14638" title="NASA M2-F1" label="NASA M2-F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759837" start="14639" end="14651" title="lifting body" label="lifting body"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14674" end="14699" title="Lockheed NF-104A#Third NF-104A" label="December 1963 test flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665633" start="14728" end="14735" title="Lockheed NF-104A" label="NF-104s"/>
<link wikidata="Q910917" start="14871" end="14880" title="Flat spin (aviation)" label="flat spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095676" start="15427" end="15441" title="Clark Air Base" label="Clark Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="15447" end="15458" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q180573" start="15528" end="15541" title="South Vietnam" label="South Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817084" start="15656" end="15681" title="4th Fighter Wing" label="4th Tactical Fighter Wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766303" start="15685" end="15715" title="Seymour Johnson Air Force Base" label="Seymour Johnson Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="15717" end="15731" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="15745" end="15777" title="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II" label="McDonnell Douglas F-4 Phantom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="15786" end="15797" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q712703" start="15809" end="15834" title="USS Pueblo (AGER-2)" label="&amp;quot;Pueblo&amp;quot; crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967196" start="15860" end="15877" title="Brigadier general (United States)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457647" start="15937" end="15958" title="Seventeenth Air Force" label="Seventeenth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286743" start="16008" end="16022" title="Joseph Farland" label="Joseph Farland"/>
<link wikidata="Q302691" start="16051" end="16062" title="Air Attache" label="Air Attache"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16066" end="16074" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="16089" end="16107" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495350" start="16125" end="16141" title="Abdur Rahim Khan" label="Abdur Rahim Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q235396" start="16365" end="16381" title="AIM-9 Sidewinder" label="AIM-9 Sidewinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646112" start="16397" end="16409" title="Shenyang F-6" label="Shenyang F-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q6593303" start="16487" end="16514" title="List of Pakistan Air Force squadrons" label="various Pakistani Squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q16002168" start="16540" end="16554" title="Air combat manoeuvring" label="combat tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q110156526" start="16600" end="16634" title="No. 15 Squadron (Pakistan Air Force)" label="No. 15 Squadron &amp;quot;Cobras&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7118090" start="16638" end="16654" title="Peshawar Airbase" label="Peshawar Airbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="16676" end="16678" title="Officer commanding" label="OC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644280" start="16679" end="16705" title="8-Pass Charlie" label="Wing Commander Najeeb Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43512" start="16722" end="16724" title="K2" label="K2"/>
<link wikidata="Q153826" start="16738" end="16743" title="F-86F" label="F-86F"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922071" start="16823" end="16852" title="1971 War" label="hostilities broke out in 1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342822" start="16876" end="16889" title="West Pakistan" label="West Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="17214" end="17224" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="17250" end="17265" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q170199" start="17298" end="17309" title="Sukhoi Su-7" label="Sukhoi Su-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q150609" start="17315" end="17321" title="MiG-21" label="MiG-21"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17363" end="17376" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q814005" start="17436" end="17456" title="Beechcraft Queen Air" label="Beechcraft Queen Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q11208" start="17517" end="17525" title="The Pentagon" label="Pentagon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362" start="17787" end="17796" title="Islamabad" label="Islamabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972062" start="17834" end="17852" title="Washington Monthly" label="Washington Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q634227" start="17902" end="17912" title="Beechcraft" label="Beechcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="18048" end="18061" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184689" start="18149" end="18158" title="Uncle Sam" label="Uncle Sam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060581" start="18356" end="18377" title="Norton Air Force Base" label="Norton Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="18406" end="18422" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197185" start="18442" end="18457" title="The Right Stuff (film)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5652546" start="18515" end="18546" title="Happy Bottom Riding Club" label="&amp;quot;Pancho&amp;#x27;s Place&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q294583" start="18717" end="18728" title="Sam Shepard" label="Sam Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092" start="18886" end="18895" title="Star Trek" label="Star Trek"/>
<link wikidata="Q624824" start="18989" end="18998" title="formation flying" label="formation"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19096" end="19126" title="Star Trek: The Next Generation" label="Star Trek: The Next Generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734119" start="19147" end="19161" title="The First Duty" label="The First Duty"/>
<link wikidata="" start="19259" end="19280" title="Star Trek: Enterprise" label="Star Trek: Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q502314" start="19347" end="19358" title="Rick Berman" label="Rick Berman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101459" start="19410" end="19425" title="Jonathan Archer" label="Jonathan Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q51802" start="19475" end="19483" title="Han Solo" label="Han Solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="19548" end="19562" title="General Motors" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q288170" start="19576" end="19583" title="ACDelco" label="ACDelco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405028" start="19604" end="19620" title="automotive parts" label="automotive parts"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="19668" end="19686" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q173089" start="19687" end="19695" title="pace car" label="pace car"/>
<link wikidata="Q898838" start="19704" end="19740" title="1986 Indianapolis 500" label="70th running of the Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q930900" start="19745" end="19749" title="1988 Indianapolis 500" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018871" start="19828" end="19854" title="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme" label="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q105391289" start="19906" end="19923" title="Rogers Commission" label="Rogers Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q54382" start="19963" end="19999" title="Space Shuttle Challenger" label="Space Shuttle &amp;quot;Challenger&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q214932" start="20088" end="20104" title="flight simulator" label="flight simulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676053" start="20142" end="20185" title="Chuck Yeager&amp;#x27;s Advanced Flight Trainer" label="Chuck Yeager&amp;#x27;s Advanced Flight Trainer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089214" start="20264" end="20294" title="Chuck Yeager&amp;#x27;s Air Combat" label="Chuck Yeager&amp;#x27;s Air Combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746758" start="20656" end="20716" title="The Legend of Pancho Barnes and the Happy Bottom Riding Club" label="The Legend of Pancho Barnes and the Happy Bottom Riding Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q539376" start="20748" end="20761" title="Pancho Barnes" label="Pancho Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="20871" end="20881" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="21017" end="21028" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="F-15D Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="21081" end="21101" title="General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="F-16 Fighting Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907709" start="21113" end="21123" title="Bob Hoover" label="Bob Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q373557" start="21155" end="21164" title="aerobatic" label="aerobatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822643" start="21404" end="21421" title="Tony Jannus Award" label="Tony Jannus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="21583" end="21611" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q735912" start="21652" end="21673" title="Nellis Air Force Base" label="Nellis Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q488005" start="22125" end="22155" title="National Aviation Hall of Fame" label="National Aviation Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="22252" end="22283" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="22307" end="22320" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="22383" end="22397" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="22579" end="22590" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="22642" end="22653" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697697" start="23017" end="23044" title="Air &amp;amp; Space/Smithsonian" label="Air &amp;amp; Space/Smithsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379613" start="23182" end="23201" title="Marshall University" label="Marshall University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552692" start="23245" end="23271" title="Society of Yeager Scholars" label="Society of Yeager Scholars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384383" start="23309" end="23342" title="Experimental Aircraft Association" label="Experimental Aircraft Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058085" start="23356" end="23375" title="Young Eagles" label="Young Eagle Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q55614528" start="23486" end="23528" title="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame" label="International Air &amp;amp; Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010217" start="23555" end="23587" title="International Space Hall of Fame" label="International Space Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q381740" start="23622" end="23645" title="Aerospace Walk of Honor" label="Aerospace Walk of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875740" start="23669" end="23683" title="Yeager Airport" label="Yeager Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q44564" start="23687" end="23712" title="Charleston, West Virginia" label="Charleston, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446356" start="23741" end="23754" title="Interstate 64 in West Virginia" label="Interstate 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447373" start="23755" end="23768" title="Interstate 77 in West Virginia" label="Interstate 77"/>
<link wikidata="Q918867" start="23785" end="23798" title="Kanawha River" label="Kanawha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="23972" end="23985" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120301" start="24026" end="24036" title="Corridor G (Appalachian Development Highway System)" label="Corridor G"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120301" start="24046" end="24062" title="U.S. Route 119 in West Virginia" label="U.S. Highway 119"/>
<link wikidata="Q495151" start="24076" end="24090" title="Lincoln County, West Virginia" label="Lincoln County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569337" start="24222" end="24235" title="Wings of Hope (charity)" label="Wings of Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q2685" start="24266" end="24287" title="Arnold Schwarzenegger" label="Arnold Schwarzenegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q230654" start="24292" end="24305" title="Maria Shriver" label="Maria Shriver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020532" start="24347" end="24370" title="California Hall of Fame" label="California Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720978" start="24384" end="24405" title="The California Museum" label="The California Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="24482" end="24504" title="Sacramento, California" label="Sacramento, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577908" start="24512" end="24527" title="Flying Magazine" label="Flying Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q781210" start="24678" end="24694" title="Civil Air Patrol" label="Civil Air Patrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="24727" end="24731" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659178" start="24894" end="24907" title="Harmon Trophy" label="Harmon Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109489" start="24948" end="24962" title="Collier Trophy" label="Collier Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279027" start="24967" end="24980" title="Mackay Trophy" label="Mackay Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659178" start="25042" end="25055" title="Harmon Trophy" label="Harmon Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160955" start="25065" end="25091" title="Congressional Silver Medal" label="Congressional Silver Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q834337" start="25363" end="25387" title="Grass Valley, California" label="Grass Valley, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="25586" end="25600" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="25772" end="25777" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="25796" end="25813" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="25821" end="25825" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020373" start="26448" end="26474" title="California Court of Appeal" label="California Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066807" start="26590" end="26609" title="Northern California" label="Northern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974848" start="26657" end="26694" title="National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day" label="National Pearl Harbor Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="26766" end="26778" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q471043" start="27011" end="27030" title="History of aviation" label="History of aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12733267" start="27033" end="27059" title="List of firsts in aviation" label="List of firsts in aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q431363" start="27062" end="27097" title="Society of Experimental Test Pilots" label="Society of Experimental Test Pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q216195" start="27155" end="27165" title="Tom Wolfe" label="Wolfe, Tom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301814" start="27172" end="27187" title="The Right Stuff (book)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067003" start="27204" end="27224" title="Farrar, Straus and Giroux" label="Farrar-Straus-Giroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="27750" end="27781" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="28011" end="28029" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6186" wikidata="Q969579" url="?curid=6186" title="Cajun cuisine">
<text>Cajun cuisine ( , ) is a subset of Louisiana cooking developed by the Cajuns, itself a Louisianan development incorporating elements of Native American, West African, French, and Spanish cuisine.

Cajun cuisine is often referred to as a &quot;rustic&quot; cuisine, meaning that it is based on locally available ingredients and that preparation is simple. Cajuns historically cooked their dishes, gumbo for example, in one pot.

Crawfish, shrimp, and andouille sausage are staple meats used in a variety of dishes. The aromatic vegetables green bell pepper (), onion, and celery are called &quot;the trinity&quot; by chefs in Cajun and Louisiana Creole cuisines. Roughly diced and combined in cooking, the method is similar to the use of the &quot;mirepoix&quot; in traditional French cuisine which blends roughly diced carrot, onion, and celery. Additional characteristic aromatics for both the Creole and Cajun versions may include parsley, bay leaf, thyme, green onions, ground cayenne pepper, and ground black pepper. Cayenne and Louisiana-style hot sauce are the primary sources of spice in Cajun cuisine, which usually tends towards a moderate, well-balanced heat, despite the national &quot;Cajun hot&quot; craze of the 1980s and 1990s.

==History==

The Acadians were a group of French colonists who lived in Acadia, what is today Eastern Canada. In the mid-18th century, they were deported from Acadia by the British during the French and Indian War in what they termed &quot;le Grand Dérangement&quot;, and many of them ended up settling in southern Louisiana.
Due to the extreme change in climate from that of Acadia, Acadians were unable to cook their original dishes. Soon, their former culinary traditions were adapted and, in time, incorporated not only Native American traditions, but also African-American traditions—as is exemplified in the classic Cajun dish &quot;gumbo&quot;, which takes its name from the word for its principal ingredient, okra, in the West African Bambara language. In Louisiana, the Acadian settlers replaced the whole wheat bread they were accustomed to with cornbread, which by the beginning of the 19th century they were eating with cane syrup. Between 1790 and 1810 most Louisiana Acadians bought one to three enslaved black persons, many of whom who had come from the West Indies, from whom they learned the use of new ingredients, including okra, to incorporate in their cuisine. The ragu sauces that the Cajuns developed are very similar to sauces used in French West Africa, possibly introduced by enslaved cooks.

Many other meals developed along these lines, adapted in no small part from Haiti, to become what is now considered classic Cajun cuisine traditions (not to be confused with the more modern concept associated with Prudhomme&#x27;s style).

Up through the 20th century, the meals were not elaborate but instead, rather basic. The public&#x27;s false perception of &quot;Cajun&quot; cuisine was based on Prudhomme&#x27;s style of Cajun cooking, which was spicy, flavorful, and not true to the classic form of the cuisine.

Cajun and Creole cuisine have mistakenly been considered the same, but the origins of Creole cooking are in New Orleans, and Cajun cooking arose 40 years after its establishment. Today, most restaurants serve dishes that consist of Cajun styles, which Paul Prudhomme dubbed &quot;Louisiana cooking&quot;. In Cajun home-cooking, these individual styles are still kept separate. However, there are fewer and fewer people cooking the classic Cajun dishes that would have been eaten by the original settlers.

==Cultural aspects==
According to political scientist Kevin V. Mulcahy writing on cultural identity, Cajun cuisine today is different from that of the 19th and early 20th centuries, but still defines Cajun culture for many people within and outside Acadiana. Its heritage reflects French, Spanish, American Indian, German, and Afro-Caribbean influences. Cajun food is the result of this assimilation or &quot;cultural blending&quot;. Rural Cajun cuisine is distinct from the urban Creole cuisine, having arisen by economic necessity among the Acadian immmigrants who came to Louisiana in the 18th century. These settlers lived off the land and survived on foods they could obtain by hunting, fishing, ranching, foraging, or growing crops.

Although there is a large variety of dishes within the regions that make up Cajun country in Louisiana, rural Cajuns generally prefer strong dark roast coffee, highly seasoned foods, hot peppers, vegetables smothered in brown gravy, and one-pot dishes served with rice. Each region has its own specialties, such as &quot;andouille&quot; sausage on the west bank of the Mississippi River above New Orleans, formerly known as the German Coast; barbecued shrimp in Terrebonne Parish; tasso ham made from hog&#x27;s shoulder in the area around Opelousas; and crawfish all across the parishes of southern Louisiana, where they are abundant in the fresh water wetlands and waterways.

Many Cajun recipes are based on rice and the &quot;holy trinity&quot; of onions, celery, and green pepper, and use locally caught shell fish such as shrimp and crawfish. Much of Cajun cookery starts with a &quot;roux&quot; made of wheat flour cooked and slowly stirred with a fat such as oil, butter or lard, known especially as the base for étouffée, gumbo and sauce piquante. Cajun cooks in south Louisiana historically have cooked meals in single pots, and still cook meats by braising. Almost all Cajun households had gardens up until the latter years of the 20th century, and lifted regional culinary standards by adding the fresh vegetables they grew to their dishes.

There was continuity in cuisines between the southern Bayou Teche area and the northern boundary of Cajun country in Avoyelles Parish. Fresh sausage, pork, and the use of salt and pepper as the main seasonings were universal in the region&#x27;s foodway traditions, north and south. The role of seafood in the cuisine of the southern parishes distinguished it from that of the prairies, where more wild game was consumed instead.

Anthropologist Charlotte Paige Gutierrez has written extensively on Louisiana&#x27;s traditional foodways. She writes: &quot;The term foodways, as it is now used by writers in various disciplines, has a broad definition. The study of foodways may include the production, distribution, preparation, preservation, serving, and eating of food, as well as the social, symbolic, psychological, and behavioral aspects of food.&quot; Modern conveniences influenced Louisiana&#x27;s culinary traditions: with the introduction of electricity and refrigerators, consuming freshly butchered meat immediately was not imperative as in the past, thus community events such as hog-killings (&quot;boucheries&quot;) occurred less frequently. Improved transportation and increased incomes made food stores more accessible and buying produce became more affordable for working families. Cajuns now bought their bread at a grocery store rather than baking their own. According to Gutierrez, when the economy of southern Louisiana boomed with the expansion of oil industry operations in the 1970s, Cajuns gained a renewed pride in their ethnicity.

Only those Cajuns who live near the coast are able to regularly harvest seafood such as crabs, oysters, shrimp, and saltwater fish directly from their habitats. Shrimping, crabbing, fishing, frog-gigging, and gardening have been practiced in Terrebonne and Lafourche Parishes as subsistence and commercial pursuits for many generations. Before the introduction of modern transportation and refrigeration, Cajuns who lived in the southwestern prairie parishes away from the coast had little opportunity to incorporate seafood into their diets. Today, fresh seafood is available all across Acadiana, so that now it is regarded as a regional food rather than one available only to coastal residents.

The cooking traditions of the western prairies and those of the Bayou country in southeastern Louisiana overlap in the lower and middle Bayou Teche region. The complicated network of lakes, streams, bayous, and the flood plains with their rich soil characterize the terrain of Iberia, St. Martin, and St. Mary parishes. The traditional cuisine uses those resources available in the area: pork from hog farms on the plains and seafood from the lowlands.

Seasoning practices in the Teche country occupy a middle place between the salt and black pepper-based approach to spices in the Bayou country and the prevalent use of cayenne pepper in the Cajun prairies. People along the lower and middle Teche use cayenne more often than in the Laforche area. Hot pepper sauce has a more dominant role in the Teche country cuisine than in other Cajun regions.

In the upper Teche region, wild game, freshwater fish, and pork are important in the local diet, with rabbit, duck, and venison being eaten more often than among their neighbors to southward. Avoyelles Parish, along the northern edge of Cajun country where cultural influences converge, shares some of these dietary features, although local cooking traditions are somewhat different than in the Teche country. Natives of the parish make fresh sausage, but cling to certain European customs, notably the preparation of &quot;cochon de lait róti&quot;, or roasted suckling pig. After the young pigs are slaughtered, they are suspended vertically by a rope tied to a tree limb and hang over a hardwood fire. For even cooking of the pig, it is rotated with a stick. Halfway through the roasting, the carcass is turned end for end to assure even heating of the meat. Local cooks have constructed improvised rotisseries, some fitting theirs with small motors for mechanized rotation.

The upper prairie, historically an area of small farms, ranches, and rice fields, has its own distinctive cuisine, well known for its smoked meats and &quot;boudin blanc&quot;, white sausage made of pork, rice, and seasonings. Local hardwoods such as oak, pecan, and hickory are used to smoke sausages and tasso. Smoked meats are comparatively rare, however, in other Cajun communities.

==Cajun cooking methods==
* Barbecuing—similar to &quot;low and slow&quot; Southern barbecue traditions, but with Creole/Cajun seasoning. A classic example is Johnson&#x27;s Boucaniere (&quot;smokehouse&quot;) in Lafayette, which was named best barbecue in Louisiana by the Food Network in July 2022. In the Ville Platte area, a unique sauce is made from dried onions reconstituted in water and vegetable oil thick with ketchup, mustard, Worcestershire sauce, and seasonings. The flavorful oil that rises to the top is applied directly to meats being cooked as a baste. Two popular brands are Jack Miller&#x27;s and Pig Stand, which are available online and in grocery stores across the state. This sauce is also commonly used on hamburgers, hot dogs, pork chops, chicken, and other grilled items.
* Baking—direct and indirect dry heat in a furnace or oven, faster than smoking but slower than grilling
* Grilling—direct heat on a shallow surface, fastest of all variants; sub-variants include:
** Charbroiling—direct dry heat on a solid surface with wide raised ridges
** Gridironing—direct dry heat on a solid or hollow surface with narrow raised ridges
** Griddling—direct dry or moist heat along with the use of oils and butter on a flat surface
* Braising—combining a direct dry heat charbroil-grill or gridiron-grill with a pot filled with broth for direct moist heat, faster than smoking but slower than regular grilling and baking; time starts fast, slows down, then speeds up again to finish
* Boiling—as in boiling of blue crabs, crawfish, or shrimp, in seasoned liquid, often with side items like corn on the cob, whole new potatoes, and mushrooms cooked in the same boiling pot. A seafood boil is often a large outdoor social event.
* Deep frying—lightly breaded and fried seafood including various fish, shrimp, oysters, and soft-shell crab is universally popular in Cajun cuisine, often on French bread po-boys in the New Orleans style, along with traditional Southern favorites like fried chicken, fried okra, and pork chops.
* Smothering—cooking a vegetable or meat over low heat with the sauteed &quot;trinity,&quot; plus small amounts of water or stock, similar to braising. This forms a pan sauce or gravy, and the finished product is served over rice. &quot;Étouffée&quot; is a popular variant done with crawfish or shrimp. A meatless version might feature mushrooms and eggplant. Two commonly smothered meats are pork chops and round steak]; these heartier meats may sometimes have a bit of roux added to the gravy.
* Pan-broiling or pan-frying
* Injecting—using a large syringe-type setup to place seasoning deep inside large cuts of meat; this technique is much newer than the others on this list, but very common in Cajun cuisine
* Stewing, also known as ; a whole chicken cut into pieces is a popular choice for this method, particularly an older hen.

Deep frying of turkeys or oven-roasted turduckens entered southern Louisiana cuisine more recently. Also, blackening of fish or chicken and barbecuing of shrimp in the shell are excluded because they were not prepared in traditional Cajun cuisine. Blackening was actually an invention by chef Paul Prudhomme in the 1970s, becoming associated with Cajun cooking, and presented as such by him, but is not a true historical or traditional Cajun cooking process.

==Ingredients==
In the late 18th century, about the same time that Acadian musicians embraced the Spanish guitar, spices from the Iberian Peninsula were adopted in the Acadian cuisine. With the cross-cultural borrowing that took place between them and their neighbors in southern Louisiana, Acadians were eating African okra and American Indian corn by the time of the Louisiana Purchase (1803) in such dishes as &quot;gumbo&quot;, &quot;pain de maïs&quot;, and &quot;soupe de maïs&quot;, which did not closely resemble the African and Indian versions.

The following is a partial list of ingredients used in Cajun cuisine and some of the staple ingredients of the Acadian food culture.

===Meat and seafood===
Cajun foodways include many ways of preserving meat, some of which are waning due to the availability of refrigeration and mass-produced meat at the grocer. Smoking of meats remains a fairly common practice, but once-common preparations such as turkey or duck confit (preserved in poultry fat, with spices) are now seen even by Acadians as quaint rarities.

Game (and hunting) are still uniformly popular in Acadiana.

The recent increase of catfish farming in the Mississippi Delta has brought about an increase in its usage in Cajun cuisine in place of the more traditional wild-caught speckled trout.

* &quot;Andouille&quot;—a spicy smoked pork sausage, characterized by a coarse-ground texture and large-diameter casing.
* &quot;Boudin&quot;—a cooked sausage made with green onions, pork, and rice, and usually a large amount of ground pork or chicken livers. Boudin may be thought of as &quot;dirty rice in a casing.&quot; Some locals prefer to eat the sausage with the casing on, while others squeeze the contents out. Boudin filling is completely cooked before being stuffed into casings and may be consumed immediately after purchase, although it is also popularly grilled at cookouts. Pork blood is sometimes added to produce &quot;boudin rouge&quot;. Other versions can contain seafood, such as crawfish.
* &quot;Chaurice&quot;, a sausage similar to Spanish &quot;chorizo&quot;
* &quot;Chaudin&quot; or &quot;ponce&quot;—a pig&#x27;s stomach, stuffed with spiced pork &amp; smoked.
* Ham hocks
* Wild boar or feral hog
* Head cheese
* Gratons—hog cracklings or pork rinds; fried, seasoned pork fat &amp; skin, sometimes with small bits of meat attached. Similar to Spanish &quot;chicharrones&quot;.
* New Orleans hot sausage—a spiced pork or beef sausage characterized by a reddish color.
* Pork sausage (fresh)—distinctively seasoned and usually smoked, this sausage is often used in gumbos as is andouille, but it may also be grilled or pan-cooked to produce a rice and gravy dish. The sausage itself does not include rice, separating it from &quot;boudin&quot;. In Cajun country, a distinction exists between this sausage, which is simply called &quot;pork sausage,&quot; is finer ground, and uses smaller pork casings, and the similar andouille, which has a coarser grind and larger beef casings.
* Salt pork
* Tasso—a highly seasoned, smoked pork shoulder

Beef and dairy&lt;br&gt;
Though parts of Acadiana are well suited to cattle or dairy farming, beef is not often used in a pre-processed or uniquely Cajun form. It is usually prepared fairly simply as chops, stews, or steaks, taking a cue from Texas to the west. Ground beef is used as is traditional throughout the US, although seasoned differently.

Dairy farming is not as prevalent as in the past, but there are still some farms in the business. There are no unique dairy items prepared in Cajun cuisine. Traditional Cajun and New Orleans Creole-influenced desserts are common.

===Seasonings===
* Onion (bell pepper, onion, and celery used together are known as the &quot;holy trinity&quot; of Cajun cuisine)

Thyme, sage, mint, marjoram, savory, and basil are considered sweet herbs. In colonial times a herbes de Provence would be several sweet herbs tied up in a muslin.

====Blended====
* &quot;Creole/Cajun spice&quot; blends such as Tony Chachere&#x27;s are sometimes used in Cajun kitchens, but do not suit every cook&#x27;s style because Creole- and Cajun-style seasoning is often achieved from scratch, even by taste.
:Cajun seasonings consist of a blend of salt with a variety of spices, most common being cayenne pepper and garlic. The spicy heat comes from the cayenne pepper, while other flavors come from bell pepper, paprika, green onions, parsley and more.

===Cooking bases===
* Dark roux—Cajuns inherited roux from the French. However, unlike the French, theirs is made with oil or bacon fat and more lately with olive oil, and not normally with butter. It is used as a thickening agent, especially in gumbo and &quot;étouffée&quot;.
:Preparation of a dark roux is probably the most involved or complicated procedure in Cajun cuisine, involving heating fat and flour very carefully, constantly stirring for about 15–45 minutes (depending on the color of the desired product), until the mixture has darkened in color and developed a nutty flavor. The temperature should not be too high, as a burnt roux renders a dish unpalatable.
* Light roux—The secret to making a good gumbo is pairing the roux with the protein. A dark roux, with its strong (dense) nutty flavor will completely overpower a simple seafood gumbo, but is the perfect complement to a gumbo using chicken, sausage, crawfish or alligator.
:A light roux, on the other hand, is better suited for strictly seafood dishes and unsuitable for meat gumbos for the reason that it does not support the heavier meat flavor as well. Pairing roux with protein follows the same orthodox philosophy as pairing wine with protein.
* Stocks: Cajun stocks are more heavily seasoned than Continental counterparts, and the shellfish stock sometimes made with shrimp and crawfish heads is unique to Cajun cuisine.

==Cajun dishes==
===Primary favorites===

Boudin—a type of sausage made from pork, pork liver, rice, garlic, green onions and other spices. It is widely available by the link or pound from butcher shops. &quot;Boudin&quot; is typically stuffed in a natural casing and has a softer consistency than other, better-known sausage varieties. It is usually served with side dishes such as rice dressing, &quot;maque choux&quot; or bread. &quot;Boudin&quot; balls are commonly served in southern Louisiana restaurants and are made by taking the &quot;boudin&quot; out of the case and frying it in spherical form.

Gumbo—High on the list of favorites of Cajun cooking are the soups called gumbos. Contrary to non-Cajun or Continental beliefs, gumbo does not mean simply &quot;everything in the pot&quot;. Gumbo exemplifies the influence of French, Spanish, African and Native American food cultures on Cajun cuisine.

The origins of the word &quot;gumbo&quot; are in West Africa. Kellersberger Vass lists &quot;kingumbo&quot; and &quot;tshingombo&quot; as the Bantu words for okra, while John Laudon of the University of Louisiana says the word &quot;gombo&quot; is a French word that came to the Western Hemisphere from West Africa, where okra was known as &quot;(ki) ngombo&quot; along much of the region&#x27;s coast.

Both filé and okra can be used as thickening agents in gumbo. Historically, large amounts of filé were added directly to the pot when okra was out of season. While a distinction between filé gumbo and okra gumbo is still held by some, many people enjoy putting filé in okra gumbo simply as a flavoring. Regardless of which is the dominant thickener, filé is also provided at the table and added to taste.

Many claim that gumbo is a Cajun dish, but gumbo was established long before the Acadian arrival.

Its early existence came via the early French Creole culture in New Orleans, Louisiana, where French, Spanish and Africans frequented and also influenced by later waves of Italian, German and Irish settlers.

The backbone of a gumbo is roux, as described above. Cajun gumbo typically favors darker roux, often approaching the color of chocolate or coffee beans. Since the starches in the flour break down more with longer cooking time, a dark roux has less thickening power than a lighter one. While the stovetop method is traditional, flour may also be dry-toasted in an oven for a fat-free roux, or a regular roux may be prepared in a microwave oven for a hands-off method. If the roux is for immediate use, the &quot;trinity&quot; may be sauteed in it, which stops the cooking process.

A classic gumbo is made with chicken and andouille, especially in the colder months, but the ingredients vary according to what is available. Seafood gumbos are also very popular in Cajun country.

Jambalaya—The only certain thing that can be said about jambalaya is that it contains rice, some sort of meat (often chicken, ham, sausage, or a combination), seafood (such as shrimp or crawfish), plus other items that may be available. Usually, it will include green peppers, onions, celery, tomatoes and hot chili peppers. This is also a great pre-Acadian dish, established by the Spanish in Louisiana. Jambalaya may be a tomato-rich New Orleans-style &quot;red&quot; jambalaya of Spanish Creole roots, or a Cajun-style &quot;brown&quot; jambalaya which draws its color and flavor from browned meat and caramelized onions. Historically, tomatoes were not as widely available in Acadiana as the area around New Orleans, but in modern times, both styles are popular across the state. Brown is the style served at the annual World Jambalaya Festival in Gonzales.

Rice and gravy—Rice and gravy dishes are a staple of Cajun cuisine and is usually a brown gravy based on pan drippings, which are deglazed and simmered with extra seasonings and served over steamed or boiled rice.

The dish is traditionally made from cheaper cuts of meat and cooked in a cast-iron pot, typically for an extended time period to let the tough cuts of meat become tender. Beef, pork, chicken or any of a large variety of game meats are used for its preparation. Popular local varieties include hamburger steak, smothered rabbit, turkey necks, and chicken fricassee.

===Food as an event===

====Crawfish boil====

The crawfish boil is a celebratory event where Cajuns boil crawfish, potatoes, onions and corn in large pots over propane cookers. Lemons and small muslin bags containing a mixture of bay leaves, mustard seeds, cayenne pepper, and other spices, commonly known as &quot;crab boil&quot; or &quot;crawfish boil&quot; are added to the water for seasoning.

The results are then dumped onto large, newspaper-draped tables and in some areas covered in Creole/Cajun spice blends, such as REX, Zatarain&#x27;s, Louisiana Fish Fry, or Tony Chachere&#x27;s. Also, cocktail sauce, mayonnaise, and hot sauce are sometimes used. The seafood is scooped onto large trays or plates and eaten by hand.

During times when crawfish are not abundant, shrimp and crabs are prepared and served in the same manner.

Attendees are encouraged to &quot;suck the head&quot; of a crawfish by separating the head from the abdomen of the crustacean and sucking out the fat and juices from the head.

Often, newcomers to the crawfish boil or those unfamiliar with the traditions are jokingly warned &quot;not to eat the dead ones.&quot; This comes from the common belief that when live crawfish are boiled, their tails curl beneath themselves, but when dead crawfish are boiled, their tails are straight and limp.
Seafood boils with crabs and shrimp are also popular.

====Family ====

The traditional Cajun outdoor food event is hosted by a farmer in the rural areas of Acadiana. Family and friends of the farmer gather to socialize, play games, dance, drink, and have a copious meal consisting of hog and other dishes. Men have the task of slaughtering a hog, cutting it into usable parts, and cooking the main pork dishes while women have the task of making boudin.
Similar to a family , the is a food event that revolves around pork but does not need to be hosted by a farmer. Traditionally, a suckling pig was purchased for the event, but in modern , adult pigs are used.

Unlike the family , a hog is not butchered by the hosts and there are generally not as many guests or activities. The host and male guests have the task of roasting the pig (see pig roast) while female guests bring side dishes.

====Rural Mardi Gras====
The traditional Cajun Mardi Gras (see: &quot;Courir de Mardi Gras&quot;) is a Mardi Gras celebration in rural Cajun Parishes. The tradition originated in the 18th century with the Cajuns of Louisiana, but it was abandoned in the early 20th century because of unwelcome violence associated with the event. In the early 1950s the tradition was revived in Mamou in Evangeline Parish.

The event revolves around male maskers on horseback who ride into the countryside to collect food ingredients for the party later on. They entertain householders with Cajun music, dancing, and festive antics in return for the ingredients. The preferred ingredient is fresh chicken: the householder throws a live chicken to the maskers, allowing them to chase it down (symbolizing a hunt); other ingredients include rice, sausage, vegetables, or a frozen chicken if a live one is not available.

Unlike other Cajun events, men take no part in cooking the main course for the party, and women prepare the chicken and ingredients for the gumbo. Once the festivities begin, the Cajun community members eat and dance to Cajun music until midnight after which is the beginning of Lent.

==List of Cajun-influenced chefs==
* Frank Joseph Davis
* John Folse
* Emeril Lagasse
* Paul Prudhomme
* Justin Wilson

== See also ==
* Cuisine of New Orleans
* Cuisine of the United States
* List of festivals in Louisiana
* Louisiana Creole cuisine
* Acadian cuisine

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q969579" start="0" end="13" title="Cajun cuisine" label="Cajun cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="35" end="52" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Louisiana cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q686949" start="70" end="76" title="Cajuns" label="Cajuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492088" start="136" end="151" title="Indigenous cuisine of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q4412" start="153" end="165" title="West African" label="West African"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="167" end="173" title="French cuisine" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q622512" start="179" end="186" title="Spanish cuisine" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674120" start="293" end="322" title="local food" label="locally available ingredients"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790289" start="428" end="436" title="Crayfish as food" label="Crawfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504001" start="438" end="444" title="Shrimp and prawn as food" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q492769" start="450" end="459" title="andouille" label="andouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548030" start="538" end="555" title="green bell pepper" label="green bell pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q23012379" start="571" end="577" title="celery" label="celery"/>
<link wikidata="Q855494" start="595" end="606" title="Holy trinity (cuisine)" label="the trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="635" end="659" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Louisiana Creole cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509725" start="747" end="755" title="Mirepoix (cuisine)" label="mirepoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661" start="777" end="791" title="French cuisine" label="French cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q498640" start="895" end="901" title="Creole peoples" label="Creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q25284" start="933" end="940" title="parsley" label="parsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370943" start="942" end="950" title="bay leaf" label="bay leaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="952" end="957" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="959" end="971" title="scallion" label="green onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598" start="980" end="994" title="cayenne pepper" label="cayenne pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q43084" start="1007" end="1019" title="black pepper" label="black pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q522171" start="1049" end="1058" title="hot sauce" label="hot sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="1261" end="1269" title="Acadians" label="Acadians"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="1417" end="1424" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="1436" end="1457" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723587" start="1478" end="1510" title="Expulsion of the Acadians" label="&amp;quot;le Grand Dérangement&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160522" start="1883" end="1888" title="gumbo" label="gumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80531" start="1961" end="1965" title="okra" label="okra"/>
<link wikidata="Q33243" start="1987" end="2003" title="Bambara language" label="Bambara language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108866" start="2100" end="2109" title="cornbread" label="cornbread"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2176" end="2186" title="Sugarcane#Ribbon cane syrup" label="cane syrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377468" start="2777" end="2786" title="Paul Prudhomme" label="Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377468" start="3336" end="3350" title="Paul Prudhomme" label="Paul Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397679" start="3644" end="3660" title="Kevin V. Mulcahy" label="Kevin V. Mulcahy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="4071" end="4085" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Creole cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426376" start="4758" end="4770" title="German Coast" label="German Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q387555" start="4792" end="4809" title="Terrebonne Parish" label="Terrebonne Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687656" start="4811" end="4820" title="tasso ham" label="tasso ham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420447" start="4831" end="4850" title="Boston butt" label="hog&amp;#x27;s shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154039" start="4870" end="4879" title="Opelousas" label="Opelousas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501235" start="5139" end="5149" title="shell fish" label="shell fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642869" start="5351" end="5359" title="étouffée" label="étouffée"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="5489" end="5497" title="braising" label="braising"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892312" start="5738" end="5749" title="Bayou Teche" label="Bayou Teche"/>
<link wikidata="Q504435" start="5801" end="5817" title="Avoyelles Parish, Louisiana" label="Avoyelles Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465576" start="6212" end="6220" title="foodways" label="foodways"/>
<link wikidata="Q504415" start="8219" end="8225" title="Iberia Parish, Louisiana" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q512868" start="8227" end="8237" title="St. Martin Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q507088" start="8243" end="8251" title="St. Mary Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598" start="8564" end="8578" title="cayenne pepper" label="cayenne pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968828" start="8677" end="8685" title="Lafourche Crossing, Louisiana" label="Laforche"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8692" end="8708" title="Hot sauce#Louisiana-style" label="Hot pepper sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q504435" start="8985" end="9001" title="Avoyelles Parish" label="Avoyelles Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015" start="9317" end="9336" title="cochon de lait" label="cochon de lait róti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282505" start="9394" end="9405" title="Animal slaughter" label="slaughtered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9929" end="9941" title="Boudin#Types" label="boudin blanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q461696" start="10188" end="10198" title="Barbecuing" label="Barbecuing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437350" start="10210" end="10234" title="Low-temperature cooking" label="&amp;quot;low and slow&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q128891" start="10373" end="10382" title="Lafayette, Louisiana" label="Lafayette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2619346" start="10468" end="10480" title="Ville Platte, Louisiana" label="Ville Platte"/>
<link wikidata="Q178143" start="10580" end="10587" title="ketchup" label="ketchup"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="10589" end="10596" title="Mustard (condiment)" label="mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q842618" start="10598" end="10618" title="Worcestershire sauce" label="Worcestershire sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q193713" start="11030" end="11037" title="Smoking (cooking)" label="smoking"/>
<link wikidata="Q390409" start="11233" end="11244" title="Gridiron (cooking)" label="Gridironing"/>
<link wikidata="Q784148" start="11412" end="11420" title="Braising" label="Braising"/>
<link wikidata="Q844839" start="11688" end="11698" title="Callinectes sapidus" label="blue crabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440363" start="11853" end="11865" title="seafood boil" label="seafood boil"/>
<link wikidata="Q208172" start="12064" end="12076" title="Baguette" label="French bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992018" start="12077" end="12083" title="po-boy" label="po-boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059288" start="12092" end="12109" title="New Orleans cuisine" label="New Orleans style"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546501" start="12203" end="12213" title="Smothering (food)" label="Smothering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642869" start="12438" end="12446" title="Étouffée" label="Étouffée"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12728" end="12737" title="Syringe#Cooking" label="Injecting"/>
<link wikidata="Q273318" start="12752" end="12759" title="syringe" label="syringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q534023" start="13077" end="13086" title="turducken" label="turducken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922798" start="13144" end="13154" title="Blackening (cooking)" label="blackening"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377468" start="13331" end="13345" title="Paul Prudhomme" label="Paul Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="13628" end="13645" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q193155" start="13867" end="13885" title="Louisiana Purchase" label="Louisiana Purchase"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="14137" end="14155" title="Staple food" label="staple ingredients"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465576" start="14215" end="14223" title="foodways" label="foodways"/>
<link wikidata="Q215768" start="14332" end="14345" title="Mass production" label="mass-produced"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992515" start="14464" end="14475" title="duck confit" label="duck confit"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="14651" end="14658" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782656" start="14659" end="14666" title="Aquaculture of catfish" label="farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426203" start="14674" end="14691" title="Mississippi Delta" label="Mississippi Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751557" start="14797" end="14811" title="Cynoscion nebulosus" label="speckled trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q492769" start="14822" end="14831" title="Andouille" label="Andouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475519" start="14943" end="14949" title="Boudin" label="Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23374" start="15584" end="15591" title="chorizo" label="chorizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961551" start="15606" end="15613" title="Chaudin" label="Chaudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q153976" start="15704" end="15712" title="Ham hock" label="Ham hock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4675762" start="15741" end="15752" title="Head cheese" label="Head cheese"/>
<link wikidata="Q11554312" start="15755" end="15762" title="Cracklings" label="Gratons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667736" start="15899" end="15911" title="Chicharrón" label="chicharrones"/>
<link wikidata="Q118783723" start="15921" end="15944" title="New Orleans hot sausage" label="New Orleans hot sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7406005" start="16523" end="16532" title="Salt pork" label="Salt pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7687656" start="16535" end="16540" title="Tasso ham" label="Tasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q14096331" start="16661" end="16674" title="dairy farming" label="dairy farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q913548" start="17391" end="17409" title="herbes de Provence" label="herbes de Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q725457" start="17452" end="17458" title="muslin" label="muslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822047" start="17525" end="17545" title="Tony Chachere&amp;#x27;s" label="Tony Chachere&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q746427" start="17987" end="17991" title="roux" label="roux"/>
<link wikidata="Q11106" start="18086" end="18091" title="bacon" label="bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="18117" end="18126" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642869" start="18222" end="18230" title="étouffée" label="étouffée"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075310" start="19185" end="19191" title="Stock (food)" label="Stocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475519" start="19404" end="19410" title="Boudin" label="Boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131419" start="19421" end="19428" title="sausage" label="sausage"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="19471" end="19483" title="scallion" label="green onions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372144" start="19611" end="19625" title="Casing (sausage)" label="natural casing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6754314" start="19766" end="19777" title="maque choux" label="maque choux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160522" start="20043" end="20048" title="gumbo" label="gumbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q49297" start="20223" end="20243" title="Native American cuisine" label="Native American food"/>
<link wikidata="Q33146" start="20414" end="20419" title="Bantu languages" label="Bantu"/>
<link wikidata="Q127956" start="21818" end="21832" title="microwave oven" label="microwave oven"/>
<link wikidata="Q864693" start="22000" end="22007" title="Chicken (food)" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q492769" start="22012" end="22021" title="andouille" label="andouille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364509" start="22225" end="22234" title="jambalaya" label="jambalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139514" start="23021" end="23029" title="Gonzales, Louisiana" label="Gonzales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323064" start="23047" end="23061" title="Rice and gravy" label="Rice and gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q736427" start="23075" end="23081" title="Staple food" label="staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q945934" start="23116" end="23127" title="brown gravy" label="brown gravy"/>
<link wikidata="Q322444" start="23162" end="23170" title="Deglazing (cooking)" label="deglazed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294507" start="23320" end="23333" title="cast iron cookware" label="cast-iron pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983167" start="23540" end="23555" title="hamburger steak" label="hamburger steak"/>
<link wikidata="Q791790" start="23593" end="23610" title="Fricassee" label="chicken fricassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440363" start="23664" end="23677" title="seafood boil" label="crawfish boil"/>
<link wikidata="Q8067113" start="24146" end="24161" title="Zatarain&amp;#x27;s" label="Zatarain&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105371" start="24214" end="24228" title="cocktail sauce" label="cocktail sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q522171" start="24246" end="24255" title="hot sauce" label="hot sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="24568" end="24578" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q13475519" start="25390" end="25396" title="boudin" label="boudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015" start="25527" end="25539" title="suckling pig" label="suckling pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193247" start="25785" end="25794" title="pig roast" label="pig roast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178148" start="25906" end="25926" title="Courir de Mardi Gras" label="Courir de Mardi Gras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858534" start="26214" end="26219" title="Mamou, Louisiana" label="Mamou"/>
<link wikidata="Q504379" start="26223" end="26240" title="Evangeline Parish" label="Evangeline Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="27017" end="27021" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q17579843" start="27061" end="27079" title="Frank Joseph Davis" label="Frank Joseph Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233562" start="27082" end="27092" title="John Folse" label="John Folse"/>
<link wikidata="Q339838" start="27095" end="27109" title="Emeril Lagasse" label="Emeril Lagasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377468" start="27112" end="27126" title="Paul Prudhomme" label="Paul Prudhomme"/>
<link wikidata="Q6318281" start="27129" end="27142" title="Justin Wilson (chef)" label="Justin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22059288" start="27161" end="27183" title="Cuisine of New Orleans" label="Cuisine of New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q40578" start="27186" end="27214" title="Cuisine of the United States" label="Cuisine of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619484" start="27217" end="27247" title="List of festivals in Louisiana" label="List of festivals in Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645076" start="27250" end="27274" title="Louisiana Creole cuisine" label="Louisiana Creole cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006862" start="27277" end="27292" title="Acadian cuisine" label="Acadian cuisine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6187" wikidata="Q365" url="?curid=6187" title="Cologne">
<text>Cologne ( ; ; ) is the largest city of the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia and the fourth-most populous city of Germany with nearly 1.1 million inhabitants in the city proper and over 3.1 million people in the Cologne Bonn urban region. Cologne is also part of the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region, the second biggest metropolitan region by GDP in the European Union. Centered on the left (west) bank of the Rhine, Cologne is located on the River Rhine (Lower Rhine), about southeast of the North Rhine-Westphalia state capital Düsseldorf and northwest of Bonn, the former capital of West Germany.

The city&#x27;s medieval Cologne Cathedral () was the world&#x27;s tallest building 1880–1890 and is today the third-tallest church and tallest cathedral in the world. It was constructed to house the Shrine of the Three Kings and is a globally recognized landmark and one of the most visited sights and pilgrimage destinations in Europe. The cityscape is further shaped by the Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne. Cologne is famous for Eau de Cologne, which has been produced in the city since 1709; &quot;cologne&quot; has since come to be a generic term.

Cologne was founded and established in Germanic Ubii territory in the 1st century CE as the Roman , hence its name. was later dropped (except in Latin), and became the name of the city in its own right, which developed into modern German as . , the French version of the city&#x27;s name, has become standard in English as well. Cologne functioned as the capital of the Roman province of and as the headquarters of the Roman military in the region until occupied by the Franks in 462. During the Middle Ages the city flourished as being located on one of the most important major trade routes between east and western Europe (including the Brabant Road, Via Regia and Publica). Cologne was a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Empire and one of the major members of the trade union Hanseatic League. It was one of the largest European cities in medieval and renaissance times.

Prior to World War II, the city had undergone occupations by the French (1794–1815) and the British (1918–1926), and was part of Prussia beginning in 1815. Cologne was one of the most heavily bombed cities in Germany during World War II. The bombing reduced the population by 93% mainly due to evacuation, and destroyed around 80% of the millennia-old city center. The post-war rebuilding has resulted in a mixed cityscape, restoring most major historic landmarks like city gates and churches (31 of them being Romanesque). The city nowadays consists of around 25% pre World War II buildings and boasts around 9,000 historic buildings.

Cologne is a major cultural center for the Rhineland; it hosts more than 30 museums and hundreds of galleries. There are many institutions of higher education, most notably the University of Cologne, one of Europe&#x27;s oldest and largest universities; the Technical University of Cologne, Germany&#x27;s largest university of applied sciences; and the German Sport University Cologne. It hosts three Max Planck science institutes and is a major research hub for the aerospace industry, with the German Aerospace Center and the European Astronaut Centre headquarters. Lufthansa, Europe&#x27;s largest airline, have their main corporate headquarters in Cologne. It also has a significant chemical and automobile industry. Cologne Bonn Airport is a regional hub, the main airport for the region being Düsseldorf Airport. The Cologne Trade Fair hosts a number of trade shows.

==History==

===Roman Cologne===
The first urban settlement on the grounds of modern-day Cologne was &quot;Oppidum Ubiorum&quot;, founded in 38 BCE by the Ubii, a Cisrhenian Germanic tribe. In 50 CE, the Romans founded Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium (Cologne) on the river Rhine, a colonia which was named after Emperor Claudius and his wife, who was born here, Agrippina the Younger. In 85 CE the city became the provincial capital of Germania Inferior. It was also known as . Considerable Roman remains can be found in present-day Cologne, especially near the wharf area, where a 1,900-year-old Roman boat was discovered in late 2007. From 260 to 271, Cologne was the capital of the Gallic Empire under Postumus, Marius, and Victorinus. In 310, under emperor Constantine I, a bridge was built over the Rhine at Cologne. Roman imperial governors resided in the city and it became one of the most important trade and production centers in the Roman Empire north of the Alps. Cologne is shown on the 4th century Peutinger Map.

Maternus, who was elected as bishop in 313, was the first known bishop of Cologne. The city was the capital of a Roman province until it was occupied by the Ripuarian Franks in 462. Parts of the original Roman sewers are preserved underneath the city, with the new sewerage system having opened in 1890.

After the destruction of the Second Temple in the Siege of Jerusalem and the associated dispersion (diaspora) of the Jews, there is evidence of a Jewish community in Cologne. In 321 CE, Emperor Constantine approved the settlement of a Jewish community with all the freedoms of Roman citizens. It is assumed that it was located near the Marspforte within the city wall. The Edict of Constantine to the Jews is the oldest documented evidence in Germany.

===Middle Ages===
Early medieval Cologne was part of Austrasia within the Frankish Empire. Cunibert, made bishop of Cologne in 623, was an important advisor to the Merovingian King Dagobert I and served with domesticus Pepin of Landen as tutor to the king&#x27;s son and heir Siegebert III, the future king of Austrasia. In 716, Charles Martel commanded an army for the first time and suffered the only defeat of his life when Chilperic II, King of Neustria, invaded Austrasia and the city fell to him in the Battle of Cologne. Charles fled to the Eifel mountains, rallied supporters and took the city back that same year after defeating Chilperic in the Battle of Amblève. Cologne had been the seat of a bishop since the Roman period; under Charlemagne, in 795, bishop Hildebold was promoted to archbishop. In the 843 Treaty of Verdun Cologne fell into the dominion of Lothair I&#x27;s Middle Francia – later called Lotharingia (Lower Lorraine).

In 953, the archbishops of Cologne first gained noteworthy secular power when bishop Bruno was appointed as duke by his brother Otto I, King of Germany. In order to weaken the secular nobility, who threatened his power, Otto endowed Bruno and his archiepiscopal successors with the prerogatives of secular princes, thus establishing the Electorate of Cologne, formed by the temporal possessions of the archbishopric and included in the end a strip of territory along the left Bank of the Rhine east of Jülich, as well as the Duchy of Westphalia on the other side of the Rhine, beyond Berg and Mark. By the end of the 12th century, the Archbishop of Cologne was one of the seven electors of the Holy Roman Emperor. Besides being prince elector, he was Archchancellor of Italy as well, technically from 1238 and permanently from 1263 until 1803.

Following the Battle of Worringen in 1288, Cologne gained its independence from the archbishops and became a Free City. Archbishop Sigfried II von Westerburg was forced to reside in Bonn. The archbishop nevertheless preserved the right of capital punishment. Thus the municipal council (though in strict political opposition towards the archbishop) depended upon him in all matters concerning criminal justice. This included torture, the sentence for which was only allowed to be handed down by the episcopal judge known as the greve. This legal situation lasted until the French conquest of Cologne.

Besides its economic and political significance Cologne also became an important centre of medieval pilgrimage, when Cologne&#x27;s archbishop, Rainald of Dassel, gave the relics of the Three Wise Men to Cologne&#x27;s cathedral in 1164 (after they had been taken from Milan). Besides the three magi Cologne preserves the relics of Saint Ursula and Albertus Magnus.

Cologne&#x27;s location on the river Rhine placed it at the intersection of the major trade routes between east and west as well as the main south–north Western Europe trade route, Venice to Netherlands; even by the mid-10th century, merchants in the town were already known for their prosperity and luxurious standard of living due to the availability of trade opportunities. The intersection of these trade routes was the basis of Cologne&#x27;s growth. By the end of the 12th century, Archbishop Phillip von Heinsberg enclosed the entire city with walls. By 1300 the city population was 50,000–55,000. Cologne was a member of the Hanseatic League in 1475, when Frederick III confirmed the city&#x27;s imperial immediacy. Cologne was so influential in regional commerce that its systems of weights and measurements (e.g. the Cologne mark) were used throughout Europe.

===Early modern history===

The economic structures of medieval and early modern Cologne were characterised by the city&#x27;s status as a major harbour and transport hub on the Rhine. Craftsmanship was organised by self-administering guilds, some of which were exclusive to women.

As a free imperial city, Cologne was a self-ruling state within the Holy Roman Empire, an imperial estate with seat and vote at the Imperial Diet, and as such had the right (and obligation) to contribute to the defense of the Empire and maintain its own military force. As they wore a red uniform, these troops were known as the &quot;Rote Funken&quot; (red sparks). These soldiers were part of the Army of the Holy Roman Empire (&quot;Reichskontingent&quot;). They fought in the wars of the 17th and 18th century, including the wars against revolutionary France in which the small force was almost completely wiped out in combat. The tradition of these troops is preserved as a military persiflage by Cologne&#x27;s most outstanding carnival society, the &quot;Rote Funken&quot;.

The Free Imperial City of Cologne must not be confused with the Electorate of Cologne, which was a state of its own within the Holy Roman Empire. Since the second half of the 16th century the majority of archbishops were drawn from the Bavarian Wittelsbach dynasty. Due to the free status of Cologne, the archbishops were usually not allowed to enter the city. Thus they took up residence in Bonn and later in Brühl on the Rhine. As members of an influential and powerful family, and supported by their outstanding status as electors, the archbishops of Cologne repeatedly challenged and threatened the free status of Cologne during the 17th and 18th centuries, resulting in complicated affairs, which were handled by diplomatic means and propaganda as well as by the supreme courts of the Holy Roman Empire.

===From the 19th century until World War I===
Cologne lost its status as a free city during the French period. According to the Treaty of Lunéville (1801) all the territories of the Holy Roman Empire on the left bank of the Rhine were officially incorporated into the French Republic (which had already occupied Cologne in 1794). Thus this region later became part of Napoleon&#x27;s Empire. Cologne was part of the French Département Roer (named after the river Roer, German: Rur) with Aachen (French: Aix-la-Chapelle) as its capital. The French modernised public life, for example by introducing the Napoleonic code and removing the old elites from power. The Napoleonic code remained in use on the left bank of the Rhine until 1900, when a unified civil code (the &quot;Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch&quot;) was introduced in the German Empire. In 1815 at the Congress of Vienna, Cologne was made part of the Kingdom of Prussia, first in the Province of Jülich-Cleves-Berg and then the Rhine Province.

The permanent tensions between the Catholic Rhineland and the overwhelmingly Protestant Prussian state repeatedly escalated with Cologne being in the focus of the conflict. In 1837 the archbishop of Cologne, Clemens August von Droste-Vischering, was arrested and imprisoned for two years after a dispute over the legal status of marriages between Catholics and Protestants (&quot;Mischehenstreit&quot;). In 1874, during the Kulturkampf, Archbishop Paul Melchers was imprisoned before taking asylum in the Netherlands. These conflicts alienated the Catholic population from Berlin and contributed to a deeply felt anti-Prussian resentment, which was still significant after World War II, when the former mayor of Cologne, Konrad Adenauer, became the first West German chancellor.

During the 19th and 20th centuries, Cologne absorbed numerous surrounding towns, and by World War I had already grown to 700,000 inhabitants. Industrialisation changed the city and spurred its growth. Vehicle and engine manufacturing was especially successful, though the heavy industry was less ubiquitous than in the Ruhr area. The cathedral, started in 1248 but abandoned around 1560, was eventually finished in 1880 not just as a place of worship but also as a German national monument celebrating the newly founded German empire and the continuity of the German nation since the Middle Ages. Some of this urban growth occurred at the expense of the city&#x27;s historic heritage with much being demolished (for example, the city walls or the area around the cathedral) and sometimes replaced by contemporary buildings.

Cologne was designated as one of the Fortresses of the German Confederation. It was turned into a heavily armed fortress (opposing the French and Belgian fortresses of Verdun and Liège) with two fortified belts surrounding the city, the remains of which can be seen to this day. The military demands on what became Germany&#x27;s largest fortress presented a significant obstacle to urban development, with forts, bunkers, and wide defensive dugouts completely encircling the city and preventing expansion; this resulted in a very densely built-up area within the city itself.

During World War I Cologne was the target of several minor air raids but suffered no significant damage. Cologne was occupied by the British Army of the Rhine until 1926, under the terms of the Armistice and the subsequent Versailles Peace Treaty. In contrast with the harsh behaviour of the French occupation troops in Germany, the British forces were more lenient to the local population. Konrad Adenauer, the mayor of Cologne from 1917 until 1933 and later a West German chancellor, acknowledged the political impact of this approach, especially since Britain had opposed French demands for a permanent Allied occupation of the entire Rhineland.

As part of the demilitarisation of the Rhineland, the city&#x27;s fortifications had to be dismantled. This was an opportunity to create two green belts (&quot;Grüngürtel&quot;) around the city by converting the fortifications and their fields of fire into large public parks. This was not completed until 1933. In 1919 the University of Cologne, closed by the French in 1798, was reopened. This was considered to be a replacement for the loss of the University of Strasbourg on the west bank of the Rhine, which reverted to France with the rest of Alsace. Cologne prospered during the Weimar Republic (1919–33), and progress was made especially in public governance, city planning, housing and social affairs. Social housing projects were considered exemplary and were copied by other German cities. Cologne competed to host the Olympics, and a modern sports stadium was erected at Müngersdorf. When the British occupation ended, the prohibition of civil aviation was lifted and Cologne Butzweilerhof Airport soon became a hub for national and international air traffic, second in Germany only to Berlin Tempelhof Airport.

The democratic parties lost the local elections in Cologne in March 1933 to the Nazi Party and other extreme-right parties. The Nazis then arrested the Communist and Social Democrats members of the city assembly, and Mayor Adenauer was dismissed. Compared to some other major cities, however, the Nazis never gained decisive support in Cologne. (Significantly, the number of votes cast for the Nazi Party in Reichstag elections had always been the national average.) By 1939, the population had risen to 772,221 inhabitants.

===World War II===

During World War II, Cologne was a Military Area Command Headquarters () for Wehrkreis VI (headquartered at Münster). Cologne was under the command of Lieutenant-General Freiherr Roeder von Diersburg, who was responsible for military operations in Bonn, Siegburg, Aachen, Jülich, Düren, and Monschau. Cologne was home to the 211th Infantry Regiment and the 26th Artillery Regiment.

The Allies dropped 44,923.2 tons of bombs on the city during World War II, destroying 61% of its built up area. During the Bombing of Cologne in World War II, Cologne endured 262 air raids by the Western Allies, which caused approximately 20,000 civilian casualties and almost completely wiped out the central part of the city. During the night of 31 May 1942, Cologne was the target of &quot;Operation Millennium&quot;, the first 1,000 bomber raid by the Royal Air Force in World War II. 1,046 heavy bombers attacked their target with 1,455 tons of explosives, approximately two-thirds of which were incendiary. This raid lasted about 75 minutes, destroyed of built-up area (61%), killed 486 civilians and made 59,000 people homeless. The devastation was recorded by Hermann Claasen from 1942 until the end of the war, and presented in his exhibition and book of 1947 &quot;Singing in the furnace. Cologne – Remains of an old city&quot;.

Cologne was taken by the American First Army in early March 1945 during the Invasion of Germany after a battle. By the end of the war, the population of Cologne had been reduced by 95%. This loss was mainly caused by a massive evacuation of the people to more rural areas. The same happened in many other German cities in the last two years of war. By the end of 1945, however, the population had already recovered to approximately 450,000. By the end of the war, essentially all of Cologne&#x27;s pre-war Jewish population of 11,000 had been deported or killed by the Nazis. The six synagogues of the city were destroyed. The synagogue on Roonstraße was rebuilt in 1959.

===Post-war and Cold War eras===

Despite Cologne&#x27;s status as the largest city in the region, nearby Düsseldorf was chosen as the political capital of the federated state of North Rhine-Westphalia. With Bonn being chosen as the provisional federal capital (&quot;provisorische Bundeshauptstadt&quot;) and seat of the government of the Federal Republic of Germany (then informally West Germany), Cologne benefited by being sandwiched between two important political centres. The city became–and still is–home to a number of federal agencies and organizations. After reunification in 1990, Berlin was made the capital of Germany.

In 1945 architect and urban planner Rudolf Schwarz called Cologne the &quot;world&#x27;s greatest heap of rubble&quot;. Schwarz designed the master plan for reconstruction in 1947, which included the construction of several new thoroughfares through the city centre, especially the &quot;Nord-Süd-Fahrt&quot; (&quot;North-South-Drive&quot;). The master plan took into consideration the fact that even shortly after the war a large increase in automobile traffic could be anticipated. Plans for new roads had already, to a certain degree, evolved under the Nazi administration, but the actual construction became easier when most of the city centre was in ruins.

The destruction of 95% of the city centre, including the famous Twelve Romanesque churches such as St. Gereon, Great St. Martin, St. Maria im Kapitol and several other monuments in World War II, meant a tremendous loss of cultural treasures. The rebuilding of those churches and other landmarks such as the Gürzenich event hall was not undisputed among leading architects and art historians at that time, but in most cases, civil intention prevailed. The reconstruction lasted until the 1990s, when the Romanesque church of St. Kunibert was finished.

In 1959, the city&#x27;s population reached pre-war numbers again. It then grew steadily, exceeding 1 million for about one year from 1975. It remained just below that until mid-2010, when it exceeded 1 million again.
===Post-reunification===

In the 1980s and 1990s Cologne&#x27;s economy prospered for two main reasons. The first was the growth in the number of media companies, both in the private and public sectors; they are especially catered for in the newly developed Media Park, which creates a strong visual focal point in Cologne&#x27;s city centre and includes the &quot;KölnTurm&quot;, one of Cologne&#x27;s most prominent high-rise buildings. The second was the permanent improvement of the diverse traffic infrastructure, which made Cologne one of the most easily accessible metropolitan areas in Central Europe.

Due to the economic success of the Cologne Trade Fair, the city arranged a large extension to the fair site in 2005. At the same time the original buildings, which date back to the 1920s, were rented out to RTL, Germany&#x27;s largest private broadcaster, as their new corporate headquarters.

Cologne was the focus of the 2015-16 New Year&#x27;s Eve sexual assaults in Germany, with over 500 women reporting that they were sexually assaulted by persons of African and Arab appearance.

==Geography==
The metropolitan area encompasses over , extending around a central point that lies at 50° 56&#x27; 33 latitude and 6° 57&#x27; 32 longitude. The city&#x27;s highest point is above sea level (the Monte Troodelöh) and its lowest point is above sea level (the Worringer Bruch). The city of Cologne lies within the larger area of the Cologne Lowland, a cone-shaped area of the central Rhineland that lies between Bonn, Aachen and Düsseldorf.

===Districts===

Cologne is divided into 9 boroughs (&quot;Stadtbezirke&quot;) and 85 districts (&quot;Stadtteile&quot;):

===Climate===
Located in the Rhine-Ruhr area, Cologne is one of the warmest cities in Germany. It has a temperate–oceanic climate (Köppen: &quot;Cfb&quot;) with cool winters and warm summers. It is also one of the cloudiest cities in Germany, with just 1,567.5 hours of sun a year. Its average annual temperature is : during the day and at night. In January, the mean temperature is , while the mean temperature in July is . The record high temperature of happened on 25 July 2019 during the July 2019 European heat wave in which Cologne saw three consecutive days over . Especially the inner urban neighbourhoods experience a greater number of hot days, as well as significantly higher temperatures during nighttime compared to the surrounding area (including the airport, where temperatures are classified). Still temperatures can vary noticeably over the course of a month with warmer and colder weather. Precipitation is spread evenly throughout the year with a light peak in summer due to showers and thunderstorms.

The progressing climate change can be seen by looking at the climate data of the previous decade with lower mean temperatures.

===Flood protection===

Cologne is regularly affected by flooding from the Rhine and is considered the most flood-prone European city. A city agency (&quot;Stadtentwässerungsbetriebe Köln&quot;, &quot;Cologne Urban Drainage Operations&quot;) manages an extensive flood control system which includes both permanent and mobile flood walls, protection from rising waters for buildings close to the river banks, monitoring and forecasting systems, pumping stations and programmes to create or protect floodplains, and river embankments. The system was redesigned after a 1993 flood, which resulted in heavy damage.

==Demographics==
In the Roman Empire, the city was large and rich with a population of 40,000 in 100–200 AD. The city was home to around 20,000 people in 1000 AD, growing to 50,000 in 1200 AD. The Rhineland metropolis still had 50,000 residents in 1300 AD.

Cologne is the fourth-largest city by population in Germany after Berlin, Hamburg and Munich. As of 31 December 2021, there were 1,079,301 people registered as living in Cologne in an area of , which makes Cologne the third largest city by area. The population density was . Cologne first reached the population of 1,000,000 in 1975 due to the incorporation of Wesseling, however this was reversed after public opposition. In 2009 Cologne&#x27;s population again reached 1,000,000 and it became one of the four cities in Germany with a population exceeding 1 Million. The metropolitan area of the Cologne Bonn Region is home to 3,573,500 living on . It is part of the polycentric megacity region Rhine-Ruhr with a population of over 11,000,000 people.

There were 551,528 women and 527,773 men in Cologne. In 2021, there were 11,127 births in Cologne; 5,844 marriages and 1,808 divorces, and 10,536 deaths. In the city, the population was spread out, with 16.3% under the age of 18, and 17.8% were 65 years of age or older. 203 people in Cologne were over the age of 100.

According to the Statistical Office of the City of Cologne, the number of people with a migrant background is at 40.5% (436,660). 2,254 people acquired German citizenship in 2021. In 2021, there were 559,854 households, of which 18.4% had children under the age of 18; 51% of all households were made up of singles. 8% of all households were single-parent households. The average household size was 1.88.

===Residents with foreign citizenship===
Cologne residents with a foreign citizenship as of 31 December 2021 is as follows:
===Turkish community===
Cologne is home to 90,000 people of Turkish origin and is the second largest German city with Turkish population after Berlin. Cologne has a Little Istanbul in Keupstraße that has many Turkish restaurants and markets. Famous Turkish-German people like rapper Eko Fresh and TV presenter Nazan Eckes were born in Cologne.

===Language===

Colognian or Kölsch () (natively &quot;Kölsch Platt&quot;) is a small set of very closely related dialects, or variants, of the Ripuarian Central German group of languages. These dialects are spoken in the area covered by the Archdiocese and former Electorate of Cologne reaching from Neuss in the north to just south of Bonn, west to Düren and east to Olpe in the North-West of Germany. Kölsch is one of the very few city dialects in Germany, which also include the dialect spoken in Berlin, for example.

===Religion===

As of 2015, 35.5% of the population belonged to the Catholic Church, the largest religious body, and 15.5% to the Protestant Church. Irenaeus of Lyons claimed that Christianity was brought to Cologne by Roman soldiers and traders at an unknown early date. It is known that in the early second century it was a bishop&#x27;s seat. The first historical Bishop of Cologne was Saint Maternus. Thomas Aquinas studied in Cologne in 1244 under Albertus Magnus. Cologne is the seat of the Archdiocese of Cologne.

According to the 2011 census, 2.1% of the population was Eastern Orthodox, 0.5% belonged of an Evangelical Free Church and 4.2% belonged to further religious communities officially recognized by the state of North Rhine-Westphalia (such as Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses).

There are several mosques, including the Cologne Central Mosque run by the Turkish-Islamic Union for Religious Affairs. In 2011, about 11.2% of the population was Muslim.

Cologne also has one of the oldest and largest Jewish communities in Germany. In 2011, 0.3% of Cologne&#x27;s population was Jewish.

On 11 October 2021, the Mayor of Cologne, Henriette Reker, announced that all of Cologne&#x27;s 35 mosques would be allowed to broadcast the Adhan (prayer call) for up to five minutes on Fridays between noon and 3 p.m. She commented that the move &quot;shows that diversity is appreciated and loved in Cologne&quot;.

==Government and politics==

The city&#x27;s administration is headed by the mayor and the three deputy mayors.

===Political traditions and developments===
The long tradition of a free imperial city, which long dominated an exclusively Catholic population and the age-old conflict between the church and the bourgeoisie (and within it between the patricians and craftsmen) have created its own political climate in Cologne. Various interest groups often form networks beyond party boundaries. The resulting web of relationships, with political, economic, and cultural links with each other in a system of mutual favours, obligations and dependencies, is called the &#x27;Cologne coterie&#x27;. This has often led to an unusual proportional distribution in the city government and degenerated at times into corruption: in 1999, a &quot;waste scandal&quot; over kickbacks and illegal campaign contributions came to light, which led not only to the imprisonment of the entrepreneur Hellmut Trienekens, but also to the downfall of almost the entire leadership of the ruling Social Democrats.

===Mayor===

The incumbent Lord Mayor of Cologne is Henriette Reker. She received 52.66% of the vote at the municipal election on 17 October 2015, running as an independent with the support of the CDU, FDP, and Greens. She took office on 15 December 2015. Reker was re-elected to a second term in a runoff election on 27 September 2020, in which she received 59.27% of the vote.

The most recent mayoral election was held on 13 September 2020, with a runoff held on 27 September, and the results were as follows:
! rowspan=2 colspan=2| Candidate
! rowspan=2| Party
! colspan=2| First round
! colspan=2| Second round
! Votes
! Votes
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Henriette Reker
| align=left| Independent (Green/CDU)
| 187,389
| 45.1
| 174,263
| 59.3
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Andreas Kossiski
| align=left| Social Democratic Party
| 111,353
| 26.8
| 119,753
| 40.7
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Jörg Detjen
| align=left| The Left
| 29,810
| 7.2
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Olivier Fuchs
| align=left| Volt Germany
| 18,520
| 4.5
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Christer Cremer
| align=left| Alternative for Germany
| 17,441
| 4.2
| 
| align=left| Nicolin Gabrysch
| align=left| Climate Friends
| 14,370
| 3.5
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Roberto Campione
| align=left| Independent
| 14,122
| 3.4
| 
| align=left| Thor Zimmermann
| align=left| Good Cologne
| 8,613
| 2.1
| 
| align=left| Dagmar Langel
| align=left| We Are Cologne
| 4,464
| 1.1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Robert Nussholz
| align=left| Independent
| 4,044
| 1.0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Sabine Neumeyer
| align=left| Independent
| 2,547
| 0.6
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Rüdiger-René Keune
| align=left| Ecological Democratic Party
| 2,336
| 0.6
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Martin Przybylski
| align=left| Independent
| 924
| 0.2
! colspan=3| Valid votes
! 415,933
! 98.7
! 294,016
! 99.1
! colspan=3| Invalid votes
! 5,633
! 1.3
! 2,727
! 0.9
! colspan=3| Total
! 421,566
! 100.0
! 296,743
! 100.0
! colspan=3| Electorate/voter turnout
! 820,527
! 51.4
! 818,731
! 36.2
| colspan=7| Source: City of Cologne (1st round , 2nd round)

===City council===

The Cologne city council (&quot;Kölner Stadtrat&quot;) governs the city alongside the Mayor. It serves a term of five years. The most recent city council election was held on 13 September 2020, and the results were as follows:
! colspan=2| Party
! Votes
! +/-
! Seats
|-
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alliance 90/The Greens (Grüne)
| 118,997
| 28.5
| 9.0
| 26
| 8
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Social Democratic Party (SPD)
| 90,040
| 21.6
| 7.8
| 19
| 7
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Christian Democratic Union (CDU)
| 89,659
| 21.5
| 5.7
| 19
| 6
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| The Left (Die Linke)
| 27,044
| 6.5
| 0.4
| 6
| ±0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Free Democratic Party (FDP)
| 21,965
| 5.3
| 0.2
| 5
| ±0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Volt Germany (Volt)
| 20,783
| 5.0
| New
| 4
| New
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Alternative for Germany (AfD)
| 18,272
| 4.4
| 0.8
| 4
| 1
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Die PARTEI (PARTEI)
| 10,261
| 2.5
| 2.4
| 2
| 2
| 
| align=left| Climate Friends (Klima Freunde)
| 8,383
| 2.0
| 0.0
| 2
| ±0
| 
| align=left| Good Cologne (GUT)
| 8,298
| 2.0
| 0.6
| 2
| ±0
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Free Voters Cologne (FWK)
| 2,501
| 0.6
| 0.2
| 1
| ±0
| colspan=7 bgcolor=lightgrey| 
| bgcolor=| 
| align=left| Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP)
| 374
| 0.1
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| We Are Cologne 2020 (Wir Sind Köln)
| 265
| 0.1
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| Independent A. Krause
| 107
| 0.0
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| Independent Neumeyer
| 72
| 0.0
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| Independent Weber
| 72
| 0.0
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| Independent R. Krause
| 71
| 0.0
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| Independent Schidlowsky
| 32
| 0.0
| New
| 0
| New
| 
| align=left| Party of Progress (PdF)
| 31
| 0.0
| New
| 0
| New
! colspan=2| Valid votes
! 417,227
! 98.9
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Invalid votes
! 4,596
! 1.1
! 
|-
! colspan=2| Total
! 421,823
! 100.0
! 90
! ±0
! colspan=2| Electorate/voter turnout
! 820,526
! 51.4
! 1.8
! 
| colspan=7| Source: City of Cologne

===State Landtag===

In the Landtag of North Rhine-Westphalia, Cologne is divided among seven constituencies. After the 2022 North Rhine-Westphalia state election, the composition and representation of each was as follows:

=== Federal parliament ===
In the Bundestag, Cologne is divided among four constituencies. In the 20th Bundestag, elected 26 September 2021, the composition and representation of each was as follows:

==Cityscape==
The inner city of Cologne was largely destroyed during World War II. The reconstruction of the city followed the style of the 1950s, while respecting the old layout and naming of the streets. Thus, the city centre today is characterized by modern architecture, with a few interspersed pre-war buildings which were reconstructed due to their historical importance. Some buildings of the &quot;Wiederaufbauzeit&quot; (era of reconstruction), for example, the opera house by Wilhelm Riphahn, are nowadays regarded as classics of modern architecture. Nevertheless, the uncompromising style of the Cologne Opera house and other modern buildings has remained controversial.

The districts outside the city center consist mostly of 19th and 20th century buildings. Around 25% of Cologne was built before 1945.

Green areas account for over a quarter of Cologne, which is approximately of public green space for every inhabitant.

==Wildlife==
The dominant wildlife of Cologne is insects, small rodents, and several species of birds. Pigeons are the most often seen animals in Cologne, although the number of birds is augmented each year by a growing population of feral exotics, most visibly parrots such as the rose-ringed parakeet. The sheltered climate in southeast Northrhine-Westphalia allows these birds to survive through the winter, and in some cases, they are displacing native species. The plumage of Cologne&#x27;s green parrots is highly visible even from a distance, and contrasts starkly with the otherwise muted colours of the cityscape.

Hedgehogs, rabbits and squirrels are common in parks and the greener parts of town. In the outer suburbs foxes and wild boar can be seen, even during the day.

==Tourism==
Cologne had 5.8 million overnight stays booked and 3.35 million arrivals in 2016.
===Landmarks===

====Churches====
* Cologne Cathedral (German: &quot;Kölner Dom&quot;) is the city&#x27;s most famous monument and the Cologne residents&#x27; most loved landmark. It is a Gothic church, started in 1248, and completed in 1880. In 1996, it was designated a World Heritage Site; it houses the Shrine of the Three Kings, which supposedly contains the relics of the Three Magi (see also). Residents of Cologne sometimes refer to the cathedral as &quot;the eternal construction site&quot; (&quot;die ewige Baustelle&quot;).
* Twelve Romanesque churches: These buildings are outstanding examples of early medieval church architecture. The origins of some of these churches go back as far as Roman times, for example St. Gereon, which was originally a huge mausoleum in a Roman graveyard, or St. Maria im Kapitol, built on the substructure of a Roman temple. Great St. Martin Church stands on the site of Roman warehouses and previously a sports field with a swimming pool, the walls of which can be seen in the basement of the church. With the exception of St. Maria Lyskirchen all of these churches were very badly damaged during World War II. Reconstructions of the last ones were only finished in the 1990s.

====Medieval houses====
The Cologne City Hall (&quot;Kölner Rathaus&quot;), founded in the 12th century, is the oldest city hall in Germany still in use. The Renaissance-style loggia and tower were added in the 15th century. Other famous buildings include the Gürzenich, Haus Saaleck and the Overstolzenhaus.
====Medieval city gates====

Of the twelve medieval city gates that once existed, only the Eigelsteintorburg at Ebertplatz, the Hahnentor at Rudolfplatz and the Severinstorburg at Chlodwigplatz still stand today.

===Streets===

* The Cologne Ring boulevards (such as &quot;Hohenzollernring&quot;, &quot;Kaiser-Wilhelm-Ring&quot;, &quot;Hansaring&quot;) with their medieval city gates (such as &quot;Hahnentorburg&quot; on &quot;Rudolfplatz&quot;) are also known for their night life.
* Hohe Straße (literally: &quot;High Street&quot;) is one of the main shopping areas and extends past the cathedral in an approximately southerly direction. The street contains many gift shops, clothing stores, fast food restaurants and electronic goods dealers.
* Schildergasse – connects &quot;Neumarkt&quot; square at its western end to the &quot;Hohe Strasse&quot; shopping street at its eastern end and has been named the busiest shopping street in Europe with 13,000 people passing through every hour, according to a 2008 study by GfK.
* Ehrenstraße – the shopping area around &quot;Apostelnstrasse&quot;, &quot;Ehrenstrasse&quot;, and &quot;Rudolfplatz&quot; is a little more on the quirky and stylish side.

===Bridges===
Several bridges cross the Rhine in Cologne. They are (from south to north): the Rodenkirchen Bridge, South Bridge (railway), , Deutz Bridge, Hohenzollern Bridge (railway), (&quot;Zoobrücke&quot;) and Mülheim Bridge. In particular the iron tied arch Hohenzollern Bridge (&quot;Hohenzollernbrücke&quot;) is a dominant landmark along the river embankment. A Rhine crossing of a special kind is provided by the Cologne Cable Car (German: &quot;Kölner Seilbahn&quot;), a cableway that runs across the river between the Cologne Zoological Garden in Riehl and the Rheinpark in Deutz.

===High-rise structures===
Cologne&#x27;s tallest structure is the Colonius telecommunication tower at . The observation deck has been closed since 1992. A selection of the tallest buildings in Cologne is listed below. Other tall structures include the Hansahochhaus (designed by architect Jacob Koerfer and completed in 1925 – it was at one time Europe&#x27;s tallest office building), the Kranhaus buildings at Rheinauhafen, and the Messeturm Köln (&quot;trade fair tower&quot;).

==Culture==

Cologne has numerous museums. The famous Roman-Germanic Museum features art and architecture from the city&#x27;s distant past; the Museum Ludwig houses one of the most important collections of modern art in Europe, including a Picasso collection matched only by the museums in Barcelona and Paris. The Museum Schnütgen of religious art is partly housed in St. Cecilia, one of Cologne&#x27;s Twelve Romanesque churches. Many art galleries in Cologne enjoy a worldwide reputation like e.g. Galerie Karsten Greve, one of the leading galleries for postwar and contemporary art.

Cologne has more than 60 music venues and the third-highest density of music venues of Germany&#x27;s four largest cities, after Munich and Hamburg and ahead of Berlin.

Several orchestras are active in the city, among them the Gürzenich Orchestra, which is also the orchestra of the Cologne Opera and the WDR Symphony Orchestra Cologne (&quot;German State Radio Orchestra&quot;), both based at the Cologne Philharmonic Orchestra Building (Kölner Philharmonie). Other orchestras are the Musica Antiqua Köln, the WDR Rundfunkorchester Köln and WDR Big Band, and several choirs, including the WDR Rundfunkchor Köln. Cologne was also an important hotbed for electronic music in the 1950s (Studio für elektronische Musik, Karlheinz Stockhausen) and again from the 1990s onward. The public radio and TV station WDR was involved in promoting musical movements such as Krautrock in the 1970s; the influential Can was formed there in 1968. There are several centres of nightlife, among them the &quot;Kwartier Latäng&quot; (the student quarter around the Zülpicher Straße) and the nightclub-studded areas around Hohenzollernring, Friesenplatz and Rudolfplatz.
The large annual literary festival with its features regional and international authors. The main literary figure connected with Cologne is the writer Heinrich Böll, winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature. Since 2012, there is also an annual international festival of philosophy called .

The city also has the most pubs per capita in Germany. Cologne is well known for its beer, called Kölsch. Kölsch is also the name of the local dialect. This has led to the common joke of Kölsch being the only language one can drink.

Cologne is also famous for Eau de Cologne (German: &quot;Kölnisch Wasser&quot;; lit: &quot;Water of Cologne&quot;), a perfume created by Italian expatriate Johann Maria Farina at the beginning of the 18th century. During the 18th century, this perfume became increasingly popular, was exported all over Europe by the Farina family and &quot;Farina&quot; became a household name for &quot;Eau de Cologne&quot;. In 1803 Wilhelm Mülhens entered into a contract with an unrelated person from Italy named Carlo Francesco Farina who granted him the right to use his family name and Mühlens opened a small factory at Cologne&#x27;s Glockengasse. In later years, and after various court battles, his grandson Ferdinand Mülhens was forced to abandon the name &quot;Farina&quot; for the company and their product. He decided to use the house number given to the factory at Glockengasse during the French occupation in the early 19th century, 4711. Today, original Eau de Cologne is still produced in Cologne by both the Farina family, in the eighth generation, and by Mäurer &amp; Wirtz who bought the 4711 brand in 2006.

===Carnival===
The Cologne carnival is one of the largest street festivals in Europe. In Cologne, the carnival season officially starts on 11 November at 11 minutes past 11 a.m. with the proclamation of the new Carnival Season, and continues until Ash Wednesday. However, the so-called &quot;Tolle Tage&quot; (crazy days) do not start until &quot;Weiberfastnacht&quot; (Women&#x27;s Carnival) or, in dialect, &quot;Wieverfastelovend&quot;, the Thursday before Ash Wednesday, which is the beginning of the street carnival. Zülpicher Strasse and its surroundings, Neumarkt square, Heumarkt and all bars and pubs in the city are crowded with people in costumes dancing and drinking in the streets. Hundreds of thousands of visitors flock to Cologne during this time. Generally, around a million people celebrate in the streets on the Thursday before Ash Wednesday.

===Rivalry with Düsseldorf===

Cologne and Düsseldorf have a &quot;fierce regional rivalry&quot;, which includes carnival parades, ice hockey, football, and beer. People in Cologne prefer Kölsch while people in Düsseldorf prefer Altbier (&quot;Alt&quot;). Waiters and patrons will &quot;scorn&quot; and make a &quot;mockery&quot; of people who order Alt beer in Cologne or Kölsch in Düsseldorf. The rivalry has been described as a &quot;love–hate relationship&quot;. The Köln Guild of Brewers was established in 1396. The Kölsch beer style first appeared in the 1800s and in 1986 the breweries established an appellation under which only breweries in the city are allowed to use the term Kölsch.

===Museums===

* Farina Fragrance Museum – birthplace of Eau de Cologne
* Römisch-Germanisches Museum (Roman-Germanic Museum) – ancient Roman and Germanic culture
* Wallraf-Richartz Museum – European painting from the 13th to the early 20th century
* Museum Ludwig – modern art
* Museum Schnütgen – medieval art
* Museum für Angewandte Kunst – applied art
* Kolumba Kunstmuseum des Erzbistums Köln (art museum of the Archbishopric of Cologne) – modern art museum built around medieval ruins of St. Kolumba, Cologne, completed 2007
* Cathedral Treasury &quot;Domschatzkammer&quot; – historic underground vaults of the Cathedral
* EL-DE Haus – former local headquarters of the Gestapo houses a museum documenting Nazi rule in Cologne with a special focus on the persecution of political dissenters and minorities
* German Sports and Olympic Museum – exhibitions about sports from antiquity until the present
* Imhoff-Schokoladenmuseum – Chocolate Museum
* Geomuseum of the University of Cologne – the exhibition includes fossils (such as dinosaur bones and the skeleton of an Eryops), stones and minerals
* Forum for Internet Technology in Contemporary Art – collections of Internet-based art, corporate part of (NewMediaArtProjectNetwork):cologne, the experimental platform for art and New Media
* Flora und Botanischer Garten Köln – the city&#x27;s formal park and main botanical garden
* Forstbotanischer Garten Köln – an arboretum and woodland botanical garden

===Music fairs and festivals===
The city was home to the internationally famous Ringfest, and now to the C/o pop festival.&lt;ref name=&quot;C/o pop&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

In addition, Cologne enjoys a thriving Christmas Market (&quot;Weihnachtsmarkt&quot;) presence with several locations in the city.

==Economy==
As the largest city in the Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region, Cologne benefits from a large market structure. In competition with Düsseldorf, the economy of Cologne is primarily based on insurance and media industries, while the city is also an important cultural and research centre and home to a number of corporate headquarters.

Among the largest media companies based in Cologne are Westdeutscher Rundfunk, RTL Television (with subsidiaries), n-tv, Deutschlandradio, Brainpool TV and publishing houses like J. P. Bachem, Taschen, Tandem Verlag, and M. DuMont Schauberg. Several clusters of media, arts and communications agencies, TV production studios, and state agencies work partly with private and government-funded cultural institutions. Among the insurance companies based in Cologne are Central, DEVK, DKV, Generali Deutschland, Gen Re, Gothaer, HDI Gerling and national headquarters of Axa Insurance, Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance Group and Zurich Financial Services.

The German flag carrier Lufthansa and its subsidiary Lufthansa CityLine have their main corporate headquarters in Cologne. The largest employer in Cologne is Ford Europe, which has its European headquarters and a factory in Niehl (Ford-Werke GmbH). Toyota Motorsport GmbH (TMG), Toyota&#x27;s official motorsports team, responsible for Toyota rally cars, and then Formula One cars, has its headquarters and workshops in Cologne. Other large companies based in Cologne include the REWE Group, TÜV Rheinland, Deutz AG and a number of Kölsch breweries. The largest three Kölsch breweries of Cologne are Reissdorf, Gaffel, and Früh.

Historically, Cologne has always been an important trade city, with land, air, and sea connections. The city has five Rhine ports, the second largest inland port in Germany and one of the largest in Europe. Cologne Bonn Airport is the second largest freight terminal in Germany. Today, the Cologne trade fair (&quot;Koelnmesse&quot;) ranks as a major European trade fair location with over 50 trade fairs and other large cultural and sports events. In 2008 Cologne had 4.31 million overnight stays booked and 2.38 million arrivals. Cologne&#x27;s largest daily newspaper is the &quot;Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger&quot;.

Cologne shows a significant increase in startup companies, especially when considering digital business.

Cologne has also become the first German city with a population of more than a million people to declare climate emergency.

==Transport==
===Roads===

Road building had been a major issue in the 1920s under the leadership of mayor Konrad Adenauer. The first German limited-access road was constructed after 1929 between Cologne and Bonn. Today, this is the Bundesautobahn 555. In 1965, Cologne became the first German city to be fully encircled by a motorway ring road. Roughly at the same time, a city centre bypass (&quot;Stadtautobahn&quot;) was planned, but only partially put into effect, due to opposition by environmental groups. The completed section became &quot;Bundesstraße (&quot;Federal Road&quot;) B 55a&quot;, which begins at the &quot;Zoobrücke&quot; (&quot;Zoo Bridge&quot;) and meets with A 4 and A 3 at the interchange Cologne East. Nevertheless, it is referred to as &quot;Stadtautobahn&quot; by most locals. In contrast to this, the &quot;Nord-Süd-Fahrt&quot; (&quot;North-South-Drive&quot;) was actually completed, a new four/six-lane city centre through-route, which had already been anticipated by planners such as Fritz Schumacher in the 1920s. The last section south of &quot;Ebertplatz&quot; was completed in 1972.

In 2005, the first stretch of an eight-lane motorway in North Rhine-Westphalia was opened to traffic on Bundesautobahn 3, part of the eastern section of the Cologne Beltway between the interchanges Cologne East and Heumar.

===Cycling===
Compared to other German cities, Cologne has a traffic layout that is not very bicycle-friendly. It has repeatedly ranked among the worst in an independent evaluation conducted by the Allgemeiner Deutscher Fahrrad-Club. In 2014, it ranked 36th out of 39 German cities with a population greater than 200,000.

===Railway===
Cologne has a railway service with InterCity and ICE-trains stopping at Köln Hauptbahnhof (Cologne Main Station), Köln Messe/Deutz and Cologne/Bonn Airport. ICE and TGV Thalys high-speed trains link Cologne with Amsterdam, Brussels (in 1h47, 9 departures/day) and Paris (in 3h14, 6 departures/day). There are frequent ICE trains to other German cities, including Frankfurt am Main and Berlin. ICE trains to London via the Channel Tunnel were planned for 2013.

The Cologne Stadtbahn operated by Kölner Verkehrsbetriebe (KVB) is an extensive light rail system that is partially underground and serves Cologne and a number of neighbouring cities. It evolved from the tram system. Nearby Bonn is linked by both the Stadtbahn and main line railway trains, with occasional recreational boats on the Rhine. Düsseldorf is also linked by S-Bahn trains, which are operated by .

The Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn has 5 lines which cross Cologne. The S13/S19 runs 24/7 between Cologne Hbf and Cologne/Bonn airport.

===Buses===
There are frequent buses covering most of the city and surrounding suburbs, and Eurolines coaches to London via Brussels.

===Water===
Häfen und Güterverkehr Köln (Ports and Goods traffic Cologne, HGK) is one of the largest operators of inland ports in Germany. Ports include Köln-Deutz, Köln-Godorf and Köln-Niehl I and II.

===Air===
Cologne&#x27;s international airport is Cologne/Bonn Airport (CGN). It is also called &quot;Konrad Adenauer Airport&quot; after Germany&#x27;s first post-war Chancellor Konrad Adenauer, who was born in the city and was mayor of Cologne from 1917 until 1933. The airport is shared with the neighbouring city of Bonn. Cologne is headquarters to the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA).

==Education==
Cologne is home to numerous universities and colleges, and host to some 72,000 students. Its oldest university, the University of Cologne (founded in 1388) is the largest university in Germany, as the Cologne University of Applied Sciences is the largest university of Applied Sciences in the country. The Cologne University of Music and Dance is the largest conservatory in Europe. Foreigners can have German lessons in the VHS (Adult Education Centre).
Lauder Morijah School (), a Jewish school in Cologne, previously closed. After Russian immigration increased the Jewish population, the school reopened in 2002.

==Media==
Within Germany, Cologne is known as an important media centre. Several radio and television stations, including Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR), RTL and VOX, have their headquarters in the city. Film and TV production is also important. The city is &quot;Germany&#x27;s capital of TV crime stories&quot;. A third of all German TV productions are made in the Cologne region. Furthermore, the city hosts the Cologne Comedy Festival, which is considered to be the largest comedy festival in mainland Europe.

==Sports==

Cologne hosts the football club 1. FC Köln, who play currently in the 2. Bundesliga (second division). They play their home matches in RheinEnergieStadion which also hosted five matches of the 2006 FIFA World Cup. The International Olympic Committee and the International Association of Sports and Leisure Facilities gave RheinEnergieStadion a bronze medal for &quot;being one of the best sporting venues in the world&quot;. The city also hosts the two football clubs FC Viktoria Köln and SC Fortuna Köln, who play in the 3. Liga (third division) and the Regionalliga West (fourth division) respectively. Cologne&#x27;s oldest football club 1. FSV Köln 1899 is playing with its amateur team in the Verbandsliga (sixth division).

Cologne also is home of the ice hockey team Kölner Haie, which is playing in the highest ice hockey league in Germany, the Deutsche Eishockey Liga. They are based at Lanxess Arena.

Several horse races per year are held at Cologne-Weidenpesch Racecourse since 1897, the annual Cologne Marathon was started in 1997 and the classic cycling race Rund um Köln is organised in Cologne since 1908. The city also has a long tradition in rowing, being home of some of Germany&#x27;s oldest regatta courses and boat clubs, such as the Kölner Rudergesellschaft 1891 or the Kölner Ruderverein von 1877 in the Rodenkirchen district.

Japanese automotive manufacturer Toyota has their major motorsport facility known by the name Toyota Motorsport GmbH, which is located in the Marsdorf district, and is responsible for Toyota&#x27;s major motorsport development and operations, which in the past included the FIA Formula One World Championship, the FIA World Rally Championship and the Le Mans Series. They are working on Toyota&#x27;s team Toyota Gazoo Racing which competes in the FIA World Endurance Championship.

Cologne is considered &quot;the secret golf capital of Germany&quot;. The first golf club in North Rhine-Westphalia was founded in Cologne in 1906. The city offers the most options and top events in Germany.

The city has hosted several athletic events which includes the 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup, 2006 FIFA World Cup, 2007 World Men&#x27;s Handball Championship, 2010 and 2017 Ice Hockey World Championships, 2024 FIFA European Championship and 2010 Gay Games.

Since 2014, the city has hosted ESL One Cologne, one of the biggest CS GO tournaments held annually in July/August at Lanxess Arena.

Furthermore, Cologne is home of the Sport-Club Colonia 1906, Germany&#x27;s oldest boxing club, and the Kölner Athleten-Club 1882, the world&#x27;s oldest active weightlifting club.

==Notable people==

* Leon Draisaitl, ice hockey player
* Kim Petras, Grammy award-winning singer-songwriter
* Paul-Jürgen Weber, visual artist and photographer
* Udo Kier, german actor 
* Jean Bugatti, automotive designer and test engineer
* Markus N. Beeko, human rights activist

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Cologne is twinned with:

* Barcelona, Spain (1984)
* Beijing, China (1987)
* Bethlehem, Palestine (1996)
* Cluj-Napoca, Romania (1976)
* Corinto, Nicaragua (1988)
* Cork, Ireland (1988)
* Dnipro, Ukraine (2024)
* Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg (1958)
* Indianapolis, United States (1988)
* Istanbul, Turkey (1997)
* Katowice, Poland (1991)
* Kyoto, Japan (1963)
* Liège, Belgium (1958)
* Lille, France (1958)
* Liverpool, England, United Kingdom (1952)
* Neukölln (Berlin), Germany (1967)
* El Realejo, Nicaragua (1988)
* Rio de Janeiro, Brazil (2011)
* Rotterdam, Netherlands (1958)
* Tel Aviv, Israel (1979)
* Thessaloniki, Greece (1988)
* Treptow-Köpenick (Berlin), Germany (1990)
* Tunis, Tunisia (1964)
* Turin, Italy (1958)
* Turku, Finland (1967)

===Former twin towns===
* Volgograd, Russia (1988) - suspended in 2022

==See also==

* Stadtwerke Köln, the municipal infrastructure company, operator of the city&#x27;s railways, ports, and other utilities
* New Year&#x27;s Eve sexual assaults in Germany
* Hänneschen-Theater

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="0" end="7" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="43" end="55" title="States of Germany" label="German state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="59" end="81" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242225" start="90" end="115" title="List of cities in Germany by population" label="fourth-most populous city"/>
<link wikidata="Q467065" start="217" end="242" title="Cologne Bonn Region" label="Cologne Bonn urban region"/>
<link wikidata="Q164903" start="272" end="302" title="Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region" label="Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="308" end="349" title="List of EU metropolitan regions by GDP#2021 ranking of top 4 German metropolitan regions" label="second biggest metropolitan region by GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759388" start="389" end="418" title="left bank of the Rhine" label="left (west) bank of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="452" end="457" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q370470" start="459" end="470" title="Lower Rhine" label="Lower Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="533" end="543" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="561" end="565" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="589" end="601" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="629" end="646" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="" start="658" end="697" title="History of the world&amp;#x27;s tallest buildings#Churches and cathedrals: Tallest buildings between the 13th and 20th century" label="world&amp;#x27;s tallest building 1880–1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q224969" start="715" end="770" title="List of tallest church buildings" label="third-tallest church and tallest cathedral in the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q662314" start="804" end="829" title="Shrine of the Three Kings" label="Shrine of the Three Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q869691" start="981" end="1018" title="Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne" label="Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863" start="1042" end="1056" title="Eau de Cologne" label="Eau de Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q664800" start="1212" end="1216" title="Ubii" label="Ubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q316860" start="1634" end="1640" title="Ripuarian Franks" label="Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1660" end="1671" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="1744" end="1756" title="trade routes" label="trade routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q896471" start="1804" end="1816" title="Brabant Road" label="Brabant Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q836028" start="1818" end="1827" title="Via Regia" label="Via Regia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="1856" end="1874" title="free imperial city" label="free imperial city"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="1882" end="1899" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="1948" end="1964" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2053" end="2065" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="2173" end="2180" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q471156" start="2228" end="2242" title="Bombing of Cologne in World War II" label="heavily bombed"/>
<link wikidata="Q73275403" start="2555" end="2565" title="Förderverein Romanische Kirchen Köln" label="Romanesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="2724" end="2733" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="2858" end="2879" title="University of Cologne" label="University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q54166" start="2939" end="2970" title="Technical University of Cologne" label="Technical University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q315229" start="3035" end="3066" title="German Sport University Cologne" label="German Sport University Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q158085" start="3083" end="3112" title="Max Planck Society" label="Max Planck science institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q157332" start="3178" end="3201" title="German Aerospace Center" label="German Aerospace Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q314203" start="3210" end="3235" title="European Astronaut Centre" label="European Astronaut Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="3250" end="3259" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q157741" start="3403" end="3423" title="Cologne Bonn Airport" label="Cologne Bonn Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q58226" start="3481" end="3499" title="Düsseldorf Airport" label="Düsseldorf Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q280255" start="3505" end="3523" title="Cologne Trade Fair" label="Cologne Trade Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q57305" start="3542" end="3552" title="trade show" label="trade show"/>
<link wikidata="Q664800" start="3711" end="3715" title="Ubii" label="Ubii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426737" start="3719" end="3729" title="Germani cisrhenani" label="Cisrhenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="3730" end="3744" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23048" start="3775" end="3809" title="Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium" label="Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium"/>
<link wikidata="Q756780" start="3842" end="3849" title="Colonia (Roman)" label="colonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="3880" end="3888" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q154732" start="3922" end="3943" title="Agrippina the Younger" label="Agrippina the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="3996" end="4013" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q273025" start="4245" end="4258" title="Gallic Empire" label="Gallic Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q312603" start="4265" end="4273" title="Postumus" label="Postumus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310442" start="4275" end="4281" title="Marcus Aurelius Marius" label="Marius"/>
<link wikidata="Q333770" start="4287" end="4297" title="Victorinus" label="Victorinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8413" start="4321" end="4334" title="Constantine I (emperor)" label="Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12767" start="4571" end="4584" title="Peutinger Map" label="Peutinger Map"/>
<link wikidata="Q316860" start="4744" end="4760" title="Ripuarian Franks" label="Ripuarian Franks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399679" start="4848" end="4867" title="Cologne sewerage system" label="new sewerage system"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="4921" end="4934" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="4942" end="4960" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70 CE)" label="Siege of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412733" start="4980" end="5013" title="Jewish diaspora" label="dispersion (diaspora) of the Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q105098" start="5398" end="5407" title="Austrasia" label="Austrasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31929" start="5419" end="5434" title="Frankish Empire" label="Frankish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301" start="5674" end="5688" title="Charles Martel" label="Charles Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q109240" start="5772" end="5784" title="Chilperic II" label="Chilperic II"/>
<link wikidata="Q106577" start="5794" end="5802" title="Neustria" label="Neustria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272823" start="5854" end="5871" title="Battle of Cologne" label="Battle of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q152356" start="5893" end="5898" title="Eifel" label="Eifel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2531046" start="6000" end="6017" title="Battle of Amblève" label="Battle of Amblève"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="6087" end="6098" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q314428" start="6115" end="6124" title="Hildebold of Cologne" label="Hildebold"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="6141" end="6151" title="archbishop" label="archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q134840" start="6164" end="6180" title="Treaty of Verdun" label="Treaty of Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q150735" start="6215" end="6224" title="Lothair I" label="Lothair I"/>
<link wikidata="Q468902" start="6232" end="6246" title="Middle Francia" label="Middle Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673921" start="6262" end="6273" title="Lotharingia" label="Lotharingia"/>
<link wikidata="Q660393" start="6275" end="6289" title="Lower Lorraine" label="Lower Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56228" start="6378" end="6383" title="Bruno I, Archbishop of Cologne" label="Bruno"/>
<link wikidata="Q43915" start="6421" end="6427" title="Otto I, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Otto I"/>
<link wikidata="Q175211" start="6429" end="6444" title="Kingdom of Germany" label="King of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="6630" end="6651" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Electorate of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q16045" start="6795" end="6801" title="Jülich" label="Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q657241" start="6818" end="6837" title="Duchy of Westphalia" label="Duchy of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151095" start="6877" end="6881" title="Berg (state)" label="Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700198" start="6886" end="6890" title="County of Mark" label="Mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q479702" start="7044" end="7058" title="Archchancellor" label="Archchancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q152295" start="7152" end="7171" title="Battle of Worringen" label="Battle of Worringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="7247" end="7256" title="Free Imperial City" label="Free City"/>
<link wikidata="Q73215" start="7269" end="7295" title="Sigfried II von Westerburg" label="Sigfried II von Westerburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="7320" end="7324" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q55619" start="7884" end="7901" title="Rainald of Dassel" label="Rainald of Dassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51671" start="7926" end="7940" title="Three Wise Men" label="Three Wise Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="8009" end="8014" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q369691" start="8072" end="8084" title="Saint Ursula" label="Saint Ursula"/>
<link wikidata="Q60059" start="8089" end="8104" title="Albertus Magnus" label="Albertus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q405155" start="8193" end="8204" title="trade route" label="trade route"/>
<link wikidata="Q455269" start="8606" end="8627" title="Phillip von Heinsberg" label="Phillip von Heinsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q57346" start="8658" end="8663" title="Defensive wall" label="walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="8740" end="8756" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q150966" start="8771" end="8784" title="Frederick III, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Frederick III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048969" start="8934" end="8946" title="Cologne mark" label="Cologne mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="9266" end="9284" title="free imperial city" label="free imperial city"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="9329" end="9346" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507115" start="9351" end="9366" title="imperial estate" label="imperial estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="9393" end="9406" title="Imperial Diet (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Imperial Diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="10107" end="10128" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Electorate of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q131621" start="10288" end="10307" title="House of Wittelsbach" label="Wittelsbach dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="10435" end="10439" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7036" start="10453" end="10458" title="Brühl, North Rhine-Westphalia" label="Brühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q22722" start="10568" end="10576" title="Prince-elector" label="electors"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="10928" end="10937" title="Free Imperial City" label="free city"/>
<link wikidata="Q156447" start="10981" end="11000" title="Treaty of Lunéville" label="Treaty of Lunéville"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="11035" end="11052" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="11121" end="11136" title="French First Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="11221" end="11229" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q643589" start="11276" end="11287" title="Department (administrative division)" label="Département"/>
<link wikidata="Q153402" start="11288" end="11292" title="Roer (department)" label="Roer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152331" start="11330" end="11333" title="Rur" label="Rur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="11340" end="11346" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="11455" end="11470" title="Napoleonic code" label="Napoleonic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q165728" start="11626" end="11649" title="Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch" label="Bürgerliches Gesetzbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="11679" end="11692" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q46362" start="11709" end="11727" title="Congress of Vienna" label="Congress of Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="11758" end="11776" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Kingdom of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639593" start="11791" end="11821" title="Province of Jülich-Cleves-Berg" label="Province of Jülich-Cleves-Berg"/>
<link wikidata="Q698162" start="11835" end="11849" title="Rhine Province" label="Rhine Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="11896" end="11905" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q66960" start="12060" end="12096" title="Clemens August von Droste-Vischering" label="Clemens August von Droste-Vischering"/>
<link wikidata="Q159879" start="12276" end="12287" title="Kulturkampf" label="Kulturkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q69149" start="12300" end="12313" title="Paul Melchers" label="Paul Melchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="12573" end="12588" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="12951" end="12960" title="Ruhr area" label="Ruhr area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="12966" end="12975" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="13152" end="13165" title="German empire" label="German empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005960" start="13494" end="13532" title="Fortresses of the German Confederation" label="Fortresses of the German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q154748" start="13625" end="13631" title="Verdun" label="Verdun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="13636" end="13641" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14042" end="14053" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q654842" start="14168" end="14193" title="British Army of the Rhine" label="British Army of the Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="14258" end="14281" title="Peace Treaty of Versailles" label="Versailles Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="14426" end="14441" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="14724" end="14733" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="15009" end="15030" title="University of Cologne" label="University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q157575" start="15136" end="15160" title="University of Strasbourg" label="University of Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="15234" end="15240" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="15271" end="15286" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431809" start="15665" end="15694" title="Cologne Butzweilerhof Airport" label="Cologne Butzweilerhof Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q9686" start="15783" end="15807" title="Tempelhof International Airport" label="Berlin Tempelhof Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="15890" end="15900" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q153401" start="15962" end="15971" title="KPD" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="15976" end="15992" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q637829" start="16218" end="16227" title="Reichstag (Weimar Republic)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q689690" start="16433" end="16445" title="Wehrkreis VI" label="Wehrkreis VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742" start="16464" end="16471" title="Münster" label="Münster"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="16604" end="16608" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14870" start="16610" end="16618" title="Siegburg" label="Siegburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="16620" end="16626" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16045" start="16628" end="16634" title="Jülich" label="Jülich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884" start="16636" end="16641" title="Düren" label="Düren"/>
<link wikidata="Q200783" start="16647" end="16655" title="Monschau" label="Monschau"/>
<link wikidata="Q471156" start="16862" end="16896" title="Bombing of Cologne in World War II" label="Bombing of Cologne in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="16943" end="16949" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q471156" start="17132" end="17152" title="Operation Millennium" label="Operation Millennium"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="17195" end="17210" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610834" start="17507" end="17522" title="Hermann Claasen" label="Hermann Claasen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17713" end="17723" title="First United States Army#World War II" label="First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q666414" start="17755" end="17774" title="Western Allied invasion of Germany" label="Invasion of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q111945956" start="17783" end="17789" title="Battle of Cologne (1945)" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q544285" start="18306" end="18329" title="Roonstrasse Synagogue" label="synagogue on Roonstraße"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="18458" end="18468" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="18512" end="18527" title="States of Germany" label="federated state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="18531" end="18553" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="18560" end="18564" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="18737" end="18749" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q97133" start="19022" end="19036" title="Rudolf Schwarz (architect)" label="Rudolf Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q869691" start="19713" end="19739" title="Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne" label="Twelve Romanesque churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q682188" start="19748" end="19758" title="St. Gereon&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="St. Gereon"/>
<link wikidata="Q564520" start="19760" end="19776" title="Great St. Martin Church" label="Great St. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19778" end="19798" title="St. Maria im Kapitol" label="St. Maria im Kapitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q457665" start="20173" end="20185" title="St. Kunibert (Cologne)" label="St. Kunibert"/>
<link wikidata="Q280255" start="21065" end="21083" title="Cologne Trade Fair" label="Cologne Trade Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304009" start="21237" end="21240" title="Mediengruppe RTL Deutschland" label="RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q21973967" start="21353" end="21407" title="2015-16 New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve sexual assaults in Germany" label="2015-16 New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve sexual assaults in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452016" start="21706" end="21721" title="Above mean sea level" label="above sea level"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226401" start="21727" end="21742" title="Monte Troodelöh" label="Monte Troodelöh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594050" start="21789" end="21804" title="Worringer Bruch" label="Worringer Bruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q884315" start="21862" end="21877" title="Cologne Lowland" label="Cologne Lowland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="21913" end="21922" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="21941" end="21945" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="21947" end="21953" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="21958" end="21968" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q164903" start="22123" end="22133" title="Rhine-Ruhr" label="Rhine-Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q167466" start="22198" end="22207" title="Temperateness" label="temperate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="22208" end="22223" title="oceanic climate" label="oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="22225" end="22248" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen: &amp;quot;Cfb&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q66467267" start="22586" end="22614" title="July 2019 European heat wave" label="July 2019 European heat wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460082" start="23569" end="23579" title="flood wall" label="flood wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q193110" start="23741" end="23751" title="floodplain" label="floodplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152243" start="24053" end="24062" title="Rhineland" label="Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="24180" end="24186" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="24200" end="24206" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q14956" start="24475" end="24484" title="Wesseling" label="Wesseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q467065" start="24711" end="24730" title="Cologne Bonn Region" label="Cologne Bonn Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q164903" start="24810" end="24820" title="Rhine-Ruhr" label="Rhine-Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="25860" end="25866" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q492219" start="26000" end="26009" title="Eko Fresh" label="Eko Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q95206" start="26027" end="26038" title="Nazan Eckes" label="Nazan Eckes"/>
<link wikidata="Q32145" start="26206" end="26215" title="Ripuarian language" label="Ripuarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q704841" start="26216" end="26230" title="Central German" label="Central German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7904317" start="26327" end="26348" title="Electorate of Cologne" label="Electorate of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948" start="26363" end="26368" title="Neuss" label="Neuss"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="26399" end="26403" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884" start="26413" end="26418" title="Düren" label="Düren"/>
<link wikidata="Q10898" start="26431" end="26435" title="Olpe, Germany" label="Olpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q497778" start="26545" end="26552" title="Berlinerisch dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="26563" end="26569" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="26653" end="26668" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="26715" end="26732" title="Protestant Church in Germany" label="Protestant Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q182123" start="26734" end="26751" title="Irenaeus" label="Irenaeus of Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q511623" start="26974" end="26988" title="Maternus of Cologne" label="Saint Maternus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="26990" end="27004" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60059" start="27038" end="27053" title="Albertus Magnus" label="Albertus Magnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q11805" start="27082" end="27104" title="Archdiocese of Cologne" label="Archdiocese of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="27164" end="27180" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="27202" end="27225" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical Free Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="27347" end="27371" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q836059" start="27416" end="27438" title="Cologne Central Mosque" label="Cologne Central Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q881198" start="27450" end="27493" title="Turkish-Islamic Union for Religious Affairs" label="Turkish-Islamic Union for Religious Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="27538" end="27544" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q19285371" start="27723" end="27738" title="Henriette Reker" label="Henriette Reker"/>
<link wikidata="Q165494" start="27822" end="27827" title="Adhan" label="Adhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q895591" start="28076" end="28081" title="List of mayors of Cologne" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q895591" start="29116" end="29137" title="List of mayors of Cologne" label="Lord Mayor of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19285371" start="29141" end="29156" title="Henriette Reker" label="Henriette Reker"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="29250" end="29261" title="Independent politician" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="29286" end="29289" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="29291" end="29294" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="FDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="29300" end="29306" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19285371" start="29751" end="29766" title="Henriette Reker" label="Henriette Reker"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="29781" end="29792" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="29794" end="29799" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="29800" end="29803" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="CDU"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="29897" end="29920" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="30008" end="30016" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30087" end="30099" title="Volt Europa#Germany" label="Volt Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="30172" end="30195" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="30348" end="30359" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="30580" end="30591" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="30663" end="30674" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q294989" start="30749" end="30776" title="Ecological Democratic Party" label="Ecological Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="30850" end="30861" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="31495" end="31517" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Alliance 90/The Greens"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="31585" end="31608" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49762" start="31673" end="31699" title="Christian Democratic Union of Germany" label="Christian Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q49764" start="31764" end="31772" title="The Left (Germany)" label="The Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q13124" start="31842" end="31863" title="Free Democratic Party (Germany)" label="Free Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q106205950" start="31927" end="31939" title="Volt Germany" label="Volt Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721203" start="32005" end="32028" title="Alternative for Germany" label="Alternative for Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q22748" start="32091" end="32101" title="Die PARTEI" label="Die PARTEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q327389" start="32310" end="32329" title="Free Voters" label="Free Voters Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q294989" start="32424" end="32451" title="Ecological Democratic Party" label="Ecological Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q571436" start="33235" end="33268" title="Landtag of North Rhine-Westphalia" label="Landtag of North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29953410" start="33327" end="33369" title="2022 North Rhine-Westphalia state election" label="2022 North Rhine-Westphalia state election"/>
<link wikidata="Q154797" start="33465" end="33474" title="Bundestag" label="Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q108701512" start="33529" end="33543" title="List of members of the 20th Bundestag" label="20th Bundestag"/>
<link wikidata="Q27123005" start="33553" end="33570" title="2021 German federal election" label="26 September 2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q245188" start="33886" end="33905" title="modern architecture" label="modern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370468" start="33960" end="33973" title="reconstruction (architecture)" label="reconstructed"/>
<link wikidata="Q100261" start="34118" end="34133" title="Wilhelm Riphahn" label="Wilhelm Riphahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q869662" start="34239" end="34252" title="Cologne Opera" label="Cologne Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739176" start="34803" end="34808" title="Feral organism" label="feral"/>
<link wikidata="Q208060" start="34851" end="34871" title="rose-ringed parakeet" label="rose-ringed parakeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="34908" end="34929" title="Northrhine-Westphalia" label="Northrhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4176" start="35483" end="35500" title="Cologne Cathedral" label="Cologne Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="35635" end="35641" title="gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="35719" end="35738" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q662314" start="35754" end="35779" title="Shrine of the Three Kings" label="Shrine of the Three Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="35811" end="35816" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51671" start="35825" end="35835" title="Biblical Magi" label="Three Magi"/>
<link wikidata="Q869691" start="35984" end="36010" title="Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne" label="Twelve Romanesque churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="36148" end="36159" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman times"/>
<link wikidata="Q682188" start="36173" end="36183" title="St. Gereon&amp;#x27;s Basilica, Cologne" label="St. Gereon"/>
<link wikidata="Q598352" start="36248" end="36268" title="St. Maria im Kapitol" label="St. Maria im Kapitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q564520" start="36315" end="36338" title="Great St. Martin Church" label="Great St. Martin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q25550691" start="36788" end="36797" title="city hall" label="city hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q82117" start="37030" end="37039" title="city gate" label="city gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231497" start="37213" end="37225" title="Cologne Ring" label="Cologne Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425039" start="37465" end="37476" title="Hohe Straße" label="Hohe Straße"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235506" start="37728" end="37741" title="Schildergasse" label="Schildergasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q701088" start="38000" end="38003" title="GfK" label="GfK"/>
<link wikidata="Q317993" start="38273" end="38292" title="Cologne Rodenkirchen Bridge" label="Rodenkirchen Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q884146" start="38294" end="38306" title="South Bridge (Cologne)" label="South Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38320" end="38332" title="Deutz Bridge" label="Deutz Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q696762" start="38334" end="38353" title="Hohenzollern Bridge" label="Hohenzollern Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q316377" start="38393" end="38407" title="Cologne Mülheim Bridge" label="Mülheim Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q818882" start="38432" end="38441" title="tied arch bridge" label="tied arch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685314" start="38600" end="38617" title="Cologne Cable Car" label="Cologne Cable Car"/>
<link wikidata="Q529586" start="38707" end="38732" title="Cologne Zoological Garden" label="Cologne Zoological Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q879411" start="38750" end="38759" title="Rheinpark" label="Rheinpark"/>
<link wikidata="Q153646" start="38838" end="38846" title="Colonius" label="Colonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q95672" start="39184" end="39196" title="Rheinauhafen" label="Rheinauhafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q881186" start="39206" end="39220" title="Messeturm Köln" label="Messeturm Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q3252563" start="39279" end="39295" title="List of museums in Cologne" label="numerous museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q707955" start="39308" end="39329" title="Roman-Germanic Museum" label="Roman-Germanic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q703640" start="39399" end="39412" title="Museum Ludwig" label="Museum Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q38166" start="39461" end="39471" title="modern art" label="modern art"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593" start="39495" end="39502" title="Picasso" label="Picasso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050032" start="39545" end="39554" title="Museu Picasso" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q743206" start="39559" end="39564" title="Musée Picasso" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q950" start="39570" end="39586" title="Museum Schnütgen" label="Museum Schnütgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q869691" start="39659" end="39685" title="Twelve Romanesque churches of Cologne" label="Twelve Romanesque churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q23786747" start="39756" end="39777" title="Galerie Karsten Greve" label="Galerie Karsten Greve"/>
<link wikidata="Q573877" start="40071" end="40090" title="Gürzenich Orchestra" label="Gürzenich Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q869662" start="40127" end="40140" title="Cologne Opera" label="Cologne Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q829283" start="40149" end="40179" title="WDR Symphony Orchestra Cologne" label="WDR Symphony Orchestra Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q177368" start="40283" end="40302" title="Kölner Philharmonie" label="Kölner Philharmonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q565033" start="40330" end="40349" title="Musica Antiqua Köln" label="Musica Antiqua Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q830272" start="40355" end="40381" title="WDR Rundfunkorchester Köln" label="WDR Rundfunkorchester Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537032" start="40386" end="40398" title="WDR Big Band" label="WDR Big Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537040" start="40434" end="40455" title="WDR Rundfunkchor Köln" label="WDR Rundfunkchor Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q154556" start="40561" end="40582" title="Karlheinz Stockhausen" label="Karlheinz Stockhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q203453" start="40649" end="40652" title="Westdeutscher Rundfunk" label="WDR"/>
<link wikidata="Q320592" start="40705" end="40714" title="Krautrock" label="Krautrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q170132" start="40745" end="40748" title="Can (band)" label="Can"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231497" start="40947" end="40963" title="Hohenzollernring" label="Hohenzollernring"/>
<link wikidata="Q42747" start="41146" end="41159" title="Heinrich Böll" label="Heinrich Böll"/>
<link wikidata="Q37922" start="41175" end="41201" title="Nobel Prize for Literature" label="Nobel Prize for Literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626" start="41384" end="41390" title="Kölsch (beer)" label="Kölsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4624" start="41392" end="41398" title="Colognian dialect" label="Kölsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863" start="41547" end="41561" title="Eau de Cologne" label="Eau de Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q328679" start="41676" end="41695" title="Johann Maria Farina" label="Johann Maria Farina"/>
<link wikidata="Q95946" start="42221" end="42238" title="Ferdinand Mülhens" label="Ferdinand Mülhens"/>
<link wikidata="Q236101" start="42452" end="42456" title="4711 (brand)" label="4711"/>
<link wikidata="Q650195" start="42530" end="42543" title="Johann Maria Farina gegenüber dem Jülichs-Platz" label="Farina family"/>
<link wikidata="Q879124" start="42578" end="42596" title="Mäurer &amp;amp; Wirtz" label="Mäurer &amp;amp; Wirtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q262577" start="42652" end="42668" title="Cologne carnival" label="Cologne carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542" start="42881" end="42894" title="Ash Wednesday" label="Ash Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="43539" end="43549" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q23787474" start="43563" end="43586" title="Rivalry between Cologne and Düsseldorf" label="fierce regional rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044124" start="43609" end="43617" title="Carnival in Germany, Switzerland and Austria" label="carnival"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="43627" end="43637" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="43639" end="43647" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626" start="43684" end="43690" title="Kölsch (beer)" label="Kölsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q44924" start="43725" end="43732" title="Altbier" label="Altbier"/>
<link wikidata="Q694490" start="44210" end="44233" title="Fragrance Museum" label="Farina Fragrance Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863" start="44250" end="44264" title="Eau de Cologne" label="Eau de Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q707955" start="44267" end="44294" title="Romano-Germanic Museum" label="Römisch-Germanisches Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q700959" start="44358" end="44381" title="Wallraf-Richartz Museum" label="Wallraf-Richartz Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q703640" start="44444" end="44457" title="Museum Ludwig" label="Museum Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q950" start="44473" end="44489" title="Museum Schnütgen" label="Museum Schnütgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q877567" start="44507" end="44534" title="Museum für Angewandte Kunst (Cologne)" label="Museum für Angewandte Kunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q207241" start="44537" end="44548" title="applied art" label="applied art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621165" start="44551" end="44590" title="Kolumba" label="Kolumba Kunstmuseum des Erzbistums Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q207694" start="44592" end="44602" title="art museum" label="art museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319949" start="44687" end="44707" title="St. Kolumba, Cologne" label="St. Kolumba, Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q615547" start="44822" end="44832" title="EL-DE Haus" label="EL-DE Haus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="44868" end="44875" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="44904" end="44908" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55399" start="45101" end="45125" title="Imhoff-Schokoladenmuseum" label="Imhoff-Schokoladenmuseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18577880" start="45267" end="45273" title="Eryops" label="Eryops"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="45276" end="45282" title="Rock (geology)" label="stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="45287" end="45295" title="minerals" label="minerals"/>
<link wikidata="Q320082" start="45490" end="45523" title="Flora und Botanischer Garten Köln" label="Flora und Botanischer Garten Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="45563" end="45579" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q873964" start="45582" end="45610" title="Forstbotanischer Garten Köln" label="Forstbotanischer Garten Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q272231" start="45616" end="45625" title="arboretum" label="arboretum"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="45639" end="45655" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153818" start="45737" end="45745" title="Ringfest" label="Ringfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q164903" start="46000" end="46010" title="Rhine-Ruhr metropolitan region" label="Rhine-Ruhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q877707" start="46062" end="46078" title="market structure" label="market structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="46100" end="46110" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="46171" end="46187" title="Mass media" label="media industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530704" start="46278" end="46300" title="corporate headquarters" label="corporate headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q203453" start="46358" end="46380" title="Westdeutscher Rundfunk" label="Westdeutscher Rundfunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q155702" start="46382" end="46396" title="RTL (German TV channel)" label="RTL Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q265027" start="46418" end="46422" title="n-tv" label="n-tv"/>
<link wikidata="Q702314" start="46424" end="46440" title="Deutschlandradio" label="Deutschlandradio"/>
<link wikidata="Q896183" start="46442" end="46454" title="Brainpool TV" label="Brainpool TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q367205" start="46496" end="46503" title="Taschen" label="Taschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392254" start="46505" end="46518" title="Tandem Verlag" label="Tandem Verlag"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46524" end="46543" title="M. DuMont Schauberg" label="M. DuMont Schauberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q318616" start="46789" end="46809" title="Generali Deutschland" label="Generali Deutschland"/>
<link wikidata="Q573957" start="46811" end="46817" title="Gen Re" label="Gen Re"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538743" start="46819" end="46826" title="Gothaer Group" label="Gothaer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160054" start="46869" end="46872" title="Axa" label="Axa"/>
<link wikidata="Q638336" start="46884" end="46915" title="Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance Group" label="Mitsui Sumitomo Insurance Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q230426" start="46920" end="46945" title="Zurich Insurance Group" label="Zurich Financial Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q9325" start="46972" end="46981" title="Lufthansa" label="Lufthansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q162189" start="47001" end="47019" title="Lufthansa CityLine" label="Lufthansa CityLine"/>
<link wikidata="Q571934" start="47106" end="47117" title="Ford of Europe" label="Ford Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q883741" start="47172" end="47177" title="Niehl, Cologne" label="Niehl"/>
<link wikidata="Q571943" start="47179" end="47194" title="Ford Germany" label="Ford-Werke GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q173625" start="47197" end="47219" title="Toyota Gazoo Racing Europe" label="Toyota Motorsport GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="47227" end="47233" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="47312" end="47323" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q573266" start="47428" end="47438" title="REWE Group" label="REWE Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q659206" start="47440" end="47453" title="Technischer Überwachungsverein" label="TÜV Rheinland"/>
<link wikidata="Q533617" start="47455" end="47463" title="Deutz AG" label="Deutz AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q4626" start="47480" end="47486" title="Kölsch (beer)" label="Kölsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="47728" end="47739" title="inland port" label="inland port"/>
<link wikidata="Q157741" start="47785" end="47805" title="Cologne Bonn Airport" label="Cologne Bonn Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q280255" start="47868" end="47886" title="Koelnmesse" label="Cologne trade fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q462023" start="48162" end="48183" title="Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger" label="Kölner Stadt-Anzeiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q129238" start="48232" end="48249" title="Startup company" label="startup companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="48530" end="48545" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="48631" end="48635" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061" start="48656" end="48674" title="Bundesautobahn 555" label="Bundesautobahn 555"/>
<link wikidata="Q9013" start="49106" end="49109" title="Bundesautobahn 4" label="A 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q9011" start="49114" end="49117" title="Bundesautobahn 3" label="A 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q77353" start="49438" end="49454" title="Fritz Schumacher (architect)" label="Fritz Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="49598" end="49620" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49646" end="49662" title="Bundesautobahn 3" label="Bundesautobahn 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q314884" start="49699" end="49714" title="Cologne Beltway" label="Cologne Beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903739" start="49859" end="49875" title="bicycle-friendly" label="bicycle-friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q24349" start="49964" end="49998" title="Allgemeiner Deutscher Fahrrad-Club" label="Allgemeiner Deutscher Fahrrad-Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q529938" start="50138" end="50147" title="InterCity" label="InterCity"/>
<link wikidata="Q129172" start="50152" end="50155" title="InterCityExpress" label="ICE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954" start="50175" end="50192" title="Köln Hauptbahnhof" label="Köln Hauptbahnhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q151146" start="50217" end="50233" title="Köln Messe/Deutz station" label="Köln Messe/Deutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q569474" start="50238" end="50258" title="Cologne/Bonn Airport station" label="Cologne/Bonn Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q466985" start="50268" end="50278" title="Thalys" label="TGV Thalys"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="50315" end="50324" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="50466" end="50483" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="50510" end="50516" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q10257" start="50525" end="50539" title="Channel Tunnel" label="Channel Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q95685" start="50568" end="50585" title="Cologne Stadtbahn" label="Cologne Stadtbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328558" start="50598" end="50621" title="Kölner Verkehrs-Betriebe" label="Kölner Verkehrsbetriebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567513" start="50634" end="50643" title="List of Cologne KVB stations" label="extensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268865" start="50644" end="50654" title="light rail" label="light rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="50788" end="50792" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="50904" end="50914" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q95723" start="50933" end="50939" title="S-Bahn" label="S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q481509" start="50977" end="50994" title="Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn" label="Rhine-Ruhr S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375086" start="51189" end="51198" title="Eurolines" label="Eurolines"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="51221" end="51229" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328558" start="51244" end="51271" title="Stadtwerke Köln" label="Häfen und Güterverkehr Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q863915" start="51346" end="51357" title="inland port" label="inland port"/>
<link wikidata="Q157741" start="51485" end="51505" title="Cologne Bonn Airport" label="Cologne/Bonn Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="51614" end="51629" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q895591" start="51664" end="51680" title="mayor of Cologne" label="mayor of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="51755" end="51759" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q276255" start="51792" end="51823" title="European Aviation Safety Agency" label="European Aviation Safety Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q54096" start="51963" end="51984" title="University of Cologne" label="University of Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q54166" start="52048" end="52086" title="Cologne University of Applied Sciences" label="Cologne University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365560" start="52102" end="52132" title="Fachhochschule" label="university of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="52206" end="52218" title="Music school" label="conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q203453" start="52586" end="52608" title="Westdeutscher Rundfunk" label="Westdeutscher Rundfunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q155702" start="52616" end="52619" title="RTL Television" label="RTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q684981" start="52624" end="52627" title="VOX (German TV channel)" label="VOX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927" start="52829" end="52843" title="Cologne (region)" label="Cologne region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147849" start="52877" end="52900" title="Cologne Comedy Festival" label="Cologne Comedy Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q104770" start="53021" end="53031" title="1. FC Köln" label="1. FC Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q82595" start="53059" end="53072" title="Bundesliga" label="2. Bundesliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q151893" start="53124" end="53143" title="RheinEnergieStadion" label="RheinEnergieStadion"/>
<link wikidata="Q37285" start="53182" end="53201" title="2006 FIFA World Cup" label="2006 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="53207" end="53238" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53247" end="53305" title="Internationale Vereinigung Sport- und Freizeiteinrichtungen" label="International Association of Sports and Leisure Facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q695008" start="53457" end="53473" title="FC Viktoria Köln" label="FC Viktoria Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q310608" start="53478" end="53493" title="SC Fortuna Köln" label="SC Fortuna Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q154069" start="53511" end="53518" title="3. Liga" label="3. Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q555836" start="53544" end="53561" title="Regionalliga West" label="Regionalliga West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53630" end="53646" title="1. FSV Köln 1899" label="1. FSV Köln 1899"/>
<link wikidata="Q878690" start="53687" end="53699" title="Verbandsliga" label="Verbandsliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q697902" start="53763" end="53774" title="Kölner Haie" label="Kölner Haie"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="53808" end="53818" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q169519" start="53842" end="53865" title="Deutsche Eishockey Liga" label="Deutsche Eishockey Liga"/>
<link wikidata="Q310525" start="53885" end="53898" title="Lanxess Arena" label="Lanxess Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5147845" start="53942" end="53972" title="Cologne-Weidenpesch Racecourse" label="Cologne-Weidenpesch Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q314794" start="53996" end="54012" title="Cologne Marathon" label="Cologne Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153652" start="54062" end="54074" title="Rund um Köln" label="Rund um Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q159354" start="54149" end="54155" title="rowing (sport)" label="rowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61235434" start="54245" end="54274" title="Kölner Rudergesellschaft 1891" label="Kölner Rudergesellschaft 1891"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54282" end="54309" title="Kölner Ruderverein von 1877" label="Kölner Ruderverein von 1877"/>
<link wikidata="Q446716" start="54317" end="54329" title="Rodenkirchen" label="Rodenkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="54374" end="54380" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="54397" end="54407" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q173625" start="54435" end="54457" title="Toyota Gazoo Racing Europe" label="Toyota Motorsport GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="54615" end="54649" title="Formula One" label="FIA Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852" start="54655" end="54683" title="World Rally Championship" label="FIA World Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376760" start="54692" end="54706" title="European Le Mans Series" label="Le Mans Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q22956043" start="54747" end="54766" title="Toyota Gazoo Racing" label="Toyota Gazoo Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q945048" start="54789" end="54821" title="FIA World Endurance Championship" label="FIA World Endurance Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="54917" end="54939" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155346" start="55096" end="55124" title="2005 FIFA Confederations Cup" label="2005 FIFA Confederations Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q155610" start="55147" end="55190" title="2007 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship" label="2007 World Men&amp;#x27;s Handball Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q155130" start="55192" end="55196" title="2010 IIHF World Championship" label="2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000953" start="55201" end="55236" title="2017 IIHF World Championship" label="2017 Ice Hockey World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55238" end="55269" title="2024 FIFA European Championship" label="2024 FIFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q795457" start="55274" end="55288" title="2010 Gay Games" label="2010 Gay Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q22349518" start="55323" end="55338" title="ESL One Cologne (disambiguation)" label="ESL One Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="" start="55359" end="55364" title="Counter-Strike: Global Offensive" label="CS GO"/>
<link wikidata="Q310525" start="55409" end="55422" title="Lanxess Arena" label="Lanxess Arena"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55461" end="55484" title="SC Colonia 06" label="Sport-Club Colonia 1906"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55529" end="55554" title="Kölner Athleten-Club 1882" label="Kölner Athleten-Club 1882"/>
<link wikidata="Q15012236" start="55630" end="55644" title="Leon Draisaitl" label="Leon Draisaitl"/>
<link wikidata="Q60964" start="55666" end="55676" title="Kim Petras" label="Kim Petras"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058554" start="55719" end="55736" title="Paul-Jürgen Weber" label="Paul-Jürgen Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q77035" start="55771" end="55779" title="Udo Kier" label="Udo Kier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685402" start="55797" end="55809" title="Jean Bugatti" label="Jean Bugatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q50308792" start="55851" end="55866" title="Markus N. Beeko" label="Markus N. Beeko"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="55934" end="55941" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="55951" end="55960" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="55977" end="55984" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="56001" end="56010" title="Bethlehem" label="Bethlehem"/>
<link wikidata="Q100188" start="56031" end="56042" title="Cluj-Napoca" label="Cluj-Napoca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132939" start="56061" end="56068" title="Corinto, Nicaragua" label="Corinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="56089" end="56093" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="56112" end="56118" title="Dnipro" label="Dnipro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16010" start="56137" end="56153" title="Esch-sur-Alzette" label="Esch-sur-Alzette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="56175" end="56187" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="56212" end="56220" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q588" start="56238" end="56246" title="Katowice" label="Katowice"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="56264" end="56269" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="56286" end="56291" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="56310" end="56315" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="56333" end="56342" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4071168" start="56377" end="56394" title="Neukölln" label="Neukölln (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q368227" start="56413" end="56423" title="El Realejo" label="El Realejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="56444" end="56458" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="56476" end="56485" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="56508" end="56516" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="56534" end="56546" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q158089" start="56564" end="56589" title="Treptow-Köpenick" label="Treptow-Köpenick (Berlin)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572" start="56608" end="56613" title="Tunis" label="Tunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="56632" end="56637" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="56654" end="56659" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="56703" end="56712" title="Volgograd" label="Volgograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328558" start="56765" end="56780" title="Stadtwerke Köln" label="Stadtwerke Köln"/>
<link wikidata="Q21973967" start="56887" end="56933" title="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve sexual assaults in Germany" label="New Year&amp;#x27;s Eve sexual assaults in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q151251" start="56936" end="56954" title="Hänneschen-Theater" label="Hänneschen-Theater"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6188" wikidata="Q1326339" url="?curid=6188" title="Buddhist cuisine">
<text>Buddhist cuisine is an Asian cuisine that is followed by monks and many believers from areas historically influenced by Mahayana Buddhism. It is vegetarian or vegan, and it is based on the Dharmic concept of ahimsa (non-violence). Vegetarianism is common in other Dharmic faiths such as Hinduism, Jainism and Sikhism, as well as East Asian religions like Taoism. While monks, nuns and a minority of believers are vegetarian year-round, many believers follow the Buddhist vegetarian diet for celebrations.

Buddhists believe that cooking is seen as a spiritual practice that produces the nourishment which the body needs to work hard and meditate. The origin of &quot;Buddhist food&quot; as a distinct sub-style of cuisine is tied to monasteries, where one member of the community would have the duty of being the head cook and supplying meals that paid respect to the strictures of Buddhist precepts. Temples that were open to visitors from the general public might also serve meals to them and a few temples effectively run functioning restaurants on the premises. In Japan, this culinary custom, recognized as &quot;shōjin ryōri&quot; (精進料理) or devotion cuisine, is commonly offered at numerous temples, notably in Kyoto. This centuries-old culinary tradition, primarily associated with religious contexts, is seldom encountered beyond places like temples, religious festivals, and funerals. A more recent version, more Chinese in style, is prepared by the Ōbaku school of zen, and known as ; this is served at the head temple of Manpuku-ji, as well as various subtemples. In modern times, commercial restaurants have also latched on to the style, catering both to practicing and non-practicing lay people.

== Philosophies governing food ==

=== Vegetarianism ===
Most of the dishes considered to be uniquely Buddhist are vegetarian, but not all Buddhist traditions require vegetarianism of lay followers or clergy. Vegetarian eating is primarily associated with the East and Southeast Asian tradition in China, Vietnam, Japan, and Korea where it is commonly practiced by clergy and may be observed by laity on holidays or as a devotional practice.

In the Mahayana tradition, several sutras of the Mahayana canon contain explicit prohibitions against consuming meat, including sections of the Lankavatara Sutra and Surangama Sutra. The monastic community in Chinese Buddhism, Vietnamese Buddhism and most of Korean Buddhism strictly adhere to vegetarianism. 

Theravada Buddhist monks and nuns consume food by gathering alms themselves, and generally must eat whatever foods are offered to them, including meat. The exception to this alms rule is when monks and nuns have seen, heard or known that animal(s) have been specifically killed to feed the alms-seeker, in which case consumption of such meat would be karmically negative, as well as meat from certain animals, such as dogs and snakes, that were regarded as impure in ancient India. The same restriction is also followed by some lay Buddhists and is known as the consumption of &quot;triply clean meat&quot; (三净肉). The Pāli Scriptures also indicated that Lord Buddha refusing a proposal by his traitor disciple Devadatta to mandate vegetarianism in the monastic precepts.

Tibetan Buddhism has long accepted that the practical difficulties in obtaining vegetables and grains within most of Tibet make it impossible to insist upon vegetarianism; however, many leading Tibetan Buddhist teachers agree upon the great worth of practicing vegetarianism whenever and wherever possible, such as Chatral Rinpoche, a lifelong advocate of vegetarianism who famously released large numbers of fish caught for food back into the ocean once a year, and who wrote about the practice of saving lives.

Both Mahayana and Theravada Buddhists consider that one may practice vegetarianism as part of cultivating Bodhisattvas&#x27;s paramita.

=== Other restrictions ===

In addition to the ban on garlic, practically all Mahayana monastics in China, Korea, Vietnam and Japan specifically avoid eating strong-smelling plants, traditionally asafoetida, shallot, mountain leek and Chinese onion, which together with garlic are referred to as &quot;wǔ hūn&quot; (五葷, or &#x27;Five Acrid and Strong-smelling Vegetables&#x27;) or &quot;wǔ xīn&quot; (五辛 or &#x27;Five Spices&#x27;) as they tend to excite senses. This is based on teachings found in the Brahmajala Sutra, the Surangama Sutra and the Lankavatara Sutra. In modern times this rule is often interpreted to include other vegetables of the onion genus, as well as coriander. The origin of this additional restriction is from the Indic region and can still be found among some believers of Hinduism and Jainism.

The consumption of non-vegetarian food by strict Buddhists is also subject to various restrictions. As well as the aforementioned &quot;triply clean meat&quot; rule followed by Theravada monks, nuns, and some lay Buddhists, many Chinese Buddhists avoid the consumption of beef, large animals, and exotic species. Some Buddhists abstain from eating offal (organ meat), known as &quot;xiàshui&quot; (下水).

Alcohol and other drugs are also avoided by many Buddhists because of their effects on the mind and &quot;mindfulness&quot;. It is part of the Five Precepts which dictate that one is not to &quot;not to take any substance that will cloud the mind.&quot; Caffeinated drinks may sometimes be included under this restriction. 

=== Simple and natural ===

In theory and practice, many regional styles of cooking may be adapted to be &quot;Buddhist&quot; as long as the cook, with the above restrictions in mind, prepares the food, generally in simple preparations, with expert attention to its quality, wholesomeness and flavor. Often working on a tight budget, the monastery cook would have to make the most of whatever ingredients were available.

In &quot;Tenzo kyokun&quot; (&quot;Instructions for the Zen Cook&quot;), Soto Zen founder Eihei Dogen wrote:

In preparing food, it is essential to be sincere and to respect each ingredient regardless of how coarse or fine it is. (...) A rich buttery soup is not better as such than a broth of wild herbs. In handling and preparing wild herbs, do so as you would the ingredients for a rich feast, wholeheartedly, sincerely, clearly. When you serve the monastic assembly, they and you should taste only the flavour of the Ocean of Reality, the Ocean of unobscured Awake Awareness, not whether or not the soup is creamy or made only of wild herbs. In nourishing the seeds of living in the Way, rich food and wild grass are not separate.

== Ingredients ==
Following its dominant status in most parts of East Asia where Buddhism is most practiced, rice features heavily as a staple in the Buddhist meal, especially in the form of rice porridge or congee as the usual morning meal. Noodles and other grains may often be served as well. Vegetables of all sorts are generally either stir-fried or cooked in vegetarian broth with seasonings and may be eaten with various sauces. Onions and garlic are usually avoided as consumption of these is thought to increase undesirable emotions such as anger or sexual desire. Traditionally, eggs and dairy are not permitted. Seasonings will be informed by whatever is common in the local region; for example, soy sauce and vegan dashi figure strongly in Japanese monastery food while Thai curry and tương (as a vegetarian replacement for fish sauce) may be prominent in Southeast Asia. Sweets and desserts are not often consumed, but are permitted in moderation and may be served at special occasions, such as in the context of a tea ceremony in the Zen tradition.

Buddhist vegetarian chefs have become extremely creative in imitating meat using prepared wheat gluten, also known as seitan, kao fu (烤麸) or wheat meat, soy (such as tofu or tempeh), agar, konnyaku and other plant products. Some of their recipes are the oldest and most-refined meat analogues in the world. Soy and wheat gluten are very versatile materials, because they can be manufactured into various shapes and textures, and they absorb flavorings (including, but not limited to, meat-like flavorings), while having very little flavor of their own. With the proper seasonings, they can mimic various kinds of meat quite closely.

Some of these Buddhist vegetarian chefs are in the many monasteries and temples which serve allium-free and mock-meat (also known as &#x27;meat analogues&#x27;) dishes to the monks and visitors (including non-Buddhists who often stay for a few hours or days, to Buddhists who are not monks, but staying overnight for anywhere up to weeks or months). Many Buddhist restaurants also serve vegetarian, vegan, non-alcoholic or allium-free dishes.

Some Buddhists eat vegetarian on the 1st and 15th of the lunar calendar (lenten days), on Chinese New Year eve, and on saint and ancestral holy days. To cater to this type of customer, as well as full-time vegetarians, the menu of a Buddhist vegetarian restaurant usually shows no difference from a typical Chinese or East Asian restaurant, except that in recipes originally made to contain meat, a soy chicken substitute might be served instead.

== Variations by sect or region ==

According to cookbooks published in English, formal monastery meals in the Zen tradition generally follow a pattern of &quot;three bowls&quot; in descending size. The first and largest bowl is a grain-based dish such as rice, noodles or congee; the second contains the protein dish which is often some form of stew or soup; the third and smallest bowl is a vegetable dish or a salad.

== History ==

The earliest surviving written accounts of Buddhism are the Edicts written by King Ashoka, a well-known Buddhist king who propagated Buddhism throughout Asia, and is honored by both Theravada and Mahayana schools of Buddhism. The authority of the Edicts of Ashoka as a historical record is suggested by the mention of numerous topics omitted as well as corroboration of numerous accounts found in the Theravada and Mahayana Tripitakas written down centuries later.

Asoka Rock Edict 1, dated to c. 257 BCE, mentions the prohibition of animal sacrifices in Ashoka&#x27;s Maurya Empire as well as his commitment to vegetarianism; however, whether the Sangha was vegetarian in part or in whole is unclear from these edicts. However, Ashoka&#x27;s personal commitment to, and advocating of, vegetarianism suggests Early Buddhism (at the very least for the layperson) most likely already had a vegetarian tradition (the details of what that entailed besides not killing animals and eating their flesh were not mentioned, and therefore are unknown).

== See also ==
* Buddha&#x27;s delight

* Buddhist ethics
* Buddhist vegetarianism
* Cultural elements of Buddhism
* Index of Buddhism-related articles
* List of diets
* Secular Buddhism
* Vegetarian cuisine
* Vegetarianism and religion
* Korean temple cuisine
* Kaiseki
== References ==
== External links ==

* Shabkar.org: Vegetarianism as a way of life for Buddhists
* Shojin Ryori: Vegetarian Cooking
* Tantras on Buddhist food
* Sutras on vegetarianism
* Return To The Middle Kingdom: Chinese Vegetarian Eating in East Asia
* Toshio Tanahashi
* vegetarian-china.info
* Daigo: a MICHELIN Guide Restaurant</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1326339" start="0" end="16" title="Buddhist cuisine" label="Buddhist cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="23" end="27" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778821" start="29" end="36" title="cuisine" label="cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="57" end="62" title="Bhikkhu" label="monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="120" end="137" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="145" end="155" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="208" end="214" title="ahimsa" label="ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="287" end="295" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="297" end="304" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="309" end="316" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="355" end="361" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="369" end="374" title="Bhikkhu" label="monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q854979" start="376" end="380" title="Bhikkuni" label="nuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428021" start="399" end="408" title="Householder (Buddhism)" label="believers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="733" end="744" title="Buddhist monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q550068" start="882" end="899" title="Buddhist precepts" label="Buddhist precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q384728" start="1459" end="1464" title="Ōbaku" label="Ōbaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q576318" start="1532" end="1542" title="Manpuku-ji" label="Manpuku-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="2160" end="2168" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191035" start="2202" end="2216" title="Mahayana sutras" label="Mahayana canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="2297" end="2314" title="Lankavatara Sutra" label="Lankavatara Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176806" start="2319" end="2334" title="Surangama Sutra" label="Surangama Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="2464" end="2473" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159203" start="2524" end="2528" title="Dana (Buddhism)" label="alms"/>
<link wikidata="Q132196" start="2815" end="2825" title="karma" label="karmically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068293" start="2992" end="3005" title="Upasaka" label="lay Buddhists"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="3082" end="3097" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli Scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q451043" start="3174" end="3183" title="Devadatta" label="Devadatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q483889" start="3236" end="3252" title="Tibetan Buddhism" label="Tibetan Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984040" start="3551" end="3567" title="Chatral Sangye Dorje" label="Chatral Rinpoche"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="3755" end="3763" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="3768" end="3777" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="3856" end="3875" title="Bodhisattvas" label="Bodhisattvas&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q828201" start="3876" end="3884" title="paramita" label="paramita"/>
<link wikidata="Q23400" start="3941" end="3947" title="garlic" label="garlic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="3965" end="3973" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16530385" start="4083" end="4093" title="asafoetida" label="asafoetida"/>
<link wikidata="Q193498" start="4095" end="4102" title="shallot" label="shallot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807269" start="4113" end="4117" title="leek" label="leek"/>
<link wikidata="Q422240" start="4122" end="4135" title="Chinese onion" label="Chinese onion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4955537" start="4390" end="4406" title="Brahmajala Sutra (Mahayana)" label="Brahmajala Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176806" start="4412" end="4427" title="Surangama Sutra" label="Surangama Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q543126" start="4436" end="4453" title="Lankavatara Sutra" label="Lankavatara Sutra"/>
<link wikidata="Q49391" start="4537" end="4548" title="Allium" label="onion genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41611" start="4561" end="4570" title="coriander" label="coriander"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="4686" end="4694" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="4699" end="4706" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="5057" end="5062" title="offal" label="offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q341045" start="5219" end="5230" title="mindfulness" label="mindfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074929" start="5256" end="5269" title="Five Precepts" label="Five Precepts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3983815" start="5869" end="5881" title="Tenzo kyokun" label="Tenzo kyokun"/>
<link wikidata="Q749085" start="5933" end="5941" title="Soto Zen" label="Soto Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318064" start="5950" end="5961" title="Eihei Dogen" label="Eihei Dogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="6705" end="6709" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q878624" start="6804" end="6810" title="congee" label="congee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192874" start="6838" end="6844" title="Noodle" label="Noodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="7303" end="7312" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q851746" start="7323" end="7328" title="dashi" label="dashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144927" start="7378" end="7388" title="Thai curry" label="Thai curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7862790" start="7393" end="7398" title="tương" label="tương"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359655" start="7624" end="7636" title="tea ceremony" label="tea ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q943935" start="7750" end="7762" title="wheat gluten (food)" label="wheat gluten"/>
<link wikidata="Q943935" start="7778" end="7784" title="seitan" label="seitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11006" start="7813" end="7816" title="soy" label="soy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177378" start="7826" end="7830" title="tofu" label="tofu"/>
<link wikidata="Q120096" start="7834" end="7840" title="tempeh" label="tempeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q177998" start="7843" end="7847" title="agar" label="agar"/>
<link wikidata="Q674443" start="7849" end="7857" title="konjac" label="konnyaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q756" start="7868" end="7873" title="plant" label="plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343997" start="7938" end="7951" title="meat analogue" label="meat analogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q773108" start="8229" end="8238" title="seasoning" label="seasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="8350" end="8361" title="monastery" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="8366" end="8372" title="temple" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="9297" end="9300" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q385743" start="9341" end="9364" title="Ōryōki" label="&amp;quot;three bowls&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q878624" start="9459" end="9465" title="congee" label="congee"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="9682" end="9711" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Edicts written by King Ashoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="10023" end="10032" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q779933" start="10088" end="10106" title="Edicts of Ashoka" label="Asoka Rock Edict 1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10142" end="10174" title="prohibition of animal sacrifices" label="prohibition of animal sacrifices"/>
<link wikidata="Q62943" start="10192" end="10205" title="Maurya Empire" label="Maurya Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="10271" end="10277" title="Sangha" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="10511" end="10521" title="vegetarian" label="vegetarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402333" start="10684" end="10705" title="Buddha&amp;#x27;s delight" label="Buddha&amp;#x27;s delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q550068" start="10709" end="10724" title="Buddhist ethics" label="Buddhist ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509923" start="10727" end="10749" title="Buddhist vegetarianism" label="Buddhist vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246681" start="10752" end="10781" title="Cultural elements of Buddhism" label="Cultural elements of Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056345" start="10784" end="10818" title="Index of Buddhism-related articles" label="Index of Buddhism-related articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349446" start="10821" end="10834" title="List of diets" label="List of diets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151242" start="10837" end="10853" title="Secular Buddhism" label="Secular Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q638022" start="10856" end="10874" title="Vegetarian cuisine" label="Vegetarian cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268371" start="10877" end="10903" title="Vegetarianism and religion" label="Vegetarianism and religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256231" start="10906" end="10927" title="Korean temple cuisine" label="Korean temple cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q175595" start="10930" end="10937" title="Kaiseki" label="Kaiseki"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6191" wikidata="Q29222" url="?curid=6191" title="Charles V">
<text>Charles V may refer to:

* Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor (1500–1558)
* Charles V of Naples (1661–1700), better known as Charles II of Spain
* Charles V of France (1338–1380), called the Wise
* Charles V, Duke of Lorraine (1643–1690)
* Infante Carlos of Spain, Count of Molina (1788–1855), first Carlist pretender to the throne of Spain (as Charles V)

==See also==
* Karl V. (opera)
* Carlos V (chocolate bar)
* King Charles (disambiguation)
* Charles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q29222" start="0" end="9" title="Charles V" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="27" end="56" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36174" start="71" end="90" title="Charles V of Naples" label="Charles V of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q167782" start="142" end="161" title="Charles V of France" label="Charles V of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q156949" start="193" end="220" title="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine" label="Charles V, Duke of Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q343621" start="235" end="275" title="Infante Carlos of Spain, Count of Molina" label="Infante Carlos of Spain, Count of Molina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193478" start="367" end="382" title="Karl V. (opera)" label="Karl V. (opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042737" start="385" end="409" title="Carlos V (chocolate bar)" label="Carlos V (chocolate bar)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815398" start="412" end="441" title="King Charles (disambiguation)" label="King Charles (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958359" start="444" end="451" title="Charles" label="Charles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6193" wikidata="Q76743" url="?curid=6193" title="Constantin von Tischendorf">
<text>Lobegott Friedrich Constantin (von) Tischendorf (18 January 18157 December 1874) was a German biblical scholar. In 1844, he discovered the world&#x27;s oldest and most complete Bible dated to around the mid-4th century and called Codex Sinaiticus after Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery at Mount Sinai.

Tischendorf was made an honorary doctor by the University of Oxford on 16 March 1865, and by the University of Cambridge on 9 March 1865 following his discovery. While a student gaining his academic degree in the 1840s, he earned international recognition when he deciphered the &quot;Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus&quot;, a 5th-century Greek manuscript of the New Testament.

==Early life and education==
Tischendorf was born in Lengenfeld, Saxony, the son of a forensic physician. After attending primary school in Lengenfield, he went to grammar school in nearby Plauen. From Easter 1834, having achieved excellent marks at school, he studied theology and philosophy at the University of Leipzig.

At Leipzig he was mainly influenced by JGB Winer, and he began to take special interest in New Testament criticism. Winer&#x27;s influence gave him the desire to use the oldest manuscripts in order to compile the text of the New Testament as close to the original as possible. Despite his father&#x27;s death in 1835 and his mother&#x27;s just a year later, he was still able to achieve his doctorate in 1838, before accepting a tutoring job in the home of Reverend Ferdinand Leberecht Zehme in Grossstadeln where he met and fell in love with the clergyman&#x27;s daughter Angelika. He published a volume of poetry in 1838, Maiknospen (Buds of May) and Der junge Mystiker (The Young Mystic) was published under a pseudonym in 1839. At this time he also began his first critical edition of the NewTestament in Greek which was to become his life&#x27;s work.

After a journey through southern Germany and Switzerland, and a visit to Strassburg, he returned to Leipzig to begin work on a critical study of the New Testament text.

==Career==
In 1840, he qualified as university lecturer in theology with a dissertation on the recensions of the New Testament text, the main part of which reappeared the following year in the prolegomena to his first edition of the Greek New Testament. These early textual studies convinced him of the absolute necessity of new and more exact collations of manuscripts.

From October 1840 until January 1843 he was in Paris, busy with the treasures of the Bibliothèque Nationale, eking out his scanty means by making collations for other scholars, and producing for the publisher, Firmin Didot, several editions of the Greek New Testament, one of them exhibiting the form of the text corresponding most closely to the Vulgate. His second edition retracted the more precarious readings of the first, and included a statement of critical principles that is a landmark for evolving critical studies of Biblical texts.

A great triumph of these laborious months was the decipherment of the palimpsest &quot;Codex Ephraemi Syri Rescriptus&quot;, of which the New Testament part was printed before he left Paris, and the Old Testament in 1845. His success in dealing with a manuscript that, having been over-written with other works of Ephrem the Syrian, had been mostly illegible to earlier collators, made him more well known, and gained support for more extended critical expeditions. He now became &quot;professor extraordinarius&quot; at Leipzig, where he was married in 1845. He also began to publish &quot;Reise in den Orient&quot;, an account of his travels in the east (in 2 volumes, 1845–46, translated as &quot;Travels in the East&quot; in 1847). Even though he was an expert in reading the text of a palimpsest (this is a document where the original writing has been removed and new writing added), he was not able to identify the value or meaning of the &quot;Archimedes Palimpsest&quot;, a torn leaf of which he held and after his death was sold to the Cambridge University Library.

Tischendorf briefly visited the Netherlands in 1841 and England in 1842. In 1843 he visited Italy for thirteen months, before continuing on to Egypt, Sinai, and the Levant, returning via Vienna and Munich.

=== Discovery of the Codex Sinaiticus Bible manuscripts ===

In 1844 Tischendorf travelled the first time to Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery at the foot of Mount Sinai in Egypt, where he found a portion of what would later be hailed as the oldest complete known New Testament.

Of the many pages which were contained in an old wicker basket (the kind that the monastery hauled in its visitors as customary in unsafe territories) he was given 43 pages containing a part of the Old Testament as a present. He donated those 43 pages to King Frederick Augustus II of Saxony (reigned 1836–1854), to honour him and to recognise his patronage as the funder of Tischendorf&#x27;s journey. (Tischendorf held a position as Theological Professor at Leipzig University, also under the patronage of Frederick Augustus II.) Leipzig University put two of the leaves on display in 2011.

Tischendorf reported in his 1865 book &quot;Wann Wurden Unsere Evangelen Verfasst&quot;, translated to English in 1866 as &quot;When Were Our Gospels Written&quot; in the section &quot;The Discovery of the Sinaitic Manuscript&quot; that he found, in a trash basket, forty-three sheets of parchment of an ancient copy of the Greek Old Testament, reporting that the monks were using the trash to start fires. And Tischendorf, horrified, asked if he could have them. He deposited them at the University of Leipzig, under the title of the &quot;Codex Friderico-Augustanus&quot;, a name given in honour of his patron, Frederick Augustus II of Saxony, king of Saxony. The fragments were published in 1846, although Tischendorf kept the place of discovery a secret.

Many have expressed skepticism at the historical accuracy of this report of saving a 1500-year-old parchment from the flames. J. Rendel Harris referred to the story as a &quot;myth&quot;. The Tischendorf Lesebuch (see References) quotes that the Librarian Kyrillos mentioned to Tischendorf that the contents of the basket had already twice been submitted to the fire. The contents of the baskets were damaged scriptures, the third filling apparently, so cited by Tischendorf himself.[see Tischendorf Lesebuch, Tischendorf&#x27;s own account]. 
In 1853 Tischendorf made a second trip to the Syrian monastery but made no new discoveries. He returned a third time in January 1859 under the patronage of Tsar Alexander II of Russia with the active aid of the Russian government to find more of the &quot;Codex Frederico-Augustanus&quot; or similar ancient Biblical texts. On 4 February, the last day of his visit, he was shown a text which he recognized as significant – the &quot;Codex Sinaiticus&quot; – a Greek manuscript of the complete New Testament and parts of the Old Testament dating to the 4th century.

Tischendorf persuaded the monks to present the manuscript to Tsar Alexander II of Russia, at the cost of the Tsar it was published in 1862 (in four folio volumes). Those ignorant of the details of his discovery of the &quot;Codex Sinaiticus&quot; accused Tischendorf of buying manuscripts from ignorant monastery librarians at low prices. Indeed, he was never rich, but he staunchly defended the rights of the monks at Saint Catherine&#x27;s Monastery when he persuaded them eventually to send the manuscript to the Tsar. This took approximately 10 years because the abbot of St Catherines had to be re-elected and confirmed in office in Cairo and in Jerusalem, and during those 10 years no one in the monastery had the authority to hand over any documents. However the documents were handed over in due course following a signed and sealed letter to the Tsar Alexander II (Schenkungsurkunde). Even so, the monks of Mt. Sinai still display a receipt-letter from Tischendorf promising to return the manuscript to them in the case that the donation can not be done. This token-letter had to be destroyed, following the late issue of a &quot;Schenkungsurkunde&quot;. This donation act regulated the Codex exchange with the Tsar, against 9000 Rubels and Rumanian estate protection. The Tsar was seen as the protector of Greek-Orthodox Christians. Thought lost since the Russian revolution, the document (Schenkungsurkunde) has now resurfaced in St Petersburg 2003, and has also been long before commented upon by other scholars like Kurt Aland. The monastery has disputed the existence of the gift certificate (Schenkungsurkunde) since the British Library was named as the new owner of the Codex. Now following the late find of the gift certificate by the National Russian Library the existence cannot be disputed in earnest.

In 1869 the Tsar awarded Tischendorf the style of &quot;von&quot; Tischendorf as a Russian noble. 327 facsimile editions of the Codex were printed in Leipzig for the Tsar (instead of a salary for the three-year work of Tischendorf the Tsar gave him 100 copies for reselling) in order to celebrate the 1000th anniversary of the traditional foundation of the Rus&#x27; state in 862 with the publication of this most amazing find. Supporting the production of the facsimile, all made with special print characters for each of the 4 scribes of the Codex Sinaiticus, was shift work and contributed to Tischendorf&#x27;s early demise due to exhausting work for months also during nights. Thus the Codex found its way to the Imperial Library at St. Petersburg.

When the 4-volume luxury edition of the Sinai Bible was completed in 1862, C. Tischendorf presented the original ancient manuscript to Emperor Alexander II. Meanwhile, the question of transferring the manuscript to the full possession of the Russian Sovereign remained unresolved for some years. In 1869, the new Archbishop of Sinai, Callistratus, and the monastic community, signed the official certificate presenting the manuscript to the Tsar. The Russian Government, in turn, bestowed the Monastery with 9000 rubles and decorated the Archbishop and some of the brethren with orders. In 1933 the Soviet Government sold the Codex Sinaiticus for 100,000 pounds to the British Museum in London, England. The official certificate with signatures in Russian/ French/ Greek sections has been refound in St Petersburg.

=== Novum Testamentum Graece – publication with 21 editions ===
In the winter of 1849 the first edition of his great work now titled &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece. Ad antiquos testes recensuit. Apparatum criticum multis modis&quot; appeared (translated as &quot;Greek New Testament. The ancient witnesses reviewed. Preparations critical in many ways&quot;), containing s of criticism, adding examples of their application that are applicable to students today:

Basic rule: &quot;The text is only to be sought from ancient evidence, and especially from Greek manuscripts, but without neglecting the testimonies of versions and fathers.&quot;
#&quot;A reading altogether peculiar to one or another ancient document is suspicious; as also is any, even if supported by a class of documents, which seems to evince that it has originated in the revision of a learned man.&quot;
#&quot;Readings, however well supported by evidence, are to be rejected, when it is manifest (or very probable) that they have proceeded from the errors of copyists.&quot;
#&quot;In parallel passages, whether of the New or Old Testament, especially in the Synoptic Gospels, which ancient copyists continually brought into increased accordance, those testimonies are preferable, in which precise accordance of such parallel passages is not found; unless, indeed, there are important reasons to the contrary.&quot;
#&quot;In discrepant readings, that should be preferred which may have given occasion to the rest, or which appears to comprise the elements of the others.&quot;
#&quot;Those readings must be maintained which accord with New Testament Greek, or with the particular style of each individual writer.&quot;

These were partly the result of the tireless travels he had begun in 1839 in search of unread manuscripts of the New Testament, &quot;to clear up in this way,&quot; he wrote, &quot;the history of the sacred text, and to recover if possible the genuine apostolic text which is the foundation of our faith.&quot;

In 1850 appeared his edition of the &quot;Codex Amiatinus&quot; (in 1854 corrected) and of the Septuagint version of the Old Testament (7th edition, 1887); in 1852, amongst other works, his edition of the &quot;Codex Claromontanus&quot;. In 1859, he was named &quot;professor ordinarius&quot; of theology and of Biblical paleography, this latter professorship being specially created for him; and another book of travel, &quot;Aus dem heiligen Lande&quot;, appeared in 1862. Tischendorf&#x27;s Eastern journeys were rich enough in other discoveries to merit the highest praise.

Besides his fame as a scholar, he was a friend of both Robert Schumann, with whom he corresponded, and Felix Mendelssohn, who dedicated a song to him. His colleague Samuel Prideaux Tregelles wrote warmly of their mutual interest in textual scholarship. His personal library, purchased after his death, eventually came to the University of Glasgow, where a commemorative exhibition of books from his library was held in 1974 and can be accessed by the public.

==Death==
Lobegott Friedrich Constantin (von) Tischendorf died in Leipzig on 7 December 1874, aged 59.

== Codex Sinaiticus ==

The &quot;Codex Sinaiticus&quot; contains a 4th-century manuscript of New Testament texts. Two other Bibles of similar age exist, though they are less complete: Codex Vaticanus in the Vatican Library and Codex Alexandrinus, currently owned by the British Library. The Codex Sinaiticus is deemed by some to be the most important surviving New Testament manuscript, as no older manuscript is as nearly complete as the Codex. The codex can be viewed in the British Library in London, or as a digitized version on the Internet.

== Tischendorf&#x27;s motivation ==

Throughout his life Tischendorf sought old biblical manuscripts, as he saw it as his task to give theology a Greek New Testament which was based on the oldest possible scriptures. He intended to be as close as possible to the original sources. Tischendorf&#x27;s greatest discovery was in the monastery of Saint Catherine on the Sinai Peninsula, which he visited in May 1844, and again in 1853 and 1859 (as Russian envoy).

In 1862 Tischendorf published the text of the Codex Sinaiticus for the 1000th Anniversary of the Russian Monarchy in both an illustrious four-volume facsimile edition and in a less costly text edition, to enable all scholars to have access to the Codex.

Tischendorf pursued a constant course of editorial labours, mainly on the New Testament, until he was broken down by overwork in 1873. His motive, as explained in a publication on Tischendorf&#x27;s Letter by Prof. Christfried Boettrich (Leipzig University, Prof. of Theology), was to prove scientifically that the words of the Bible were trustfully transmitted over centuries.:de:Christfried Böttrich

==Works==

His &quot;magnum opus&quot; was the &quot;Critical Edition of the New Testament.&quot;

The great edition, of which the text and apparatus appeared in 1869 and 1872, was called by himself &quot;editio viii&quot;; but this number is raised to twenty or twenty-one, if mere reprints from stereotype plates and the minor editions of his great critical texts are included; posthumous prints bring the total to forty-one. Four main recensions of Tischendorf&#x27;s text may be distinguished, dating respectively from his editions of 1841, 1849, 1859 (ed. vii), and 1869–72 (ed. viii). The edition of 1849 may be regarded as historically the most important, from the mass of new critical material it used; that of 1859 is distinguished from Tischendorf&#x27;s other editions by coming nearer to the received text; in the eighth edition, the testimony of the Sinaitic manuscript received great (probably too great) weight. The readings of the Vatican manuscript were given with more exactness and certainty than had been possible in the earlier editions, and the editor had also the advantage of using the published labours of his colleague and friend Samuel Prideaux Tregelles.

Of relatively lesser importance was Tischendorf&#x27;s work on the Greek Old Testament. His edition of the Roman text, with the variants of the Alexandrian manuscript, the &quot;Codex Ephraemi&quot;, and the &quot;Friderico-Augustanus&quot;, was of service when it appeared in 1850, but, being stereotyped, was not greatly improved in subsequent issues. Its imperfections, even within the limited field it covers, may be judged by the aid of Eberhard Nestle&#x27;s appendix to the 6th issue (1880).

Besides this may be mentioned editions of the New Testament apocrypha, &quot;De Evangeliorum apocryphorum origine et usu&quot; (1851); &quot;Acta Apostolorum apocrypha&quot; (1851); &quot;Evangelia apocrypha&quot; (1853; 2nd edition, 1876); &quot;Apocalypses apocryphae&quot; (1866), and various minor writings, partly of an apologetic character, such as &quot;Wann wurden unsere Evangelien verfasst?&quot; (&quot;When Were Our Gospels Written?&quot;; 1865; 4th edition, 1866, digitized by Google and available for e-readers), &quot;Haben wir den echten Schrifttext der Evangelisten und Apostel?&quot; (1873), and &quot;Synopsis evangelica&quot; (7th edition, 1898).

=== Facsimile of manuscripts ===
* &quot;Codex Ephraemi Syri rescriptus, sive Fragmenta Novi Testamenti&quot;, Lipsiae 1843
* &quot;Codex Ephraemi Syri rescriptus, sive Fragmenta Veteris Testamenti&quot;, Lipsiae 1845
* Notitia editionis codicis Bibliorum Sinaitici (Leipzig 1860)
* &quot;Anecdota sacra et profana&quot; (Leipzig 1861)

=== Editions of Novum Testamentum Graece ===
* &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece. Editio stereotypa secunda&quot;, (Lipsiae 1862)
* &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece&quot;. Editio Quinta, Lipsiae 1878
* &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece&quot;. Editio Septima, Lipsiae 1859

=== Editio Octava ===
* Gospels: &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece: ad antiquissimos testes denuo recensuit, apparatum criticum omni studio perfectum&quot;, vol. I (1869)
* Acts–Revelation: &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece. Editio Octava Critica Maior&quot;, vol. II (1872)
* Prolegomena I–VI: &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece. Editio Octava Critica Maior&quot;, vol. III, Part 1 (1884)
* Prolegomena VII–VIII: &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece. Editio Octava Critica Maior&quot;, vol. III, Part 2 (1890)
* Prolegomena IX–XIII: &quot;Novum Testamentum Graece. Editio Octava Critica Maior&quot;, vol. III, Part 3 (1894)
* Novum Testamentum graece: recensionis Tischendorfianae ultimae textum. Lipsiae 1881

=== LXX ===
* Vetus Testamentum Graece iuxta LXX interpretes: Vetus Testamentum Graece iuxta LXX (Volume 1)
*Vetus Testamentum Graece iuxta LXX interpretes: Vetus Testamentum Graece iuxta LXX (Volume 2)

===His publications continued===

* Doctrina Pauli apostoli de vi mortis Christi satisfactoria. Leipzig, 1837 Google
* Fritz der junge Mystiker, oder die drei letzten Festzeiten aus seinem Leben...: eine biographische Skizze. Leipzig, [1839]
* Disputatio de Christo, pane vitae, sive de loco Evang. Ioann. c. VI. vv. 5159 Leipzig, 1839
* Die Geissler: namentlich die große Geißelfahrt nach Straßburg im Jahre 1349. Leipzig, 1840
* De ev. Matth. c. 19. v. 16 et 39. Leipzig, 1840
* De recensionibus quas dicunt textus Novi Testamenti ratione potissimum habita Scholzii: dissertatio historica exegetica critica. Leipzig, 1840 [Hochschulschrift]
* Novum Testamentum Graece / Ad Antiquos Testes Recensuit Lectionesque Variantes Elzeviriorum Stephani Griesbachii Notavit Constantinus Tischendorf. Paris, 1842
* Hē Kainē Diathēkē / In Antiquis Testibus Textum Versionis Vulgatae Latinae Indagavit Lectionesque Variantes Stephani Et Griesbachii Notavit V. S. Venerabili Jager in Consilium Adhibito Constantinus Tischendorf. Paris, 1842
* Codex Ephraemi Syri rescriptus sive fragmenta utriusque testamenti. T.1. Fragmenta Veteris testamenti, T. 2. Fragmenta Novi testamenti. Leipzig, 1843
* Weihnachtspredigt ... in Lengefeld. Leipzig, 1845
* Monumenta sacra inedita sive reliquiae antiquissimae textus Novi testamenti Graeci: ex novum plus mille annorum codicibus per Europam dispersis. Leipzig, 1846
* Codex Friderico-Augustanus sive fragmenta Veteris Testamenti: e codice Graeco, omnium qui in Europa supersunt facile antiquissimo; in Oriente detexit, in patriam attulit. Leipzig, 1846
* De Israelitarum per mare rubrum transitu: cum tabula. Leipzig, 1847
* Evangelium Palatinum ineditum sive reliquiae textus Evangeliorum Latini ante Hieronymum versi: ex Codice Palatino Purpureo quarti vel quinti p. Chr. saeculi. Leipzig, 1847
* Der Geist der Wahrheit: Zeitpredigt am Sonntag Cantate den 6. Mai 1849 in der Universitätskirche zu Leipzig gehalten. Leipzig, 1849
* Novum Testamentum: Latine interprete Hieronymo; ex celeberrimo codice Amiatino omnium et antiquissimo et praestantissimo. Leipzig, 1850
* Acta apostolorum apocrypha. Leipzig, 1851 Google
* Synopsis evangelica: ex quattuor evangeliis ordine chronologico concinnavit. Leipzig, 1851 Google-USA* (5. Aufl. 1884)
* De evangeliorum apocryphorum origine et usu. In: Verhandelingen / uitg. door het Haagsche Genootschap tot Verdediging van de christelijke Godsdienst, Bd. 12, Den Haag, 1851
* Codex Claromontanus sive Epistulae Pauli omnes Graece et Latine: ex Codice Parisiensi celeberrimo nomine Claromontani plerumque dicto sexti ut videtur post Christum saeculi. Leipzig, 1852
* Evangelia apocrypha: adhibitis plurimis codicibus graecis et latinis maximam partem nunc primum consultis atque ineditorum copia insignibus. Leipzig, 1853 Google Editio Altera 1874: Google-USA*
* Novum Testamentum Triglottum: graece, latine, germanice; graecum textum addito lectionum variarum delectu recensuit, latinum Hieronymi notata Clementina lectione ex auctoritate codicum restituit, germanicum ad pristinam lutheranae editionis veritatem revocavit. Leipzig, 1854
* Anecdota sacra et profana ex oriente et occidente allata sive notitia codicum Graecorum, Arabicorum, Syriacorum, Copticorum, Hebraicorum, Aethiopicorum, Latinorum: cum excerptis multis maximam partem Graecis et 35 scripturarum antiquissimarum speciminibus. Leipzig, 1855 Google Editio repetita 1861: Michigan, Google, Google
* Pastor: Graece; ex fragmentis Lipsiensibus. Leipzig, 1856
* Novum Testamentum Graece et Latine: Graecum textum addito lectionum variarum delectu rec.; Latinum Hieronymi notata Clementina lectione ex auct. codicum. Leipzig, 1858
* Notitia editionis Codicis Bibliorum Sinaitici auspiciis imperatoris Alexandri II. susceptae. Leipzig, 1860
* Aus dem heiligen Lande: nebst fünf Abbildungen in Holzschnitt und einer lithographirten Tafel. Leipzig, 1862
* Vorworte zur sinaitischen Bibelhandschrift zu St. Petersburg : unter den Auspicien seiner Kaiserlichen Maiestät Alexander II. dem Dunkel entzogen, nach Europa überbracht, zur Hebung und Verherrlichung christlicher Wissenschaft. Leipzig, 1862
* Novum Testamentum Sinaiticum sive Novum Testamentum cum Epistola Barnabae et Fragmentis Pastoris : ex codice Sinaitico ... Leipzig, 1863
* Die Anfechtungen der Sinai-Bibel. Leipzig, 1865 Google
* Aus Dem Heiligen Lande. Leipzig, 1865 Google
* Wann wurden unsere Evangelien verfasst? Leipzig, 1865 Google, 2. Expl. Google
* Novum Testamentum Graece: ex sinaitico codice omnium antiquissimo vaticana itemque Elzeviriana lectione notata. Leipzig, 1865
* Apocalypses apocryphae Mosis, Esdrae, Pauli, Johannis, item Mariae Dormitio: additis Evangeliorum et actuum Apocryphorum supplementis. Leipzig, 1866 Internet Archive Internet Archive
* Appendix Codicum celeberrimorum Sinaitici, Vaticani, Alexandrini cum imitatione ipsorum antiqua manu scriptorum. Leipzig, 1867
* Philonea: inedita altera, altera nunc demum recte ex vetere scriptura eruta. Leipzig, 1868 Internet Archive
* Responsa ad calumnias romanas: item supplementum novi testamenti ex sinaitico codice anno 1865 editi. Leipzig, 1870
* Novum Testamentum graece: ad antiquissimos testes denuo recensuit, apparatum. Leipzig, 1869–1872. 1. Band 1869 Google-USA*, 2. Band 1872 Google-USA*
* Die Sinaibibel, ihre Entdeckung, Herausgabe und Erwerbung. Leipzig, 1871 Google-USA*
* Die evangelische Alliance-Deputation an Kaiser Alexander zu Friedrichshafen: zur Abwehr der groben Entstellungen und Verleumdungen des Herrn von Wurstemberger (zu Bach bei Bern). Leipzig, 1872
* Clementis Romani epistulae. Ad ipsius codicis alexandrini fidem ac modum repetitis curis edidit Constantinus de Tischendorf. Leipzig, 1873. Internet Archive
* Haben wir den ächten Schrifttext der Evangelisten und Apostel? Leipzig, 1873 Google-USA* (2. Aufl.)
* Liber Psalmorum: hebraicus atque latinus ab Hieronymo ex hebraeo conversus. Leipzig, 1874

===Cooperation===

* Textum ... recensuit, brevem apparatum criticum una cum variis lectionibus Elzevirorum, Knapii, Scholzii, Lachmanni subjunxit, argumenta et locos parallelos indicavit, commentationem ... edd. Stephanicae tertiae atque Millianae, Matthaeianae, Griesbachianae praemisit Aenoth. Frid. Const. Tischendorf. Leipzig, 1841
* Clementinorum Epitomae duae: altera edita correctior, inedita altera nunc primum integra ex codicibus Romanis et excerptis Tischendorfianis, cura Alberti Rud. Max. Dressel. Accedunt Friderici Wieseleri Adnotationes criticae ad Clementis Romani quae feruntur homilias. Leipzig, 1859 Internet Archive
* Ad Vetus Testamentum Graecum ex auctoritate Sixti V. Pont. Max. a. 1587 editum a Leandro van Ess quoad textum accuratissime recusum trecentis annis post editionem originalem novis curis iteratum prolegomena et epilegomena. Bredt, 1887
* Novum Testamentum : Constantin Tischendorf: griechisch, lateinisch, englisch, Ostervald: französisch, Martin Luther, DeWette, Richard Nagel: deutsch ... Hrsg. Eugen Niethe Berlin, 1891

===Second Author===

* Ezra Abbot: The late Professor Tischendorf. Aus: The Unitarian Review and Religious Magazine. März 1875 (Festschrift Konstantin von Tischendorf)
* Caspar René Gregory: Tischendorf, Lobegott Friedrich Constantin. In: Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie. Band 38. Duncker &amp; Humblot, Leipzig 1894, S. 371–373

==See also==
* List of New Testament papyri
* List of New Testament uncials
* Agnes and Margaret Smith
* Editio Octava Critica Maior

==Footnotes==
==References==
* Black, Matthew, and Robert Davidson, &quot;Constantin von Tischendorf and the Greek New Testament&quot; Glasgow: University of Glasgow Press, 1981.
* Christfried Böttrich: &quot;One Story – Different Perspectives. The Case of the Codex Sinaiticus&quot;, in: Codex Sinaiticus - New Perspectives on the Ancient Biblical Manuscript, Scot McKendrick, David Parker, Amy David Myshrall, Cillian O&#x27;Hogan (Hg.), London 2015 (Papers from the Sinaticus-Conference July 2009 in the British Library London).
* 
* In addition to the handbooks on New Testament criticism, Carl Bertheau&#x27;s article on Tischendorf in Herzog-Hauck, &quot;Realencyklopädie&quot; (3rd edition, 1907)
* THE HISTORY OF THE ACQUISITION OF THE SINAI BIBLE BY THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT IN THE CONTEXT OF RECENT FINDINGS IN RUSSIAN ARCHIVES1, A.V. Zakharova
* Bibliographie Konstantin von Tischendorf (1815–1874), Christfried Bőttrich
* Tischendorf Lesebuch, Christfried Bőttrich, 1999
* Tischendorf Erinnerungen, Ludwig Schneller, Verlag der St-Johannis Druckerei, Schweickhardt, Lahr-Dinglingen, 1991
* Various Tischendorf publications from Christfried Bőttrich

==External links==

* Tischendorf. V. Various Works. Codices, Synoptics, Testaments, Anecdotes, Criticism. 12 vols. 1845–1880
* Monumenta sacra inedita. Nova Collectio, 1–6 volumes (1857–1870) at the Internert Archive
*Tischendorf Internet Archive

=== Sortable articles ===
* Works by Von Tischendorf in English at CCEL
* Tischendorf&#x27;s eighth Greek New Testament with morphological tags and lemmas
* Comparison of Tischendorf&#x27;s 8th GNT text with other manuscript editions on the Manuscript Comparator
* A digital edition of the Evangelia Apocrypha document written in Latin and Greek, in pdf format.
* Novum Testamentum graece (1859)
* Complete Apparatus, 8th Version in pdf – </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q76743" start="0" end="47" title="Constantin von Tischendorf" label="Lobegott Friedrich Constantin (von) Tischendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="94" end="102" title="biblical" label="biblical"/>
<link wikidata="Q152962" start="230" end="246" title="Codex Sinaiticus" label="Codex Sinaiticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185362" start="253" end="285" title="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery" label="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q377485" start="289" end="300" title="Mount Sinai" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="350" end="370" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="400" end="423" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q290500" start="588" end="613" title="Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus" label="Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="635" end="640" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266076" start="641" end="651" title="Biblical manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="659" end="672" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q46869" start="728" end="738" title="Lengenfeld" label="Lengenfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q153015" start="740" end="746" title="Kingdom of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952" start="864" end="870" title="Plauen" label="Plauen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="975" end="996" title="University of Leipzig" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q96569" start="1038" end="1047" title="Georg Benedikt Winer" label="JGB Winer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="1090" end="1103" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q275456" start="1104" end="1113" title="textual criticism" label="criticism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1494" end="1506" title="Grossstadeln" label="Grossstadeln"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="1930" end="1940" title="Strassburg" label="Strassburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10753032" start="2122" end="2131" title="recension" label="recension"/>
<link wikidata="Q14953108" start="2371" end="2380" title="collation" label="collation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193563" start="2484" end="2506" title="Bibliothèque nationale de France" label="Bibliothèque Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368849" start="2609" end="2621" title="Firmin Didot" label="Firmin Didot"/>
<link wikidata="Q131175" start="2746" end="2753" title="Vulgate" label="Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q274076" start="3014" end="3024" title="palimpsest" label="palimpsest"/>
<link wikidata="Q290500" start="3031" end="3061" title="Codex Ephraemi Rescriptus" label="Codex Ephraemi Syri Rescriptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="3143" end="3156" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q200608" start="3258" end="3275" title="Ephrem the Syrian" label="Ephrem the Syrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770470" start="3895" end="3916" title="Archimedes Palimpsest" label="Archimedes Palimpsest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028334" start="3989" end="4017" title="Cambridge University Library" label="Cambridge University Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="4052" end="4063" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4163" end="4168" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="4170" end="4175" title="Sinai peninsula" label="Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="4185" end="4191" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4207" end="4213" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="4218" end="4224" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q185362" start="4336" end="4368" title="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery" label="Saint Catherine&amp;#x27;s Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q377485" start="4384" end="4395" title="Mount Sinai" label="Mount Sinai"/>
<link wikidata="Q57986" start="4766" end="4797" title="Frederick Augustus II of Saxony" label="Frederick Augustus II of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="4966" end="4984" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig University"/>
<link wikidata="Q872896" start="5589" end="5610" title="Leipzig University Library" label="University of Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152962" start="5641" end="5667" title="Codex Sinaiticus" label="Codex Friderico-Augustanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57986" start="5713" end="5744" title="Frederick Augustus II of Saxony" label="Frederick Augustus II of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q200911" start="5986" end="6002" title="J. Rendel Harris" label="J. Rendel Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="6565" end="6587" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152962" start="6837" end="6853" title="Codex Sinaiticus" label="Codex Sinaiticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="7031" end="7035" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83171" start="7036" end="7058" title="Alexander II of Russia" label="Alexander II of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44613" start="7273" end="7282" title="monastery" label="monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q267566" start="8722" end="8746" title="National Library of Russia" label="National Russian Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108445" start="9150" end="9159" title="Kievan Rus&amp;#x27;" label="Rus&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="10217" end="10231" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q746704" start="10503" end="10527" title="Novum Testamentum Graece" label="Novum Testamentum Graece"/>
<link wikidata="Q182603" start="10992" end="10999" title="Fathers of the Church" label="fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="11494" end="11510" title="Synoptic Gospels" label="Synoptic Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="11972" end="11991" title="Koine Greek" label="New Testament Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="12308" end="12317" title="Twelve apostles" label="apostolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2567818" start="12410" end="12425" title="Codex Amiatinus" label="Codex Amiatinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29334" start="12463" end="12473" title="Septuagint" label="Septuagint"/>
<link wikidata="Q912605" start="12579" end="12598" title="Codex Claromontanus" label="Codex Claromontanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179957" start="12689" end="12700" title="paleography" label="paleography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351" start="13002" end="13017" title="Robert Schumann" label="Robert Schumann"/>
<link wikidata="Q46096" start="13050" end="13067" title="Felix Mendelssohn" label="Felix Mendelssohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q546298" start="13112" end="13137" title="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles" label="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="13272" end="13293" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="13473" end="13480" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152962" start="13545" end="13561" title="Codex Sinaiticus" label="Codex Sinaiticus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209285" start="13696" end="13711" title="Codex Vaticanus" label="Codex Vaticanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213678" start="13719" end="13734" title="Vatican Library" label="Vatican Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q318233" start="13739" end="13757" title="Codex Alexandrinus" label="Codex Alexandrinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q23308" start="13989" end="14004" title="British Library" label="British Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q36755" start="14426" end="14441" title="Sinai Peninsula" label="Sinai Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q152962" start="14567" end="14583" title="Codex Sinaiticus" label="Codex Sinaiticus"/>
<link wikidata="" start="15153" end="15177" title=":de:Christfried Böttrich" label=":de:Christfried Böttrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q167172" start="15476" end="15486" title="stereotype" label="stereotype"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="16126" end="16133" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q546298" start="16335" end="16360" title="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles" label="Samuel Prideaux Tregelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q290500" start="16541" end="16555" title="Codex Ephraemi" label="Codex Ephraemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q67945" start="16805" end="16820" title="Eberhard Nestle" label="Eberhard Nestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718887" start="16909" end="16932" title="New Testament apocrypha" label="New Testament apocrypha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417837" start="26349" end="26377" title="List of New Testament papyri" label="List of New Testament papyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419177" start="26380" end="26409" title="List of New Testament uncials" label="List of New Testament uncials"/>
<link wikidata="Q545684" start="26412" end="26436" title="Agnes and Margaret Smith" label="Agnes and Margaret Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338707" start="26439" end="26466" title="Editio Octava Critica Maior" label="Editio Octava Critica Maior"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26649" end="26669" title="Christfried Böttrich" label="Christfried Böttrich"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="6195" wikidata="Q36023" url="?curid=6195" title="Calvin Coolidge">
<text>John Calvin Coolidge Jr. ( ; July 4, 1872January 5, 1933) was the 30th president of the United States, serving from 1923 to 1929. A Republican lawyer from Massachusetts, he previously served as the 29th vice president from 1921 to 1923 under President Warren G. Harding, and as the 48th governor of Massachusetts from 1919 to 1921. Coolidge gained a reputation as a small-government conservative with a taciturn personality and dry sense of humor that earned him the nickname &quot;Silent Cal&quot;.

Coolidge began his career as a member of the Massachusetts State House. He rose up the ranks of Massachusetts politics and was elected governor in 1918. As governor, Coolidge ran on the record of fiscal conservatism, strong support for women&#x27;s suffrage, and vague opposition to Prohibition. His prompt and effective response to the Boston police strike of 1919 thrust him into the national spotlight as a man of decisive action. The following year, the Republican Party nominated Coolidge as the running mate to Senator Warren G. Harding in the 1920 presidential election, which they won in a landslide. Coolidge served as vice president until Harding&#x27;s death in 1923, after which he assumed the presidency. 

During his presidency, Coolidge restored public confidence in the White House after the Harding administration&#x27;s many scandals. He signed into law the Indian Citizenship Act of 1924, which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans, and oversaw a period of rapid and expansive economic growth known as the &quot;Roaring Twenties&quot;, leaving office with considerable popularity. 

Coolidge was known for his hands-off governing approach and pro-business stance; biographer Claude Fuess wrote: &quot;He embodied the spirit and hopes of the middle class, could interpret their longings and express their opinions. That he did represent the genius of the average is the most convincing proof of his strength.&quot; Coolidge chose not to run again in 1928, remarking that ten years as president would be &quot;longer than any other man has had it—too long!&quot;

Coolidge is widely admired for his stalwart support of racial equality during a period of heightened racial tension, and is highly regarded by advocates of smaller government and &quot;laissez-faire&quot; economics; supporters of an active central government generally view him far less favorably. His critics argue that he failed to use the country&#x27;s economic boom to help struggling farmers and workers in other flailing industries, and there is still much debate among historians about the extent to which Coolidge&#x27;s economic policies contributed to the onset of the Great Depression, which began shortly after he left office. Scholars have ranked Coolidge in the lower half of U.S. presidents.

==Early life and family history==
John Calvin Coolidge Jr. was born on July 4, 1872, in Plymouth Notch, Vermont—the only U.S. president to be born on Independence Day. He was the elder of the two children of John Calvin Coolidge Sr. (1845–1926) and Victoria Josephine Moor (1846–1885). Although named for his father, from early childhood Coolidge was addressed by his middle name. The name Calvin was used in multiple generations of the Coolidge family, apparently selected in honor of John Calvin, the Protestant Reformer.

Coolidge Senior engaged in many occupations and developed a statewide reputation as a prosperous farmer, storekeeper, and public servant. He held various local offices, including justice of the peace and tax collector and served in both houses of the Vermont General Assembly. When Coolidge was 12 years old, his chronically ill mother died at the age of 39, perhaps from tuberculosis. His younger sister, Abigail Grace Coolidge (1875–1890), died at the age of 15, probably of appendicitis, when Coolidge was 18. Coolidge&#x27;s father married a Plymouth schoolteacher in 1891, and lived to the age of 80.

Coolidge&#x27;s earliest American ancestor, John Coolidge, emigrated from Cottenham, Cambridgeshire, England, around 1630 and settled in Watertown, Massachusetts. Coolidge also descended from Samuel Appleton, who settled in Ipswich and led the Massachusetts Bay Colony during King Philip&#x27;s War. Coolidge&#x27;s great-great-grandfather, another John Coolidge, was an American military officer in the Revolutionary War and one of the first selectmen of the town of Plymouth. 

His grandfather Calvin Galusha Coolidge served in the Vermont House of Representatives. His cousin Park Pollard was a businessman in Cavendish, Vermont, and the longtime chair of the Vermont Democratic Party. Coolidge&#x27;s mother was the daughter of Hiram Dunlap Moor, a Plymouth Notch farmer, and Abigail Franklin.

==Early career and marriage==

===Education and law practice===
Coolidge attended the Black River Academy and then St. Johnsbury Academy before enrolling at Amherst College, where he distinguished himself in the debating class. As a senior, he joined the Phi Gamma Delta fraternity and graduated &quot;cum laude&quot;. While at Amherst, Coolidge was profoundly influenced by philosophy professor Charles Edward Garman, a Congregational mystic who had a neo-Hegelian philosophy. Coolidge explained Garman&#x27;s ethics forty years later:

At his father&#x27;s urging after graduation, Coolidge moved to Northampton, Massachusetts, to become a lawyer. Coolidge followed the common practice of apprenticing with a local law firm, Hammond &amp; Field, and reading law with them. John C. Hammond and Henry P. Field, both Amherst graduates, introduced Coolidge to practicing law in the county seat of Hampshire County, Massachusetts. In 1897, Coolidge was admitted to the Massachusetts bar, becoming a country lawyer. With his savings and a small inheritance from his grandfather, Coolidge opened his own law office in Northampton in 1898. He practiced commercial law, believing that he served his clients best by staying out of court. As his reputation as a hard-working and diligent attorney grew, local banks and other businesses began to retain his services.

===Marriage and family===
In 1903, Coolidge met Grace Goodhue, a graduate of the University of Vermont and a teacher at Northampton&#x27;s Clarke School for the Deaf. They married on October 4, 1905, at 2:30 p.m. in a small ceremony which took place in the parlor of Grace&#x27;s family&#x27;s house, having overcome her mother&#x27;s objections to the marriage. The newlyweds went on a honeymoon trip to Montreal, originally planned for two weeks but cut short by a week at Coolidge&#x27;s request. After 25 years he wrote of Grace, &quot;for almost a quarter of a century she has borne with my infirmities and I have rejoiced in her graces&quot;.

The Coolidges had two sons: John (1906–2000) and Calvin Jr. (1908–1924). On June 30, 1924, Calvin Jr. had played tennis with his brother on the White House tennis courts without putting on socks and developed a blister on one of his toes. The blister subsequently degenerated into sepsis. Calvin Jr. died a little over a week later at the age of 16. 

Coolidge never forgave himself for Calvin Jr&#x27;s death. His eldest son John said it &quot;hurt [Coolidge] terribly&quot;, and psychiatric biographer Robert E. Gilbert, author of&quot; The Tormented President: Calvin Coolidge, Death, and Clinical Depression&quot;, said that Coolidge &quot;ceased to function as President after the death of his sixteen-year-old son&quot;. Gilbert writes that after Calvin Jr.&#x27;s death Coolidge displayed all ten of the symptoms the American Psychiatric Association lists as evidence of major depressive disorder. John later became a railroad executive, helped start the Coolidge Foundation, and was instrumental in creating the President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site.

Coolidge was frugal, and when it came to securing a home, he insisted upon renting. He and his wife attended Northampton&#x27;s Edwards Congregational Church before and after his presidency.

==Local political office (1898−1915)==

===City offices===
The Republican Party was dominant in New England at the time, and Coolidge followed the example of Hammond and Field by becoming active in local politics. In 1896, Coolidge campaigned for Republican presidential candidate William McKinley, and was selected to be a member of the Republican City Committee the next year. In 1898, he won election to the City Council of Northampton, placing second in a ward where the top three candidates were elected. The position offered no salary but provided Coolidge with valuable political experience. 

In 1899, the city council made Coolidge city solicitor. He was elected to a one-year term in 1900 and reelected in 1901. This position gave Coolidge more experience as a lawyer and paid a salary of $600 (). In 1902, the city council selected a Democrat for city solicitor, and Coolidge returned to private practice. Soon thereafter, the clerk of courts for the county died, and Coolidge was chosen to replace him. The position paid well, but it barred him from practicing law, so he remained at the job for only a year. 

In 1904, Coolidge suffered his sole defeat at the ballot box, losing an election to the Northampton school board. When told that some of his neighbors voted against him because he had no children in the schools he would govern, the recently married Coolidge replied, &quot;Might give me time!&quot;

===Massachusetts state legislator and mayor===

In 1906, the local Republican committee nominated Coolidge for election to the Massachusetts House of Representatives. He won a close victory over the incumbent Democrat, and reported to Boston for the 1907 session of the Massachusetts General Court. In his freshman term, Coolidge served on minor committees and, although he usually voted with the party, was known as a Progressive Republican, voting in favor of such measures as women&#x27;s suffrage and the direct election of Senators. 

While in Boston, Coolidge became an ally, and then a liegeman, of then U.S. Senator Winthrop Murray Crane, who controlled the Massachusetts Republican Party&#x27;s western faction; Crane&#x27;s party rival in eastern Massachusetts was U.S. Senator Henry Cabot Lodge. Coolidge forged another key strategic alliance with Guy Currier, who had served in both state houses and had the social distinction, wealth, personal charm, and broad circle of friends Coolidge lacked, and which had a lasting impact on his political career. In 1907, Coolidge was reelected. In the 1908 session he was more outspoken, though not in a leadership position.

Instead of vying for another term in the State House, Coolidge returned home to his growing family and ran for mayor of Northampton when the incumbent Democrat retired. He was well liked in the town, and defeated his challenger by a vote of 1,597 to 1,409. During his first term from 1910 to 1911, he increased teachers&#x27; salaries and retired some of the city&#x27;s debt while still managing to effect a slight tax decrease. In 1911, he was renominated and defeated the same opponent by a slightly larger margin.

In 1911, the State Senator for the Hampshire County area retired and successfully encouraged Coolidge to run for his seat for the 1912 session. Coolidge defeated his Democratic opponent by a large margin. At the start of that term, he became chairman of a committee to arbitrate the &quot;Bread and Roses&quot; strike by the workers of the American Woolen Company in Lawrence, Massachusetts. After two tense months, the company agreed to the workers&#x27; demands, in a settlement proposed by the committee. 

A major issue affecting Massachusetts Republicans in 1912 was the party split between the progressive wing, which favored Theodore Roosevelt, and the conservative wing, which favored William Howard Taft. Although he favored some progressive measures, Coolidge refused to leave the Republican party. When the new Progressive Party declined to run a candidate in his state senate district, Coolidge won reelection against his Democratic opponent by an increased margin.

In the 1913 session, Coolidge enjoyed renowned success in arduously navigating to passage the Western Trolley Act, which connected Northampton with a dozen similar industrial communities in Western Massachusetts. 

Coolidge intended to retire after his second term, as was customary, but when the president of the state senate, Levi H. Greenwood, considered running for lieutenant governor, Coolidge decided to run for the Senate again in hopes of being elected its presiding officer. Greenwood later decided to run for reelection to the Senate, and was defeated primarily due to his opposition to women&#x27;s suffrage. 

Coolidge was in favor of the women&#x27;s vote, and was reelected. With Crane&#x27;s help, Coolidge assumed the presidency of a closely divided Senate. After his election in January 1914, Coolidge delivered a published and frequently quoted speech, &quot;Have Faith in Massachusetts&quot;, which summarized his philosophy of government.

Coolidge&#x27;s speech was well received, and he attracted some admirers on its account. Towards the end of the term, many of them were proposing Coolidge&#x27;s name for nomination to lieutenant governor. After winning reelection to the Senate by an increased margin in the 1914 elections, Coolidge was reelected unanimously to be President of the Senate. Coolidge&#x27;s supporters, led by fellow Amherst alumnus Frank Stearns, encouraged him again to run for lieutenant governor. Stearns, an executive with the Boston department store R. H. Stearns, became another key ally, and began a publicity campaign on Coolidge&#x27;s behalf before he announced his candidacy at the end of the 1915 legislative session.

==Lieutenant Governor and Governor of Massachusetts (1916−1921)==
Coolidge entered the primary election for lieutenant governor and was nominated to run alongside gubernatorial candidate Samuel W. McCall. Coolidge was the leading vote-getter in the Republican primary, and balanced the Republican ticket by adding a western presence to McCall&#x27;s eastern base of support. McCall and Coolidge won the 1915 election to their respective one-year terms, with Coolidge defeating his opponent by more than 50,000 votes.

In Massachusetts, the lieutenant governor does not preside over the state Senate, as is the case in many other states; nevertheless, as lieutenant governor, Coolidge was a deputy governor functioning as an administrative inspector and was a member of the governor&#x27;s council. He was also chairman of the finance committee and the pardons committee. As a full-time elected official, Coolidge discontinued his law practice in 1916, though his family continued to live in Northampton. McCall and Coolidge were both reelected in 1916 and in 1917. When McCall decided that he would not stand for a fourth term, Coolidge announced his intention to run for governor.

===1918 election===
Coolidge was unopposed for the Republican nomination for Governor of Massachusetts in 1918. He and his running mate, Channing Cox, a Boston lawyer and Speaker of the Massachusetts House of Representatives, ran on the previous administration&#x27;s record: fiscal conservatism, a vague opposition to Prohibition, support for women&#x27;s suffrage, and support for American involvement in World War I. The issue of the war proved divisive, especially among Irish and German Americans. Coolidge was elected by a margin of 16,773 votes over his opponent, Richard H. Long, in the smallest margin of victory of any of his statewide campaigns.

===Boston police strike===

In 1919, in reaction to a plan of the policemen of the Boston Police Department to register with a union, Police Commissioner Edwin U. Curtis announced that such an act would not be tolerated. In August of that year, the American Federation of Labor issued a charter to the Boston Police Union. Curtis declared the union&#x27;s leaders were guilty of insubordination and would be relieved of duty, but indicated he would cancel their suspension if the union was dissolved by September 4. The mayor of Boston, Andrew Peters, convinced Curtis to delay his action for a few days, but with no results, and Curtis suspended the union leaders on September 8. The following day, about three-quarters of the policemen in Boston went on strike. 

Tacitly but fully in support of Curtis&#x27;s position, Coolidge closely monitored the situation but initially deferred to the local authorities. He anticipated that only a resulting measure of lawlessness could sufficiently prompt the public to understand and appreciate the controlling principle: that a policeman does not strike. That night and the next, there was sporadic violence and rioting in the city. Concerned about sympathy strikes by the firemen and others, Peters called up some units of the Massachusetts National Guard stationed in the Boston area pursuant to an old and obscure legal authority and relieved Curtis of duty.

Coolidge, sensing the severity of circumstances were then in need of his intervention, conferred with Crane&#x27;s operative, William Butler, and then acted. He called up more units of the National Guard, restored Curtis to office, and took personal control of the police force. Curtis proclaimed that all of the strikers were fired from their jobs, and Coolidge called for a new police force to be recruited.
That night Coolidge received a telegram from AFL leader Samuel Gompers. &quot;Whatever disorder has occurred&quot;, Gompers wrote, &quot;is due to Curtis&#x27;s order in which the right of the policemen has been denied&quot;. 

Coolidge publicly answered Gompers&#x27;s telegram, denying any justification whatsoever for the strike—and his response launched him into the national consciousness. Newspapers nationwide picked up on Coolidge&#x27;s statement and he became the strike&#x27;s opponents&#x27; newest hero. Amid the First Red Scare, many Americans were terrified of the spread of communist revolutions like those in Russia, Hungary, and Germany. Coolidge had lost some friends among organized labor, but conservatives saw a rising star. Although he usually acted with deliberation, the Boston police strike gave Coolidge a national reputation as a decisive leader and strict enforcer of law and order.

===1919 election===
In 1919, Coolidge and Cox were renominated for their respective offices in 1919. By this time Coolidge&#x27;s supporters, especially Stearns, had publicized his actions in the Police Strike around the state and the nation, and some of Coolidge&#x27;s speeches were published in book form. He faced the same opponent as in 1918, Richard Long, but this time Coolidge defeated him by 125,101 votes, more than seven times his margin of victory from a year earlier. His actions in the police strike, combined with the massive electoral victory, led to suggestions that Coolidge run for president in 1920.

===Legislation and vetoes as governor===
By the time Coolidge was inaugurated on January 2, 1919, the First World War had ended, and Coolidge pushed the legislature to give a $100 bonus () to Massachusetts veterans. He signed a bill reducing the work week for women and children from 54 hours to 48, saying, &quot;We must humanize the industry, or the system will break down.&quot; He passed a budget that kept the tax rates the same, while trimming $4 million from expenditures, allowing the state to retire some of its debt.

Coolidge wielded the veto pen as governor. His most publicized veto prevented an increase in legislators&#x27; pay by 50%. Although he was personally opposed to Prohibition, he vetoed a bill in May 1920 that would have allowed the sale of beer or wine of 2.75% alcohol or less, in Massachusetts in violation of the Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. &quot;Opinions and instructions do not outmatch the Constitution,&quot; he said in his veto message. &quot;Against it, they are void.&quot;

==Vice presidency (1921–1923)==

===1920 election===
At the 1920 Republican National Convention, most of the delegates were selected by state party caucuses, not primaries. As such, the field was divided among many local favorites. Coolidge was one such candidate, and while he placed as high as sixth in the voting, the powerful party bosses running the convention, primarily the party&#x27;s U.S. Senators, never considered him seriously. After ten ballots, the bosses and then the delegates settled on Senator Warren G. Harding of Ohio as their nominee for president. 

When the time came to select a vice-presidential nominee, the bosses also announced their choice, Senator Irvine Lenroot of Wisconsin, and then departed after his name was put forth, relying on the rank and file to confirm their decision. A delegate from Oregon, Wallace McCamant, had read &quot;Have Faith in Massachusetts&quot; and proposed Coolidge for vice president instead. The suggestion caught on quickly, with the masses craving an act of independence from the absent bosses, and Coolidge was unexpectedly nominated.

The Democrats nominated another Ohioan, James M. Cox, for president and the Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Franklin D. Roosevelt, for vice president. The question of the United States joining the League of Nations was a major issue in the campaign, as was the unfinished legacy of Progressivism. Harding ran a &quot;front-porch&quot; campaign from his home in Marion, Ohio, but Coolidge took to the campaign trail in the Upper South, New York, and New Englandhis audiences carefully limited to those familiar with Coolidge and those placing a premium upon concise and short speeches. On November 2, 1920, Harding and Coolidge were victorious in a landslide, winning more than 60 percent of the popular vote, including every state outside the South. They won in Tennessee, the first time a Republican ticket had won a Southern state since Reconstruction.
===&quot;Silent Cal&quot;===

The vice presidency did not carry many official duties, but Harding invited Coolidge to attend cabinet meetings, making him the first vice president to do so. He gave a number of unremarkable speeches around the country.

As vice president, Coolidge and his vivacious wife Grace were invited to quite a few parties, where the legend of &quot;Silent Cal&quot; was born. It is from this time that most of the jokes and anecdotes involving Coolidge originate, such as Coolidge being &quot;silent in five languages&quot;. Although Coolidge was known to be a skilled and effective public speaker, in private he was a man of few words and was commonly referred to as &quot;Silent Cal&quot;. 

An apocryphal story has it that a person seated next to Coolidge at a dinner told him, &quot;I made a bet today that I could get more than two words out of you&quot;, to which Coolidge replied, &quot;You lose&quot;. On April 22, 1924, Coolidge said that the &quot;You lose&quot; incident never occurred. The story was related by Frank B. Noyes, President of the Associated Press, to its membership at its annual luncheon at the Waldorf Astoria Hotel, when toasting and introducing Coolidge, the invited speaker. After the introduction and before his prepared remarks, Coolidge told the membership, &quot;Your President [Noyes] has given you a perfect example of one of those rumors now current in Washington which is without any foundation.&quot;

Coolidge often seemed uncomfortable among fashionable Washington society. When asked why he continued to attend so many of their dinner parties, he replied, &quot;Got to eat somewhere.&quot; Alice Roosevelt Longworth, a leading Republican wit, underscored Coolidge&#x27;s silence and his dour personality: &quot;When he wished he were elsewhere, he pursed his lips, folded his arms, and said nothing. He looked then precisely as though he had been weaned on a pickle.&quot; Coolidge and his wife, Grace, who was a great baseball fan, once attended a Washington Senators game and sat through all nine innings without saying a word, except once when he asked her the time.

As president, Coolidge&#x27;s reputation as a quiet man continued. &quot;The words of a President have an enormous weight,&quot; he later wrote, &quot;and ought not to be used indiscriminately.&quot; Coolidge was aware of his stiff reputation, and cultivated it. &quot;I think the American people want a solemn ass as a President,&quot; he once told Ethel Barrymore, &quot;and I think I will go along with them.&quot; Some historians suggest that Coolidge&#x27;s image was created deliberately as a campaign tactic. Others believe his withdrawn and quiet behavior was natural, deepening after the death of his son in 1924. Dorothy Parker, upon learning that Coolidge had died, reportedly remarked, &quot;How can they tell?&quot;

==Presidency (1923–1929)==

On August 2, 1923, President Harding died unexpectedly from a heart attack in San Francisco while on a speaking tour of the western United States. Vice President Coolidge was in Vermont visiting his family home, which had neither electricity nor a telephone, when he received word by messenger of Harding&#x27;s death. Coolidge dressed, said a prayer, and came downstairs to greet the reporters who had assembled. His father, a notary public and justice of the peace, administered the oath of office in the family&#x27;s parlor by the light of a kerosene lamp at 2:47 a.m. on August 3, 1923, whereupon the new President of the United States returned to bed.

Coolidge returned to Washington the next day, and was sworn in again by Justice Adolph A. Hoehling Jr. of the Supreme Court of the District of Columbia, to forestall any questions about the authority of a state official to administer a federal oath. This second oath-taking remained a secret until it was revealed by Harry M. Daugherty in 1932, and confirmed by Hoehling. When Hoehling confirmed Daugherty&#x27;s story, he indicated that Daugherty, then serving as United States Attorney General, asked him to administer the oath without fanfare at the Willard Hotel. According to Hoehling, he did not question Daugherty&#x27;s reason for requesting a second oath-taking but assumed it was to resolve any doubt about whether the first swearing-in was valid.


The nation initially did not know what to make of Coolidge, who had maintained a low profile in the Harding administration. Many had even expected him to be replaced on the ballot in 1924. Coolidge believed that those of Harding&#x27;s men under suspicion were entitled to every presumption of innocence, taking a methodical approach to the scandals, principally the Teapot Dome scandal, while others clamored for rapid punishment of those they presumed guilty. 

Coolidge thought the Senate investigations of the scandals would suffice. The resulting resignations of those involved affirmed this. He personally intervened in demanding the resignation of Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty after Daugherty refused to cooperate with the investigations. He then set about to confirm that no loose ends remained in the administration, arranging for a full briefing on the wrongdoing. Harry A. Slattery reviewed the facts with him, Harlan F. Stone analyzed the legal aspects for him, and Senator William E. Borah assessed and presented the political factors.

On December 6, 1923, Coolidge addressed Congress when it reconvened, giving a speech that supported many of Harding&#x27;s policies, including Harding&#x27;s formal budgeting process, the enforcement of immigration restrictions, and the arbitration of coal strikes ongoing in Pennsylvania. 

The address to Congress was the first presidential speech to be broadcast over the radio. The Washington Naval Treaty was proclaimed one month into Coolidge&#x27;s term, and was generally well received nationally. In May 1924, Congress passed the World War I veterans&#x27; World War Adjusted Compensation Act (&quot;Bonus Bill&quot;), overriding Coolidge&#x27;s veto. Later that year, Coolidge signed the Immigration Act, which was aimed at restricting southern and eastern European immigration, but appended a signing statement expressing his unhappiness with the bill&#x27;s specific exclusion of Japanese immigrants. 

Just before the Republican Convention began, Coolidge signed into law the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced the top marginal tax rate from 58% to 46%, cut personal income tax rates across the board, increased the estate tax, and bolstered it with a new gift tax.

On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the act granting citizenship to all Native Americans born in the United States. By that time, two-thirds of them were already citizens, having gained it through marriage, military service (veterans of World War I were granted citizenship in 1919), or land allotments.

===1924 election===

The Republican Convention was held from June 10 to 12, 1924, in Cleveland, Ohio. Coolidge was nominated on the first ballot. The convention nominated Frank Lowden of Illinois for vice president on the second ballot, but he declined. Former Brigadier General Charles G. Dawes was nominated on the third ballot and accepted.

The Democrats held their convention the next month in New York City. The convention soon deadlocked, and after 103 ballots, the delegates agreed upon a compromise candidate, John W. Davis, with Charles W. Bryan nominated for vice president. The Democrats&#x27; hopes were buoyed when Robert M. La Follette, a Republican senator from Wisconsin, split from the GOP to form a new Progressive Party. Many believed that the split in the Republican Party, like the one in 1912, would allow a Democrat to win the presidency.

After the conventions and the death of his younger son Calvin, Coolidge became withdrawn. He later said that &quot;when he [the son] died, the power and glory of the Presidency went with him.&quot; Even as he mourned, Coolidge ran his standard campaign, not mentioning his opponents by name or maligning them, and delivering speeches on his theory of government, including several that were broadcast over the radio. 

It was the most subdued campaign since 1896, partly because of Coolidge&#x27;s grief, but also because of his naturally non-confrontational style. The other candidates campaigned in a more modern fashion, but despite the split in the Republican party, the results were similar to those of 1920. Coolidge won every state outside the South except Wisconsin, La Follette&#x27;s home state. He won the election with 382 electoral votes and the popular vote by 2.5 million votes.

===Industry and trade===

During Coolidge&#x27;s presidency, the United States experienced a period of rapid economic growth known as the &quot;Roaring Twenties&quot;. He left the administration&#x27;s industrial policy in the hands of his activist Secretary of Commerce, Herbert Hoover, who energetically used government auspices to promote business efficiency and develop airlines and radio. 

Coolidge disdained regulation and appointed men to the Federal Trade Commission and the Interstate Commerce Commission, who did little to restrict the activities of businesses under their jurisdiction. The regulatory state under Coolidge was, as one biographer called it, &quot;thin to the point of invisibility&quot;.

Historian Robert Sobel offers some context for Coolidge&#x27;s &quot;laissez-faire&quot; ideology, based on the prevailing understanding of federalism during his presidency: &quot;As Governor of Massachusetts, Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation, opposed child labor, imposed economic controls during World War I, favored safety measures in factories, and even worker representation on corporate boards. Did he support these measures while president? No, because in the 1920s, such matters were considered the responsibilities of state and local governments.&quot; 

Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927, which established the Federal Radio Commission and the equal-time rule for radio broadcasters and restricted radio broadcasting licenses to stations that demonstrated they served &quot;the public interest, convenience, or necessity&quot;. 

===Taxation and government spending===
Coolidge adopted the taxation policies of his Secretary of the Treasury, Andrew Mellon, who advocated &quot;scientific taxation&quot;—the notion that lowering taxes will increase, rather than decrease, government receipts. Congress agreed, and tax rates were reduced in Coolidge&#x27;s term. 

In addition to federal tax cuts, Coolidge proposed reductions in federal expenditures and retiring the federal debt. His ideas were shared by the Republicans in Congress, and in 1924, Congress passed the Revenue Act of 1924, which reduced income tax rates and eliminated all income taxation for two million people. It reduced taxes again by passing the Revenue Acts of 1926 and 1928, while keeping spending down to reduce the overall federal debt. By 1927, only the wealthiest 2% of taxpayers paid federal income tax. Federal spending remained flat during Coolidge&#x27;s administration, allowing one-fourth of the federal debt to be retired. 

State and local governments saw considerable growth, surpassing the federal budget in 1927. In 1929, after Coolidge&#x27;s series of tax rate reductions had cut the tax rate to 24% on those making over $100,000, the federal government collected more than $1 billion in income taxes, of which 65% was from those making over $100,000. In 1921, when the tax rate on those making over $100,000 a year was 73%, the federal government collected a little over $700 million in income taxes, of which 30% was from those making over $100,000.

===Opposition to farm subsidies===
Perhaps the most contentious issue of Coolidge&#x27;s presidency was relief for farmers. Some in Congress proposed a bill designed to fight falling agricultural prices by allowing the federal government to purchase crops to sell abroad at lower prices. Agriculture Secretary Henry C. Wallace and other administration officials favored the bill when it was introduced in 1924, but rising prices convinced many in Congress that the bill was unnecessary, and it was defeated just before the 1924 elections. 

In 1926, with farm prices falling once more, Senator Charles L. McNary and Representative Gilbert N. Haugen—both Republicans—proposed the McNary–Haugen Farm Relief Bill. The bill proposed a federal farm board that would purchase surplus production in high-yield years, and hold it, when feasible, for later sale or sell it abroad. 

Coolidge opposed McNary-Haugen, saying that agriculture must stand &quot;on an independent business basis&quot; and that &quot;government control cannot be divorced from political control&quot;. Instead of manipulating prices, he favored Herbert Hoover&#x27;s proposal to increase profitability by modernizing agriculture. Secretary Mellon wrote a letter denouncing McNary-Haugen as unsound and likely to cause inflation, and it was defeated.

After McNary-Haugen&#x27;s defeat, Coolidge supported a less radical measure, the Curtis-Crisp Act, which would have created a federal board to lend money to farm cooperatives in times of surplus. The bill did not pass. In February 1927, Congress took up McNary-Haugen again, this time narrowly passing it, and Coolidge vetoed it. 

In his veto message, he expressed the belief that the bill would do nothing to help farmers, benefiting only exporters and expanding the federal bureaucracy. Congress did not override the veto. In May 1928, Congress passed the bill again by an increased majority, and Coolidge vetoed it again. &quot;Farmers never have made much money&quot; he said. &quot;I do not believe we can do much about it.&quot;

===Flood control===
Coolidge has often been criticized for his actions during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, the worst natural disaster to hit the Gulf Coast until Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Although he eventually named Hoover to a commission in charge of flood relief, scholars argue that, overall, Coolidge showed lack of interest in federal flood control. 

Coolidge believed that visiting the region after the floods would accomplish nothing and be seen as political grandstanding. He also did not want to incur the federal spending that flood control would require. He believed that property owners should bear much of the cost. Congress wanted a bill that would place the federal government completely in charge of flood mitigation. When Congress passed a compromise measure in 1928, Coolidge declined to take credit for it and signed the bill in private on May 15.

===Civil rights===
According to one biographer, Coolidge was &quot;devoid of racial prejudice&quot;, but he rarely took the lead on civil rights. Coolidge disliked the Ku Klux Klan and no Klansman is known to have received an appointment from him. In the 1924 presidential election, his opponents, Robert La Follette and John Davis, and his running mate, Charles Dawes, often attacked the Klan, but Coolidge avoided the subject. 

Due to Coolidge&#x27;s failure to condemn the Klan, some African-American leaders such as former assistant attorney general William Henry Lewis endorsed Davis. Davis got little of the black vote outside Indiana, where Klan control of the Indiana Republican Party caused many blacks to vote Democratic. It is estimated that over 90% of non-Indiana blacks voted for Coolidge. 

Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover was accused of running forced labor camps for African Americans during the Great Mississippi Flood of 1927, which led more African Americans to vote Democratic when Hoover was the Republican presidential nominee in 1928 and 1932. During Coolidge&#x27;s administration, lynchings of African-Americans decreased and millions of people left the Ku Klux Klan.

Coolidge spoke in favor of African Americans&#x27; civil rights, saying in his first State of the Union address that their rights were &quot;just as sacred as those of any other citizen&quot; under the U.S. Constitution and that it was a &quot;public and a private duty to protect those rights&quot;. 

Coolidge repeatedly called for laws to make lynching a federal crime. It was already a state crime, though not always enforced. Congress refused to pass any such legislation. On June 2, 1924, Coolidge signed the Indian Citizenship Act, which granted U.S. citizenship to all Native Americans living on reservations. Those off reservations had long been citizens. 

On June 6, 1924, Coolidge delivered a commencement address at historically black, non-segregated Howard University, in which he thanked and commended African Americans for their rapid advances in education and contributions to U.S. society over the years, as well as their eagerness to render their services as soldiers in the World War, all while faced with discrimination and prejudice at home.

In an October 1924 speech, Coolidge stressed tolerance of differences as an American value and thanked immigrants for their contributions to U.S. society, saying that they had &quot;contributed much to making our country what it is&quot;. He said that although the diversity of peoples was a source of conflict and tension in Europe, it was a peculiarly &quot;harmonious&quot; benefit for the U.S. Coolidge added that the U.S. should assist and help immigrants and urged immigrants to reject &quot;race hatreds&quot; and &quot;prejudices&quot;.

===Foreign policy===

Coolidge was neither well versed nor very interested in world affairs. His focus was mainly on U.S. business, especially pertaining to trade, and &quot;Maintaining the Status Quo&quot;. Although not an isolationist, he was reluctant to enter into European involvements. Coolidge believed strongly in a non-interventionist foreign policy and supported American exceptionalism. He considered the 1920 Republican victory a rejection of the Wilsonian position that the U.S. should join the League of Nations. 

Coolidge did not believe the League served U.S. interests. But he spoke in favor of joining the Permanent Court of International Justice (World Court), provided that the nation would not be bound by advisory decisions. In 1926, the Senate approved joining the Court, with reservations. The League of Nations accepted the reservations, but suggested some modifications of its own. The Senate failed to act, and so the U.S. did not join the World Court.

In 1924, the Coolidge administration nominated Charles Dawes to head the multinational committee that produced the Dawes Plan. It set fixed annual amounts for Germany&#x27;s World War I reparations payments and authorized a large loan, mostly from U.S. banks, to help stabilize and stimulate the German economy. Coolidge attempted to pursue further curbs on naval strength after the successes of Harding&#x27;s Washington Naval Conference, by sponsoring the Geneva Naval Conference in 1927, which failed owing to a French and Italian boycott and the failure of Great Britain and the U.S. to agree on cruiser tonnages. As a result, the conference was a failure and Congress eventually authorized for increased American naval spending in 1928. 

The Kellogg–Briand Pact of 1928, named for U.S. Secretary of State Frank B. Kellogg and French Foreign Minister Aristide Briand, was a key peacekeeping initiative. Ratified in 1929, the treaty committed signatories—the U.S., the United Kingdom, France, Italy, Germany, and Japan—to &quot;renounce war, as an instrument of national policy in their relations with one another&quot;. The treaty did not achieve its intended result—to outlaw war—but it did provide the founding principle for international law after World War II. Coolidge continued the Harding administration&#x27;s policy of withholding recognition of the Soviet Union.

Efforts were made to normalize ties with post-Revolution Mexico. Coolidge recognized Mexico&#x27;s new governments under Álvaro Obregón and Plutarco Elías Calles, and continued U.S. support for the elected Mexican government against the National League for the Defense of Religious Liberty during the Cristero War, lifting the arms embargo on Mexico. He appointed Dwight Morrow as Ambassador to Mexico with the successful objective to avoid further conflict with Mexico. 

Coolidge&#x27;s administration saw continuity in the occupation of Nicaragua and Haiti. In 1924, Coolidge ended the US occupation of the Dominican Republic as a result of withdrawal agreements finalized during Harding&#x27;s administration. In 1925, Coolidge ordered the withdrawal of Marines stationed in Nicaragua following perceived stability after the 1924 Nicaraguan general election. In January 1927, he redeployed them there, after failed attempts to peacefully resolve the rapid deterioration of political stability and avert the ensuing Constitutionalist War. He later sent Henry L. Stimson to mediate a peace deal that ended the civil war and extend U.S. military presence in Nicaragua beyond Coolidge&#x27;s presidency.

In January 1928, to extend an olive branch to Latin American leaders embittered over U.S. interventionist policies in Central America and the Caribbean, Coolidge led the U.S. delegation to the Sixth International Conference of American States in Havana, Cuba, the only international trip Coolidge made during his presidency. He was the last sitting U.S. president to visit Cuba until Barack Obama in 2016. For Canada, Coolidge authorized the St. Lawrence Seaway, a system of locks and canals that provided large vessels passage between the Atlantic Ocean and the Great Lakes.

===Cabinet===
Although some of Harding&#x27;s cabinet appointees were scandal-tarred, Coolidge initially retained all of them out of conviction that as successor to a deceased elected president, he was obligated to retain Harding&#x27;s counselors and policies until the next election. He kept Harding&#x27;s speechwriter Judson T. Welliver. Stuart Crawford replaced Welliver in November 1925. Coolidge appointed C. Bascom Slemp, a Virginia Congressman and experienced federal politician, to work jointly with Edward T. Clark, a Massachusetts Republican organizer whom he retained from his vice-presidential staff, as Secretaries to the President, a position equivalent to the modern White House Chief of Staff.

Perhaps the most powerful person in Coolidge&#x27;s cabinet was Secretary of the Treasury Andrew Mellon, who controlled the administration&#x27;s financial policies and was regarded by many, including House Minority Leader John Nance Garner, as more powerful than Coolidge himself. Commerce Secretary Herbert Hoover also held a prominent place in the cabinet, in part because Coolidge found value in Hoover&#x27;s ability to win positive publicity with his pro-business proposals. 

Secretary of State Charles Evans Hughes directed Coolidge&#x27;s foreign policy until he resigned in 1925 following Coolidge&#x27;s reelection. He was replaced by Frank B. Kellogg, who had previously served as a senator and ambassador to Great Britain. Coolidge made two other appointments after his reelection: William M. Jardine as Secretary of Agriculture and John G. Sargent as Attorney General. Coolidge had no vice president during his first term. Charles Dawes became vice president during Coolidge&#x27;s second term, and Dawes and Coolidge clashed over farm policy and other issues.


===Judicial appointments===


In 1925, Coolidge appointed one justice to the Supreme Court of the United States, Harlan F. Stone. Stone was Coolidge&#x27;s fellow Amherst alumnus, a Wall Street lawyer and conservative Republican. In 1924, Stone was serving as the dean of Columbia Law School when Coolidge appointed him to be attorney general to restore the reputation tarnished by Harding&#x27;s attorney general, Harry M. Daugherty. 

It does not appear that Coolidge considered appointing anyone other than Stone, although Stone urged him to appoint Benjamin N. Cardozo. Stone proved to be a firm believer in judicial restraint and was regarded as one of the court&#x27;s three liberal justices who often voted to uphold New Deal legislation. President Franklin D. Roosevelt later appointed Stone chief justice.

Coolidge nominated 17 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals and 61 to the United States district courts. He appointed judges to various specialty courts, including Genevieve R. Cline, who became the first woman named to the federal judiciary when Coolidge placed her on the United States Customs Court in 1928. Coolidge signed the Judiciary Act of 1925 into law, allowing the Supreme Court more discretion over its workload.

===1928 election===

In the summer of 1927, Coolidge vacationed in the Black Hills of South Dakota. While on vacation, he issued a terse statement that he would not seek a second full term as president: &quot;I do not choose to run for President in 1928.&quot; After allowing the reporters to take that in, Coolidge elaborated. &quot;If I take another term, I will be in the White House till 1933 … Ten years in Washington is longer than any other man has had it—too long!&quot; 

In his memoirs, Coolidge explained his decision not to run: &quot;The Presidential office takes a heavy toll of those who occupy it and those who are dear to them. While we should not refuse to spend and be spent in the service of our country, it is hazardous to attempt what we feel is beyond our strength to accomplish.&quot; 

After leaving office, he and Grace returned to Northampton, where he wrote his memoirs. The Republicans retained the White House in 1928 when Herbert Hoover was elected in a landslide. Coolidge was reluctant to endorse Hoover. On one occasion he remarked, &quot;for six years that man has given me unsolicited advice—all of it bad.&quot; But Coolidge had no desire to split the party by publicly opposing Hoover&#x27;s nomination.

==Post-presidency (1929–1933)==
After his presidency, Coolidge retired to a spacious home in Northampton, &quot;The Beeches&quot;. He kept a Hacker runabout boat on the Connecticut River, and local boating enthusiasts often observed him on the water. During this time, he chaired the Non-Partisan Railroad Commission, an entity several banks and corporations created to survey the country&#x27;s long-term transportation needs and make recommendations for improvements. He was an honorary president of the American Foundation for the Blind, a director of New York Life Insurance Company, president of the American Antiquarian Society, and a trustee of Amherst College.

Coolidge published his autobiography in 1929 and wrote a syndicated newspaper column, &quot;Calvin Coolidge Says&quot;, from 1930 to 1931. After the Democratic landslide in the 1932 presidential election, some Republicans spoke of rejecting Hoover as their nominee and drafting Coolidge to run instead. Coolidge made clear that he was not interested in running again and that he would publicly repudiate any effort to draft him. Hoover was renominated, and Coolidge made several radio addresses in support of him. Hoover lost the general election to Franklin D. Roosevelt in a landslide.

==Death==
Coolidge died suddenly of coronary thrombosis at The Beeches on January 5, 1933, at 12:45 p.m., aged 60. Shortly before his death, he told an old friend, &quot;I feel I no longer fit in with these times.&quot; Coolidge is buried in Plymouth Notch Cemetery in Plymouth Notch, Vermont. The nearby family home is maintained as one of the original buildings on the Calvin Coolidge Homestead District site. In July 1972, the State of Vermont dedicated a new visitors&#x27; center nearby to mark Coolidge&#x27;s 100th birthday.

==Legacy==

Despite being one of the most popular U.S. presidents while in office, Coolidge is generally rated below average by modern historians. David Greenberg, a scholar from Rutgers University, said, &quot;although the public liked and admired Calvin Coolidge during his tenure, the Great Depression that began in 1929 seriously eroded his reputation and changed public opinion about his policies&quot;. 

Historians have criticized Coolidge for his lack of assertiveness and have called him a &quot;do nothing president&quot; who enjoyed high public approval only because he was in office when things were going well around the world. Some historians have scrutinized Coolidge for signing laws that broadened federal regulatory authority and say it paved the way for corruption in future presidential administrations. 

In a 1982 &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot; survey of 49 historians, Coolidge was ranked the eighth-worst U.S. president. In 2006, British journalist William Shawcross said he believed Coolidge was the worst president of the 20th century. In a 2021 C-SPAN survey, historians ranked Coolidge 24th out of 44 presidents. They gave him high ratings for &quot;moral authority&quot; and &quot;administrative skills&quot; but poor ratings for &quot;setting an agenda&quot; and &quot;pursuing equal justice&quot;.

Although historians generally view Coolidge unfavorably, his hands-off government approach continues to resonate with modern conservatives and Republican politicians. In 1981, President Ronald Reagan publicly praised Coolidge&#x27;s laissez-faire policy. Later, Reagan had a portrait of Thomas Jefferson in the White House Cabinet Room replaced by one of Coolidge.

==Radio, film, and commemorations==
Despite his reputation as a quiet and even reclusive politician, Coolidge made use of the new medium of radio and made radio history several times while president. He made himself available to reporters, giving 520 press conferences, meeting with reporters more regularly than any president before or since. Coolidge&#x27;s second inauguration was the first presidential inauguration broadcast on radio. On December 6, 1923, his speech to Congress was broadcast on radio, the first presidential radio address. 

Coolidge signed the Radio Act of 1927, which assigned regulation of radio to the newly created Federal Radio Commission. On August 11, 1924, Theodore W. Case, using the Phonofilm sound-on-film process he developed for Lee de Forest, filmed Coolidge on the White House lawn, making him the first president to appear in a sound film, &quot;President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Grounds&quot;. When Charles Lindbergh arrived in Washington on a U.S. Navy ship after his celebrated 1927 trans-Atlantic flight, Coolidge welcomed him back to the U.S. and presented him with the Medal of Honor, and the event was filmed.

==See also==
* Coolidge, Arizona
* Coolidge Dam
* List of things named after Calvin Coolidge
* Presidency of Calvin Coolidge

General:
* List of presidents of the United States
* List of presidents of the United States by previous experience

==Notes==
==References==
==Works cited==
===About Coolidge and his era===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===By Coolidge===
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* 
* 
* Postell, Joseph W. &quot;Roaring Against Progressivism: The Principled Conservatism of Calvin Coolidge,&quot; in Joseph W. Postell and Johnathan O&#x27;Neill, eds. &quot;Toward an American Conservatism: Constitutional Conservatism during the Progressive Era&quot; (2013) pp. 181–208.
* Russell, Francis. &quot;Coolidge and the Boston Police Strike.&quot; &quot;Antioch Review&quot; 16#4 (1956), pp. 403–15. online
* Tacoma, Thomas J. &quot;The Political Thought of Calvin Coolidge: Burkean Americanist&quot; (Lexington Books, 2020).
* Tacoma, Thomas. &quot;Calvin Coolidge and the Great Depression: A New Assessment.&quot; &quot;Independent Review&quot; 24.3 (2019): 361–380. online
* Zibel, Howard J. &quot;The Role of Calvin Coolidge in the Boston Police Strike of 1919,&quot; &quot;Industrial and Labor Relations Forum&quot; 6, no. 3 (November 1969): 299–318
===Primary sources===
* 
==External links==

Biographical information
* White House biography

Digital collections
* 
* Text of a number of Coolidge speeches, Miller Center of Public Affairs

Physical collections
* Calvin Coolidge Presidential Library &amp; Museum
* Calvin Coolidge Presidential Foundation
* Calvin Coolidge: A Resource Guide, Library of Congress
* Calvin Coolidge Personal Manuscripts

Other
* &quot;President Coolidge, Taken on the White House Ground&quot;, the first presidential film with sound recording
* &quot;Life Portrait of Calvin Coolidge&quot;, from C-SPAN&#x27;s &quot;American Presidents: Life Portraits&quot;, September 27, 1999
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="0" end="24" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="John Calvin Coolidge Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="71" end="101" title="president of the United States" label="president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="132" end="142" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="155" end="168" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11699" start="203" end="217" title="Vice President of the United States" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="252" end="269" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="287" end="312" title="governor of Massachusetts" label="governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q853562" start="366" end="382" title="small-government" label="small-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="482" end="492" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Silent Cal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="546" end="571" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040862" start="645" end="652" title="1918 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="in 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="697" end="716" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="737" end="758" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="784" end="795" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309019" start="838" end="858" title="Boston police strike" label="Boston police strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="1026" end="1043" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q699343" start="1051" end="1077" title="1920 United States presidential election" label="1920 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="1099" end="1108" title="landslide victory" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="1287" end="1298" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245979" start="1309" end="1331" title="Harding administration" label="Harding administration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1344" end="1352" title="Warren G. Harding#Scandals" label="scandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q548645" start="1377" end="1407" title="Indian Citizenship Act of 1924" label="Indian Citizenship Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q15133865" start="1423" end="1439" title="U.S. citizenship" label="U.S. citizenship"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="1544" end="1560" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q59240430" start="1707" end="1719" title="Claude Fuess" label="Claude Fuess"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980134" start="1955" end="1971" title="I do not choose to run" label="chose not to run"/>
<link wikidata="Q699380" start="1981" end="1985" title="1928 United States presidential election" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279580" start="2149" end="2164" title="racial equality" label="racial equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="2279" end="2292" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2553" end="2564" title="Causes of the Great Depression#Calvin Coolidge (1923–29)" label="much debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2674" end="2690" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2743" end="2754" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States#Scholar survey summary" label="have ranked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787251" start="2891" end="2905" title="Plymouth, Vermont" label="Plymouth Notch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16551" start="2907" end="2914" title="Vermont" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="2953" end="2969" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030809" start="3011" end="3035" title="John Calvin Coolidge Sr." label="John Calvin Coolidge Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="3289" end="3300" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="3306" end="3325" title="Protestant Reformer" label="Protestant Reformer"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="3507" end="3527" title="justice of the peace" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867076" start="3579" end="3603" title="Vermont General Assembly" label="Vermont General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3700" end="3712" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827217" start="4009" end="4018" title="Cottenham" label="Cottenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23112" start="4020" end="4034" title="Cambridgeshire" label="Cambridgeshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="4036" end="4043" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q54172" start="4072" end="4096" title="Watertown, Massachusetts" label="Watertown, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152750" start="4127" end="4142" title="Samuel Appleton (born 1625)" label="Samuel Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q376786" start="4159" end="4166" title="Ipswich, Massachusetts" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="4179" end="4203" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q862257" start="4211" end="4233" title="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War" label="King Philip&amp;#x27;s War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="4339" end="4356" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931397" start="4378" end="4387" title="Board of Selectmen" label="selectmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063593" start="4431" end="4454" title="Calvin Galusha Coolidge" label="Calvin Galusha Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q113873230" start="4514" end="4526" title="Park Pollard" label="Park Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605450" start="4548" end="4566" title="Cavendish, Vermont" label="Cavendish, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921641" start="4820" end="4839" title="Black River Academy" label="Black River Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589032" start="4849" end="4870" title="St. Johnsbury Academy" label="St. Johnsbury Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="4891" end="4906" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085573" start="4989" end="5004" title="Phi Gamma Delta" label="Phi Gamma Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="5036" end="5045" title="cum laude" label="cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q20807158" start="5130" end="5151" title="Charles Edward Garman" label="Charles Edward Garman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18245005" start="5155" end="5169" title="Congregationalism in the United States" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474384" start="5187" end="5199" title="Neo-Hegelianism" label="neo-Hegelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q49186" start="5336" end="5362" title="Northampton, Massachusetts" label="Northampton, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300597" start="5486" end="5497" title="reading law" label="reading law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16863906" start="5509" end="5524" title="John C Hammond" label="John C. Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q54161" start="5629" end="5660" title="Hampshire County, Massachusetts" label="Hampshire County, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784195" start="5700" end="5717" title="Massachusetts Bar Association" label="Massachusetts bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177513" start="5730" end="5744" title="country lawyer" label="country lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234287" start="6140" end="6153" title="Grace Goodhue" label="Grace Goodhue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="6173" end="6194" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127501" start="6231" end="6257" title="Clarke School for the Deaf" label="Clarke School for the Deaf"/>
<link wikidata="Q220161" start="6479" end="6488" title="honeymoon" label="honeymoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="6497" end="6505" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227035" start="6770" end="6774" title="John Coolidge" label="John"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="6855" end="6861" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q276469" start="6953" end="6960" title="blister" label="blister"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="7023" end="7029" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q466524" start="7566" end="7598" title="American Psychiatric Association" label="American Psychiatric Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="7620" end="7645" title="major depressive disorder" label="major depressive disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167465" start="7762" end="7807" title="President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site" label="President Calvin Coolidge State Historic Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="7946" end="7960" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="8065" end="8081" title="History of the Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="8283" end="8299" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q701632" start="8413" end="8425" title="City Council" label="City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q641208" start="8940" end="8955" title="Court clerk" label="clerk of courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q399541" start="9225" end="9237" title="Board of Education" label="school board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="9552" end="9590" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="9660" end="9666" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453540" start="9695" end="9722" title="Massachusetts General Court" label="Massachusetts General Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363538" start="9844" end="9866" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1912)" label="Progressive Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="9904" end="9925" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q197656" start="9934" end="9961" title="Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="direct election of Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q681464" start="10049" end="10070" title="Winthrop Murray Crane" label="Winthrop Murray Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q174037" start="10213" end="10230" title="Henry Cabot Lodge" label="Henry Cabot Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q62036526" start="10284" end="10295" title="Guy Currier" label="Guy Currier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150259" start="10645" end="10656" title="Massachusetts State House" label="State House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494665" start="11136" end="11149" title="Massachusetts Senate" label="State Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q505038" start="11412" end="11427" title="Bread and Roses" label="Bread and Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745393" start="11463" end="11486" title="American Woolen Company" label="American Woolen Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q49163" start="11490" end="11513" title="Lawrence, Massachusetts" label="Lawrence, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q699289" start="11695" end="11710" title="1912 United States presidential election" label="the party split"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="11755" end="11773" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q35648" start="11816" end="11835" title="William Howard Taft" label="William Howard Taft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363538" start="11945" end="11962" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1912)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122136" start="12292" end="12313" title="Western Massachusetts" label="Western Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241341" start="12399" end="12428" title="President of the Massachusetts Senate" label="president of the state senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16030040" start="12430" end="12447" title="Levi H. Greenwood" label="Levi H. Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489759" start="13478" end="13491" title="Frank Stearns" label="Frank Stearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="13864" end="13880" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q440654" start="13964" end="13980" title="Samuel W. McCall" label="Samuel W. McCall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800652" start="14050" end="14058" title="ticket balance" label="balanced"/>
<link wikidata="Q887117" start="15037" end="15062" title="List of governors of Massachusetts" label="Governor of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q65040862" start="15066" end="15070" title="1918 Massachusetts gubernatorial election" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q440590" start="15097" end="15109" title="Channing Cox" label="Channing Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494460" start="15146" end="15184" title="Massachusetts House of Representatives" label="Massachusetts House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2698984" start="15236" end="15255" title="fiscal conservatism" label="fiscal conservatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q399999" start="15279" end="15290" title="Prohibition in the United States" label="Prohibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="15367" end="15378" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075293" start="15435" end="15440" title="Irish American" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q141817" start="15445" end="15461" title="German Americans" label="German Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q64006279" start="15531" end="15546" title="Richard H. Long" label="Richard H. Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066929" start="15701" end="15725" title="Boston Police Department" label="Boston Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="15745" end="15750" title="trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346881" start="15772" end="15787" title="Edwin U. Curtis" label="Edwin U. Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q464242" start="15867" end="15895" title="American Federation of Labor" label="American Federation of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q505489" start="16155" end="16168" title="Andrew James Peters" label="Andrew Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q125107" start="16811" end="16826" title="sympathy strike" label="sympathy strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784323" start="16890" end="16918" title="Massachusetts National Guard" label="Massachusetts National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q282657" start="17491" end="17505" title="Samuel Gompers" label="Samuel Gompers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092510" start="17961" end="17976" title="First Red Scare" label="First Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="18025" end="18034" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="18061" end="18067" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q243652" start="18069" end="18076" title="Hungarian Soviet Republic" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="18082" end="18089" title="German Revolution of 1918–19" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q192571" start="19239" end="19247" title="child labor" label="children"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19752" end="19773" title="Low-alcohol beer#Small beer" label="2.75% alcohol or less"/>
<link wikidata="Q156784" start="19812" end="19866" title="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Eighteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4560879" start="20069" end="20104" title="1920 Republican National Convention" label="1920 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35286" start="20522" end="20539" title="Warren G. Harding" label="Warren G. Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="20543" end="20547" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673264" start="20688" end="20702" title="Irvine Lenroot" label="Irvine Lenroot"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="20837" end="20843" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962849" start="20845" end="20861" title="Wallace McCamant" label="Wallace McCamant"/>
<link wikidata="Q440117" start="21149" end="21161" title="James M. Cox" label="James M. Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="21218" end="21239" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="21307" end="21324" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="21392" end="21405" title="Progressivism" label="Progressivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505891" start="21427" end="21453" title="Front porch campaign" label="front-porch&amp;quot; campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q985636" start="21471" end="21483" title="Marion, Ohio" label="Marion, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399638" start="21532" end="21543" title="Upper South" label="Upper South"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="21872" end="21881" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q623429" start="21949" end="21963" title="Reconstruction era of the United States" label="Reconstruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q234287" start="22268" end="22273" title="Grace Coolidge" label="Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="23044" end="23060" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836665" start="23621" end="23646" title="Alice Roosevelt Longworth" label="Alice Roosevelt Longworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030254" start="23980" end="23999" title="History of the Washington Senators (1901–1960)" label="Washington Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q230147" start="24452" end="24467" title="Ethel Barrymore" label="Ethel Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q270707" start="24725" end="24739" title="Dorothy Parker" label="Dorothy Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167465" start="25055" end="25070" title="Coolidge Homestead" label="his family home"/>
<link wikidata="Q15479268" start="25288" end="25301" title="notary public" label="notary public"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25306" end="25326" title="Justice of the peace#Massachusetts, Connecticut, Vermont" label="justice of the peace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25345" end="25359" title="Oath of office#United States" label="oath of office"/>
<link wikidata="Q215628" start="25406" end="25419" title="kerosene lamp" label="kerosene lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684305" start="25599" end="25621" title="Adolph A. Hoehling Jr." label="Adolph A. Hoehling Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7889769" start="25629" end="25670" title="United States District Court for the District of Columbia" label="Supreme Court of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q351931" start="25836" end="25854" title="Harry M. Daugherty" label="Harry M. Daugherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q636207" start="25984" end="26014" title="United States Attorney General" label="United States Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q731089" start="26072" end="26085" title="Willard InterContinental Washington" label="Willard Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236296" start="26646" end="26665" title="Teapot Dome scandal" label="Teapot Dome scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q351931" start="26951" end="26969" title="Harry M. Daugherty" label="Harry M. Daugherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5666794" start="27161" end="27178" title="Harry A. Slattery" label="Harry A. Slattery"/>
<link wikidata="Q942386" start="27208" end="27223" title="Harlan F. Stone" label="Harlan F. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q895819" start="27272" end="27288" title="William E. Borah" label="William E. Borah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="27520" end="27563" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="the enforcement of immigration restrictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="27612" end="27624" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q696550" start="27722" end="27745" title="Washington Naval Treaty" label="Washington Naval Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036413" start="27902" end="27937" title="World War Adjusted Compensation Act" label="World War Adjusted Compensation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434492" start="28034" end="28049" title="Immigration Act of 1924" label="Immigration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285210" start="28140" end="28157" title="signing statement" label="signing statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156766" start="28228" end="28236" title="Japanese American" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317971" start="28325" end="28344" title="Revenue Act of 1924" label="Revenue Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q179222" start="28416" end="28426" title="income tax" label="income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q628413" start="28465" end="28475" title="estate tax" label="estate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118234" start="28505" end="28513" title="gift tax" label="gift tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561570" start="28843" end="28864" title="1924 Republican National Convention" label="Republican Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q584973" start="28989" end="29001" title="Frank Orren Lowden" label="Frank Lowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="29005" end="29013" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q184565" start="29097" end="29113" title="Charles G. Dawes" label="Charles G. Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152781" start="29177" end="29198" title="1924 Democratic National Convention" label="held their convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332779" start="29337" end="29350" title="John W. Davis" label="John W. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q887229" start="29357" end="29373" title="Charles W. Bryan" label="Charles W. Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q878682" start="29447" end="29468" title="Robert M. La Follette" label="Robert M. La Follette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="29496" end="29505" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638786" start="29540" end="29557" title="Progressive Party (United States, 1924–1934)" label="Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q13468437" start="30721" end="30737" title="Roaring Twenties" label="Roaring Twenties"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="30849" end="30863" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="31028" end="31052" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="31061" end="31091" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349905" start="31303" end="31315" title="Robert Sobel" label="Robert Sobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="31362" end="31375" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="31433" end="31443" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q64948720" start="31891" end="31908" title="Radio Act of 1927" label="Radio Act of 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392181" start="31932" end="31956" title="Federal Radio Commission" label="Federal Radio Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384108" start="31965" end="31980" title="equal-time rule" label="equal-time rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281174" start="31985" end="32003" title="Radio in the United States" label="radio broadcasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993167" start="32025" end="32046" title="Broadcast license" label="broadcasting licenses"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="32050" end="32058" title="Radio broadcasting" label="stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q446858" start="32263" end="32276" title="Andrew Mellon" label="Andrew Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138777" start="32587" end="32599" title="United States public debt" label="federal debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317971" start="32688" end="32707" title="Revenue Act of 1924" label="Revenue Act of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317972" start="32853" end="32857" title="Revenue Act of 1926" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931944" start="32862" end="32866" title="Revenue Act of 1928" label="1928"/>
<link wikidata="Q464219" start="33973" end="33989" title="Henry Cantwell Wallace" label="Henry C. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959799" start="34257" end="34274" title="Charles L. McNary" label="Charles L. McNary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524034" start="34294" end="34311" title="Gilbert N. Haugen" label="Gilbert N. Haugen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6802486" start="34342" end="34372" title="McNary–Haugen Farm Relief Bill" label="McNary–Haugen Farm Relief Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="34775" end="34789" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147270" start="35801" end="35832" title="Great Mississippi Flood of 1927" label="Great Mississippi Flood of 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q16422" start="35889" end="35906" title="Hurricane Katrina" label="Hurricane Katrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="36766" end="36778" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010485" start="37153" end="37172" title="William Henry Lewis" label="William Henry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147270" start="37517" end="37548" title="Great Mississippi Flood of 1927" label="Great Mississippi Flood of 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q15985086" start="37711" end="37741" title="Lynching in the United States" label="lynchings of African-Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q554211" start="37884" end="37910" title="State of the Union address" label="State of the Union address"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318554" start="38146" end="38170" title="Dyer Anti-Lynching Bill" label="lynching a federal crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q548645" start="38314" end="38336" title="Indian Citizenship Act" label="Indian Citizenship Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068752" start="38563" end="38580" title="Howard University" label="Howard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155530" start="39734" end="39753" title="United States non-interventionism" label="non-interventionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="39783" end="39806" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182760" start="39869" end="39878" title="Wilsonian" label="Wilsonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="39918" end="39935" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q838946" start="40035" end="40075" title="Permanent Court of International Justice" label="Permanent Court of International Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937518" start="40211" end="40223" title="reservation (law)" label="reservations"/>
<link wikidata="Q184565" start="40439" end="40452" title="Charles Dawes" label="Charles Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q156528" start="40507" end="40517" title="Dawes Plan" label="Dawes Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q687013" start="40566" end="40589" title="World War I reparations" label="World War I reparations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050213" start="40803" end="40830" title="Washington Naval Conference" label="Washington Naval Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533024" start="40850" end="40873" title="Geneva Naval Conference" label="Geneva Naval Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="41140" end="41159" title="Kellogg–Briand Pact" label="Kellogg–Briand Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q193009" start="41203" end="41219" title="Frank B. Kellogg" label="Frank B. Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="41248" end="41263" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="41648" end="41660" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="41756" end="41768" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826311" start="41792" end="41806" title="Mexico–United States relations" label="normalize ties"/>
<link wikidata="Q214426" start="41817" end="41827" title="Mexican Revolution" label="Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="41892" end="41906" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="41911" end="41932" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975775" start="42008" end="42060" title="National League for the Defense of Religious Liberty" label="National League for the Defense of Religious Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q279662" start="42072" end="42084" title="Cristero War" label="Cristero War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665468" start="42135" end="42148" title="Dwight Morrow" label="Dwight Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889339" start="42152" end="42172" title="United States Ambassador to Mexico" label="Ambassador to Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304042" start="42297" end="42320" title="United States occupation of Nicaragua" label="occupation of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298759" start="42325" end="42330" title="United States occupation of Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q131744619" start="42360" end="42399" title="1916 United States occupation of the Dominican Republic" label="US occupation of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="42529" end="42536" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024474" start="42600" end="42632" title="Nicaraguan general election, 1924" label="1924 Nicaraguan general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553256" start="42790" end="42811" title="Nicaraguan civil war (1926–27)" label="Constitutionalist War"/>
<link wikidata="Q314826" start="42827" end="42843" title="Henry L. Stimson" label="Henry L. Stimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123120" start="42855" end="42867" title="Pact of Espino Negro" label="a peace deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q138550" start="43006" end="43018" title="olive branch" label="olive branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q768496" start="43066" end="43090" title="Banana Wars" label="interventionist policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="43118" end="43127" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q122119" start="43169" end="43218" title="Pan-American Conference" label="Sixth International Conference of American States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="43222" end="43228" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="43230" end="43234" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="43360" end="43372" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q753288" start="43418" end="43437" title="St. Lawrence Seaway" label="St. Lawrence Seaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347" start="43539" end="43550" title="Great Lakes" label="Great Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304281" start="43875" end="43893" title="Judson T. Welliver" label="Judson T. Welliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022421" start="43966" end="43981" title="C. Bascom Slemp" label="C. Bascom Slemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201013" start="44171" end="44199" title="Secretary to the President (United States)" label="Secretaries to the President"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="44237" end="44263" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="White House Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q446858" start="44356" end="44369" title="Andrew Mellon" label="Andrew Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q298991" start="44489" end="44506" title="John Nance Garner" label="John Nance Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="44567" end="44581" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q313252" start="44768" end="44788" title="Charles Evans Hughes" label="Charles Evans Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193009" start="44912" end="44928" title="Frank B. Kellogg" label="Frank B. Kellogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q464480" start="45061" end="45079" title="William M. Jardine" label="William M. Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q351943" start="45112" end="45127" title="John G. Sargent" label="John G. Sargent"/>
<link wikidata="Q184565" start="45203" end="45216" title="Charles Dawes" label="Charles Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="45420" end="45454" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q942386" start="45456" end="45471" title="Harlan F. Stone" label="Harlan F. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149089" start="45615" end="45634" title="Columbia Law School" label="Columbia Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q351931" start="45758" end="45776" title="Harry M. Daugherty" label="Harry M. Daugherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q817637" start="45896" end="45915" title="Benjamin N. Cardozo" label="Benjamin N. Cardozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151311" start="45955" end="45973" title="judicial restraint" label="judicial restraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q16197545" start="46018" end="46040" title="The Three Musketeers (Supreme Court)" label="three liberal justices"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="46099" end="46120" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="46195" end="46226" title="United States Courts of Appeals" label="United States Courts of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="46241" end="46270" title="United States district courts" label="United States district courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533089" start="46331" end="46349" title="Genevieve R. Cline" label="Genevieve R. Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889681" start="46441" end="46468" title="United States Customs Court" label="United States Customs Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17109608" start="46498" end="46519" title="Judiciary Act of 1925" label="Judiciary Act of 1925"/>
<link wikidata="Q250937" start="46664" end="46675" title="Black Hills" label="Black Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211" start="46679" end="46691" title="South Dakota" label="South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980134" start="46802" end="46824" title="I do not choose to run" label="I do not choose to run"/>
<link wikidata="Q35236" start="47546" end="47560" title="Herbert Hoover" label="Herbert Hoover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125489" start="47977" end="47983" title="Hacker-Craft" label="Hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743853" start="48342" end="48375" title="American Foundation for the Blind" label="American Foundation for the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039380" start="48391" end="48422" title="New York Life Insurance Company" label="New York Life Insurance Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742987" start="48441" end="48469" title="American Antiquarian Society" label="American Antiquarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714960" start="48525" end="48542" title="The Autobiography of Calvin Coolidge" label="his autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q179868" start="48683" end="48709" title="1932 United States presidential election" label="1932 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="49056" end="49077" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q707774" start="49131" end="49150" title="coronary thrombosis" label="coronary thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205839" start="49337" end="49360" title="Plymouth Notch Cemetery" label="Plymouth Notch Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205837" start="49364" end="49387" title="Plymouth Notch, Vermont" label="Plymouth Notch, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167465" start="49466" end="49500" title="Calvin Coolidge Homestead District" label="Calvin Coolidge Homestead District"/>
<link wikidata="Q61750152" start="49775" end="49790" title="David Greenberg (historian)" label="David Greenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="49807" end="49825" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="50470" end="50485" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018348" start="50598" end="50615" title="William Shawcross" label="William Shawcross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="50697" end="50703" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="51141" end="51154" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="51242" end="51258" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024851" start="51266" end="51290" title="Cabinet Room (White House)" label="White House Cabinet Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443707" start="51681" end="51700" title="Second inauguration of Calvin Coolidge" label="second inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q64948720" start="51889" end="51906" title="Radio Act of 1927" label="Radio Act of 1927"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392181" start="51964" end="51988" title="Federal Radio Commission" label="Federal Radio Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523686" start="52010" end="52026" title="Theodore W. Case" label="Theodore W. Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381432" start="52038" end="52047" title="Phonofilm" label="Phonofilm"/>
<link wikidata="Q20682774" start="52048" end="52061" title="sound-on-film" label="sound-on-film"/>
<link wikidata="Q354863" start="52087" end="52100" title="Lee de Forest" label="Lee de Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618" start="52272" end="52289" title="Charles Lindbergh" label="Charles Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q203535" start="52447" end="52461" title="Medal of Honor" label="Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q80067" start="52505" end="52522" title="Coolidge, Arizona" label="Coolidge, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434157" start="52525" end="52537" title="Coolidge Dam" label="Coolidge Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q106518566" start="52540" end="52582" title="List of things named after Calvin Coolidge" label="List of things named after Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q29109910" start="52585" end="52614" title="Presidency of Calvin Coolidge" label="Presidency of Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="52627" end="52666" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="List of presidents of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594910" start="52669" end="52731" title="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience" label="List of presidents of the United States by previous experience"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859101" start="53931" end="53962" title="Miller Center of Public Affairs" label="Miller Center of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q131454" start="54116" end="54135" title="Library of Congress" label="Library of Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="54351" end="54357" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
<link wikidata="" start="54371" end="54406" title="American Presidents: Life Portraits" label="American Presidents: Life Portraits"/>
</links>
</doc>
