<doc id="9703" wikidata="Q219695" url="?curid=9703" title="Evolutionary psychology">
<text>Evolutionary psychology is a theoretical approach in psychology that examines cognition and behavior from a modern evolutionary perspective. It seeks to identify human psychological adaptations with regards to the ancestral problems they evolved to solve. In this framework, psychological traits and mechanisms are either functional products of natural and sexual selection or non-adaptive by-products of other adaptive traits. 

Adaptationist thinking about physiological mechanisms, such as the heart, lungs, and the liver, is common in evolutionary biology. Evolutionary psychologists apply the same thinking in psychology, arguing that just as the heart evolved to pump blood, the liver evolved to detoxify poisons, and the kidneys evolved to filter turbid fluids there is modularity of mind in that different psychological mechanisms evolved to solve different adaptive problems. These evolutionary psychologists argue that much of human behavior is the output of psychological adaptations that evolved to solve recurrent problems in human ancestral environments.

Some evolutionary psychologists argue that evolutionary theory can provide a foundational, metatheoretical framework that integrates the entire field of psychology in the same way evolutionary biology has for biology.

Evolutionary psychologists hold that behaviors or traits that occur universally in all cultures are good candidates for evolutionary adaptations, including the abilities to infer others&#x27; emotions, discern kin from non-kin, identify and prefer healthier mates, and cooperate with others. Findings have been made regarding human social behaviour related to infanticide, intelligence, marriage patterns, promiscuity, perception of beauty, bride price, and parental investment. The theories and findings of evolutionary psychology have applications in many fields, including economics, environment, health, law, management, psychiatry, politics, and literature.

Criticism of evolutionary psychology involves questions of testability, cognitive and evolutionary assumptions (such as modular functioning of the brain, and large uncertainty about the ancestral environment), importance of non-genetic and non-adaptive explanations, as well as political and ethical issues due to interpretations of research results. Evolutionary psychologists frequently engage with and respond to such criticisms.

==Scope==

===Principles===
Its central assumption is that the human brain is composed of a large number of specialized mechanisms that were shaped by natural selection over a vast period of time to solve the recurrent information-processing problems faced by our ancestors. These problems involve food choices, social hierarchies, distributing resources to offspring, and selecting mates. Proponents suggest that it seeks to integrate psychology into the other natural sciences, rooting it in the organizing theory of biology (evolutionary theory), and thus understanding psychology as a branch of biology. Anthropologist John Tooby and psychologist Leda Cosmides note:

Just as human physiology and evolutionary physiology have worked to identify physical adaptations of the body that represent &quot;human physiological nature,&quot; the purpose of evolutionary psychology is to identify evolved emotional and cognitive adaptations that represent &quot;human psychological nature.&quot; According to Steven Pinker, it is &quot;not a single theory but a large set of hypotheses&quot; and a term that &quot;has also come to refer to a particular way of applying evolutionary theory to the mind, with an emphasis on adaptation, gene-level selection, and modularity.&quot; Evolutionary psychology adopts an understanding of the mind that is based on the computational theory of mind. It describes mental processes as computational operations, so that, for example, a fear response is described as arising from a neurological computation that inputs the perceptional data, e.g. a visual image of a spider, and outputs the appropriate reaction, e.g. fear of possibly dangerous animals. Under this view, any domain-general learning is impossible because of the combinatorial explosion. Evolutionary Psychology specifies the domain as the problems of survival and reproduction.

While philosophers have generally considered the human mind to include broad faculties, such as reason and lust, evolutionary psychologists describe evolved psychological mechanisms as narrowly focused to deal with specific issues, such as catching cheaters or choosing mates. The discipline sees the human brain as having evolved specialized functions, called cognitive modules, or &quot;psychological adaptations&quot; which are shaped by natural selection. Examples include language-acquisition modules, incest-avoidance mechanisms, cheater-detection mechanisms, intelligence and sex-specific mating preferences, foraging mechanisms, alliance-tracking mechanisms, agent-detection mechanisms, and others. Some mechanisms, termed &quot;domain-specific&quot;, deal with recurrent adaptive problems over the course of human evolutionary history. &quot;Domain-general&quot; mechanisms, on the other hand, are proposed to deal with evolutionary novelty.

Evolutionary psychology has roots in cognitive psychology and evolutionary biology but also draws on behavioral ecology, artificial intelligence, genetics, ethology, anthropology, archaeology, biology, ecopsycology and zoology. It is closely linked to sociobiology, but there are key differences between them including the emphasis on &quot;domain-specific&quot; rather than &quot;domain-general&quot; mechanisms, the relevance of measures of current fitness, the importance of mismatch theory, and psychology rather than behavior.

Nikolaas Tinbergen&#x27;s four categories of questions can help to clarify the distinctions between several different, but complementary, types of explanations. Evolutionary psychology focuses primarily on the &quot;why?&quot; questions, while traditional psychology focuses on the &quot;how?&quot; questions.

===Premises===
Evolutionary psychology is founded on several core premises.

# The brain is an information processing device, and it produces behavior in response to external and internal inputs.
# The brain&#x27;s adaptive mechanisms were shaped by natural and sexual selection.
# Different neural mechanisms are specialized for solving problems in humanity&#x27;s evolutionary past.
# The brain has evolved specialized neural mechanisms that were designed for solving problems that recurred over deep evolutionary time, giving modern humans stone-age minds.
# Most contents and processes of the brain are unconscious; and most mental problems that seem easy to solve are actually extremely difficult problems that are solved unconsciously by complicated neural mechanisms.
# Human psychology consists of many specialized mechanisms, each sensitive to different classes of information or inputs. These mechanisms combine to manifest behavior.

==History==

Evolutionary psychology has its historical roots in Charles Darwin&#x27;s theory of natural selection. In &quot;The Origin of Species&quot;, Darwin predicted that psychology would develop an evolutionary basis:

Two of his later books were devoted to the study of animal emotions and psychology; &quot;The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex&quot; in 1871 and &quot;The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals&quot; in 1872. Darwin&#x27;s work inspired William James&#x27;s functionalist approach to psychology. Darwin&#x27;s theories of evolution, adaptation, and natural selection have provided insight into why brains function the way they do.

The content of evolutionary psychology has derived from, on the one hand, the biological sciences (especially evolutionary theory as it relates to ancient human environments, the study of paleoanthropology and animal behavior) and, on the other, the human sciences, especially psychology.

Evolutionary biology as an academic discipline emerged with the modern synthesis in the 1930s and 1940s. In the 1930s the study of animal behavior (ethology) emerged with the work of the Dutch biologist Nikolaas Tinbergen and the Austrian biologists Konrad Lorenz and Karl von Frisch.

W.D. Hamilton&#x27;s (1964) papers on inclusive fitness and Robert Trivers&#x27;s (1972) theories on reciprocity and parental investment helped to establish evolutionary thinking in psychology and the other social sciences. In 1975, Edward O. Wilson combined evolutionary theory with studies of animal and social behavior, building on the works of Lorenz and Tinbergen, in his book &quot;&quot;.

In the 1970s, two major branches developed from ethology. Firstly, the study of animal &quot;social&quot; behavior (including humans) generated sociobiology, defined by its pre-eminent proponent Edward O. Wilson in 1975 as &quot;the systematic study of the biological basis of all social behavior&quot; and in 1978 as &quot;the extension of population biology and evolutionary theory to social organization.&quot; Secondly, there was behavioral ecology which placed less emphasis on &quot;social&quot; behavior; it focused on the ecological and evolutionary basis of animal and human behavior.

In the 1970s and 1980s university departments began to include the term &quot;evolutionary biology&quot; in their titles. The modern era of evolutionary psychology was ushered in, in particular, by Donald Symons&#x27; 1979 book &quot;The Evolution of Human Sexuality&quot; and Leda Cosmides and John Tooby&#x27;s 1992 book &quot;The Adapted Mind&quot;. David Buller observed that the term &quot;evolutionary psychology&quot; is sometimes seen as denoting research based on the specific methodological and theoretical commitments of certain researchers from the Santa Barbara school (University of California), thus some evolutionary psychologists prefer to term their work &quot;human ecology&quot;, &quot;human behavioural ecology&quot; or &quot;evolutionary anthropology&quot; instead.

From psychology there are the primary streams of developmental, social and cognitive psychology. Establishing some measure of the relative influence of genetics and environment on behavior has been at the core of behavioral genetics and its variants, notably studies at the molecular level that examine the relationship between genes, neurotransmitters and behavior. Dual inheritance theory (DIT), developed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, has a slightly different perspective by trying to explain how human behavior is a product of two different and interacting evolutionary processes: genetic evolution and cultural evolution. DIT is seen by some as a &quot;middle-ground&quot; between views that emphasize human universals versus those that emphasize cultural variation.

==Theoretical foundations==

The theories on which evolutionary psychology is based originated with Charles Darwin&#x27;s work, including his speculations about the evolutionary origins of social instincts in humans. Modern evolutionary psychology, however, is possible only because of advances in evolutionary theory in the 20th century.

Evolutionary psychologists say that natural selection has provided humans with many psychological adaptations, in much the same way that it generated humans&#x27; anatomical and physiological adaptations. As with adaptations in general, psychological adaptations are said to be specialized for the environment in which an organism evolved, the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. Sexual selection provides organisms with adaptations related to mating. For male mammals, which have a relatively high maximal potential reproduction rate, sexual selection leads to adaptations that help them compete for females. For female mammals, with a relatively low maximal potential reproduction rate, sexual selection leads to choosiness, which helps females select higher quality mates. Charles Darwin described both natural selection and sexual selection, and he relied on group selection to explain the evolution of altruistic (self-sacrificing) behavior. But group selection was considered a weak explanation, because in any group the less altruistic individuals will be more likely to survive, and the group will become less self-sacrificing as a whole.

In 1964, the evolutionary biologist William D. Hamilton proposed inclusive fitness theory, emphasizing a gene-centered view of evolution. Hamilton noted that genes can increase the replication of copies of themselves into the next generation by influencing the organism&#x27;s social traits in such a way that (statistically) results in helping the survival and reproduction of other copies of the same genes (most simply, identical copies in the organism&#x27;s close relatives). According to Hamilton&#x27;s rule, self-sacrificing behaviors (and the genes influencing them) can evolve if they typically help the organism&#x27;s close relatives so much that it more than compensates for the individual animal&#x27;s sacrifice. Inclusive fitness theory resolved the issue of how altruism can evolve. Other theories also help explain the evolution of altruistic behavior, including evolutionary game theory, tit-for-tat reciprocity, and generalized reciprocity. These theories help to explain the development of altruistic behavior, and account for hostility toward cheaters (individuals that take advantage of others&#x27; altruism).

Several mid-level evolutionary theories inform evolutionary psychology. The r/K selection theory proposes that some species prosper by having many offspring, while others follow the strategy of having fewer offspring but investing much more in each one. Humans follow the second strategy. Parental investment theory explains how parents invest more or less in individual offspring based on how successful those offspring are likely to be, and thus how much they might improve the parents&#x27; inclusive fitness. According to the Trivers–Willard hypothesis, parents in good conditions tend to invest more in sons (who are best able to take advantage of good conditions), while parents in poor conditions tend to invest more in daughters (who are best able to have successful offspring even in poor conditions). According to life history theory, animals evolve life histories to match their environments, determining details such as age at first reproduction and number of offspring. Dual inheritance theory posits that genes and human culture have interacted, with genes affecting the development of culture, and culture, in turn, affecting human evolution on a genetic level, in a similar way to the Baldwin effect.

==Evolved psychological mechanisms==

Evolutionary psychology is based on the hypothesis that, just like hearts, lungs, livers, kidneys, and immune systems, cognition has a functional structure that has a genetic basis, and therefore has evolved by natural selection. Like other organs and tissues, this functional structure should be universally shared amongst a species and should solve important problems of survival and reproduction.

Evolutionary psychologists seek to understand psychological mechanisms by understanding the survival and reproductive functions they might have served over the course of evolutionary history. These might include abilities to infer others&#x27; emotions, discern kin from non-kin, identify and prefer healthier mates, cooperate with others and follow leaders. Consistent with the theory of natural selection, evolutionary psychology sees humans as often in conflict with others, including mates and relatives. For instance, a mother may wish to wean her offspring from breastfeeding earlier than does her infant, which frees up the mother to invest in additional offspring. Evolutionary psychology also recognizes the role of kin selection and reciprocity in evolving prosocial traits such as altruism. Like chimpanzees and bonobos, humans have subtle and flexible social instincts, allowing them to form extended families, lifelong friendships, and political alliances. In studies testing theoretical predictions, evolutionary psychologists have made modest findings on topics such as infanticide, intelligence, marriage patterns, promiscuity, perception of beauty, bride price and parental investment.

Another example would be the evolved mechanism in depression. Clinical depression is maladaptive and should have evolutionary approaches so it can become adaptive. Over the centuries animals and humans have gone through hard times to stay alive, which made our fight or flight senses evolve tremendously. For instances, mammalians have separation anxiety from their guardians which causes distress and sends signals to their hypothalamic pituitary adrenal axis, and emotional/behavioral changes. Going through these types of circumstances helps mammals cope with separation anxiety.

===Historical topics===
Proponents of evolutionary psychology in the 1990s made some explorations in historical events, but the response from historical experts was highly negative and there has been little effort to continue that line of research. Historian Lynn Hunt says that the historians complained that the researchers:
Hunt states that &quot;the few attempts to build up a subfield of psychohistory collapsed under the weight of its presuppositions.&quot; She concludes that, as of 2014, the &quot;&#x27;iron curtain&#x27; between historians and psychology...remains standing.&quot;

===Products of evolution: adaptations, exaptations, byproducts, and random variation===
Not all traits of organisms are evolutionary adaptations. As noted in the table below, traits may also be exaptations, byproducts of adaptations (sometimes called &quot;spandrels&quot;), or random variation between individuals.

Psychological adaptations are hypothesized to be innate or relatively easy to learn and to manifest in cultures worldwide. For example, the ability of toddlers to learn a language with virtually no training is likely to be a psychological adaptation. On the other hand, ancestral humans did not read or write, thus today, learning to read and write requires extensive training, and presumably involves the repurposing of cognitive capacities that evolved in response to selection pressures unrelated to written language. However, variations in manifest behavior can result from universal mechanisms interacting with different local environments. For example, Caucasians who move from a northern climate to the equator will have darker skin. The mechanisms regulating their pigmentation do not change; rather the input to those mechanisms change, resulting in different outputs.

One of the tasks of evolutionary psychology is to identify which psychological traits are likely to be adaptations, byproducts or random variation. George C. Williams suggested that an &quot;adaptation is a special and onerous concept that should only be used where it is really necessary.&quot; As noted by Williams and others, adaptations can be identified by their improbable complexity, species universality, and adaptive functionality.

===Obligate and facultative adaptations===
A question that may be asked about an adaptation is whether it is generally obligate (relatively robust in the face of typical environmental variation) or facultative (sensitive to typical environmental variation). The sweet taste of sugar and the pain of hitting one&#x27;s knee against concrete are the result of fairly obligate psychological adaptations; typical environmental variability during development does not much affect their operation. By contrast, facultative adaptations are somewhat like &quot;if-then&quot; statements. For example, The adaptation for skin to tan is conditional to exposure to sunlight; this is an example of another facultative adaptation. When a psychological adaptation is facultative, evolutionary psychologists concern themselves with how developmental and environmental inputs influence the expression of the adaptation.

===Cultural universals===

Evolutionary psychologists hold that behaviors or traits that occur universally in all cultures are good candidates for evolutionary adaptations. Cultural universals include behaviors related to language, cognition, social roles, gender roles, and technology. Evolved psychological adaptations (such as the ability to learn a language) interact with cultural inputs to produce specific behaviors (e.g., the specific language learned).

Basic gender differences, such as greater eagerness for sex among men and greater coyness among women, are explained as sexually dimorphic psychological adaptations that reflect the different reproductive strategies of males and females. It has been found that both male and female personality traits differ on a large spectrum. Males had a higher rate of traits relating to dominance, tension, and directness. Females had higher rates organizational behavior and more emotional based characteristics.

Evolutionary psychologists contrast their approach to what they term the &quot;standard social science model,&quot; according to which the mind is a general-purpose cognition device shaped almost entirely by culture.

==Environment of evolutionary adaptedness==

Evolutionary psychology argues that to properly understand the functions of the brain, one must understand the properties of the environment in which the brain evolved. That environment is often referred to as the &quot;environment of evolutionary adaptedness&quot;.

The idea of an &quot;environment of evolutionary adaptedness&quot; was first explored as a part of attachment theory by John Bowlby. This is the environment to which a particular evolved mechanism is adapted. More specifically, the environment of evolutionary adaptedness is defined as the set of historically recurring selection pressures that formed a given adaptation, as well as those aspects of the environment that were necessary for the proper development and functioning of the adaptation.

Humans, the genus &quot;Homo&quot;, appeared between 1.5 and 2.5 million years ago, a time that roughly coincides with the start of the Pleistocene 2.6 million years ago. Because the Pleistocene ended a mere 12,000 years ago, most human adaptations either newly evolved during the Pleistocene, or were maintained by stabilizing selection during the Pleistocene. Evolutionary psychology, therefore, proposes that the majority of human psychological mechanisms are adapted to reproductive problems frequently encountered in Pleistocene environments. In broad terms, these problems include those of growth, development, differentiation, maintenance, mating, parenting, and social relationships.

The environment of evolutionary adaptedness is significantly different from modern society. The ancestors of modern humans lived in smaller groups, had more cohesive cultures, and had more stable and rich contexts for identity and meaning. Researchers look to existing hunter-gatherer societies for clues as to how hunter-gatherers lived in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. Unfortunately, the few surviving hunter-gatherer societies are different from each other, and they have been pushed out of the best land and into harsh environments, so it is not clear how closely they reflect ancestral culture. However, all around the world small-band hunter-gatherers offer a similar developmental system for the young (&quot;hunter-gatherer childhood model,&quot; Konner, 2005; 
&quot;evolved developmental niche&quot; or &quot;evolved nest;&quot; Narvaez et al., 2013). The characteristics of the niche are largely the same as for social mammals, who evolved over 30 million years ago: soothing perinatal experience, several years of on-request breastfeeding, nearly constant affection or physical proximity, responsiveness to need (mitigating offspring distress), self-directed play, and for humans, multiple responsive caregivers. Initial studies show the importance of these components in early life for positive child outcomes.

Evolutionary psychologists sometimes look to chimpanzees, bonobos, and other great apes for insight into human ancestral behavior.

===Mismatches===
Since an organism&#x27;s adaptations were suited to its ancestral environment, a new and different environment can create a mismatch. Because humans are mostly adapted to Pleistocene environments, psychological mechanisms sometimes exhibit &quot;mismatches&quot; to the modern environment. One example is the fact that although over 20,000 people are murdered by guns in the US annually, whereas spiders and snakes kill only a handful, people nonetheless learn to fear spiders and snakes about as easily as they do a pointed gun, and more easily than an unpointed gun, rabbits or flowers. A potential explanation is that spiders and snakes were a threat to human ancestors throughout the Pleistocene, whereas guns (and rabbits and flowers) were not. There is thus a mismatch between humans&#x27; evolved fear-learning psychology and the modern environment.

This mismatch also shows up in the phenomena of the supernormal stimulus, a stimulus that elicits a response more strongly than the stimulus for which the response evolved. The term was coined by Niko Tinbergen to refer to non-human animal behavior, but psychologist Deirdre Barrett said that supernormal stimulation governs the behavior of humans as powerfully as that of other animals. She explained junk food as an exaggerated stimulus to cravings for salt, sugar, and fats, and she says that television is an exaggeration of social cues of laughter, smiling faces and attention-grabbing action. Magazine centerfolds and double cheeseburgers pull instincts intended for an environment of evolutionary adaptedness where breast development was a sign of health, youth and fertility in a prospective mate, and fat was a rare and vital nutrient. The psychologist Mark van Vugt recently argued that modern organizational leadership is a mismatch. His argument is that humans are not adapted to work in large, anonymous bureaucratic structures with formal hierarchies. The human mind still responds to personalized, charismatic leadership primarily in the context of informal, egalitarian settings. Hence the dissatisfaction and alienation that many employees experience. Salaries, bonuses and other privileges exploit instincts for relative status, which attract particularly males to senior executive positions.

==Research methods==
Evolutionary theory is heuristic in that it may generate hypotheses that might not be developed from other theoretical approaches. One of the main goals of adaptationist research is to identify which organismic traits are likely to be adaptations, and which are byproducts or random variations. As noted earlier, adaptations are expected to show evidence of complexity, functionality, and species universality, while byproducts or random variation will not. In addition, adaptations are expected to be presented as proximate mechanisms that interact with the environment in either a generally obligate or facultative fashion (see above). Evolutionary psychologists are also interested in identifying these proximate mechanisms (sometimes termed &quot;mental mechanisms&quot; or &quot;psychological adaptations&quot;) and what type of information they take as input, how they process that information, and their outputs. Evolutionary developmental psychology, or &quot;evo-devo,&quot; focuses on how adaptations may be activated at certain developmental times (e.g., losing baby teeth, adolescence, etc.) or how events during the development of an individual may alter life-history trajectories.

Evolutionary psychologists use several strategies to develop and test hypotheses about whether a psychological trait is likely to be an evolved adaptation. Buss (2011) notes that these methods include:

Evolutionary psychologists also use various sources of data for testing, including experiments, archaeological records, data from hunter-gatherer societies, observational studies, neuroscience data, self-reports and surveys, public records, and human products.
Recently, additional methods and tools have been introduced based on fictional scenarios, mathematical models, and multi-agent computer simulations.

==Main areas of research==
Foundational areas of research in evolutionary psychology can be divided into broad categories of adaptive problems that arise from evolutionary theory itself: survival, mating, parenting, family and kinship, interactions with non-kin, and cultural evolution.

===Survival and individual-level psychological adaptations===
Problems of survival are clear targets for the evolution of physical and psychological adaptations. Major problems the ancestors of present-day humans faced included food selection and acquisition; territory selection and physical shelter; and avoiding predators and other environmental threats.

====Consciousness====
Consciousness meets George Williams&#x27; criteria of species universality, complexity, and functionality, and it is a trait that apparently increases fitness.

In his paper &quot;Evolution of consciousness,&quot; John Eccles argues that special anatomical and physical adaptations of the mammalian cerebral cortex gave rise to consciousness. In contrast, others have argued that the recursive circuitry underwriting consciousness is much more primitive, having evolved initially in pre-mammalian species because it improves the capacity for interaction with both social &quot;and&quot; natural environments by providing an energy-saving &quot;neutral&quot; gear in an otherwise energy-expensive motor output machine. Once in place, this recursive circuitry may well have provided a basis for the subsequent development of many of the functions that consciousness facilitates in higher organisms, as outlined by Bernard J. Baars. Richard Dawkins suggested that humans evolved consciousness in order to make themselves the subjects of thought. Daniel Povinelli suggests that large, tree-climbing apes evolved consciousness to take into account one&#x27;s own mass when moving safely among tree branches. Consistent with this hypothesis, Gordon Gallup found that chimpanzees and orangutans, but not little monkeys or terrestrial gorillas, demonstrated self-awareness in mirror tests.

The concept of consciousness can refer to voluntary action, awareness, or wakefulness. However, even voluntary behavior involves unconscious mechanisms. Many cognitive processes take place in the cognitive unconscious, unavailable to conscious awareness. Some behaviors are conscious when learned but then become unconscious, seemingly automatic. Learning, especially implicitly learning a skill, can take place seemingly outside of consciousness. For example, plenty of people know how to turn right when they ride a bike, but very few can accurately explain how they actually do so.

Evolutionary psychology approaches self-deception as an adaptation that can improve one&#x27;s results in social exchanges.

Sleep may have evolved to conserve energy when activity would be less fruitful or more dangerous, such as at night, and especially during the winter season.

====Sensation and perception====
Many experts, such as Jerry Fodor, write that the purpose of perception is knowledge, but evolutionary psychologists hold that its primary purpose is to guide action. For example, they say, depth perception seems to have evolved not to help us know the distances to other objects but rather to help us move around in space. Evolutionary psychologists say that animals from fiddler crabs to humans use eyesight for collision avoidance, suggesting that vision is basically for directing action, not providing knowledge.

Building and maintaining sense organs is metabolically expensive, so these organs evolve only when they improve an organism&#x27;s fitness. More than half the brain is devoted to processing sensory information, and the brain itself consumes roughly one-fourth of one&#x27;s metabolic resources, so the senses must provide exceptional benefits to fitness. Perception accurately mirrors the world; animals get useful, accurate information through their senses.

Scientists who study perception and sensation have long understood the human senses as adaptations to their surrounding worlds. Depth perception consists of processing over half a dozen visual cues, each of which is based on a regularity of the physical world. Vision evolved to respond to the narrow range of electromagnetic energy that is plentiful and that does not pass through objects. Sound waves go around corners and interact with obstacles, creating a complex pattern that includes useful information about the sources of and distances to objects. Larger animals naturally make lower-pitched sounds as a consequence of their size. The range over which an animal hears, on the other hand, is determined by adaptation. Homing pigeons, for example, can hear the very low-pitched sound (infrasound) that carries great distances, even though most smaller animals detect higher-pitched sounds. Taste and smell respond to chemicals in the environment that are thought to have been significant for fitness in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. For example, salt and sugar were apparently both valuable to the human or pre-human inhabitants of the environment of evolutionary adaptedness, so present-day humans have an intrinsic hunger for salty and sweet tastes. The sense of touch is actually many senses, including pressure, heat, cold, tickle, and pain. Pain, while unpleasant, is adaptive. An important adaptation for senses is range shifting, by which the organism becomes temporarily more or less sensitive to sensation. For example, one&#x27;s eyes automatically adjust to dim or bright ambient light. Sensory abilities of different organisms often coevolve, as is the case with the hearing of echolocating bats and that of the moths that have evolved to respond to the sounds that the bats make.

Evolutionary psychologists contend that perception demonstrates the principle of modularity, with specialized mechanisms handling particular perception tasks. For example, people with damage to a particular part of the brain have the specific defect of not being able to recognize faces (prosopagnosia). Evolutionary psychology suggests that this indicates a so-called face-reading module.

====Learning and facultative adaptations====
In evolutionary psychology, learning is said to be accomplished through evolved capacities, specifically facultative adaptations. Facultative adaptations express themselves differently depending on input from the environment. Sometimes the input comes during development and helps shape that development. For example, migrating birds learn to orient themselves by the stars during a critical period in their maturation. Evolutionary psychologists believe that humans also learn language along an evolved program, also with critical periods. The input can also come during daily tasks, helping the organism cope with changing environmental conditions. For example, animals evolved Pavlovian conditioning in order to solve problems about causal relationships. Animals accomplish learning tasks most easily when those tasks resemble problems that they faced in their evolutionary past, such as a rat learning where to find food or water. Learning capacities sometimes demonstrate differences between the sexes. In many animal species, for example, males can solve spatial problems faster and more accurately than females, due to the effects of male hormones during development. The same might be true of humans.

====Emotion and motivation====

Motivations direct and energize behavior, while emotions provide the affective component to motivation, positive or negative. In the early 1970s, Paul Ekman and colleagues began a line of research which suggests that many emotions are universal. He found evidence that humans share at least five basic emotions: fear, sadness, happiness, anger, and disgust. Social emotions evidently evolved to motivate social behaviors that were adaptive in the environment of evolutionary adaptedness. For example, spite seems to work against the individual but it can establish an individual&#x27;s reputation as someone to be feared. Shame and pride can motivate behaviors that help one maintain one&#x27;s standing in a community, and self-esteem is one&#x27;s estimate of one&#x27;s status.
Motivation has a neurobiological basis in the reward system of the brain. Recently, it has been suggested that reward systems may evolve in such a way that there may be an inherent or unavoidable trade-off in the motivational system for activities of short versus long duration.

====Cognition====
Cognition refers to internal representations of the world and internal information processing. From an evolutionary psychology perspective, cognition is not &quot;general purpose&quot;. Cognition uses heuristics, or strategies, that generally increase the likelihood of solving problems that the ancestors of present-day humans routinely faced in their lives. For example, present-day humans are far more likely to solve logic problems that involve detecting cheating (a common problem given humans&#x27; social nature) than the same logic problem put in purely abstract terms. Since the ancestors of present-day humans did not encounter truly random events and lived under simpler life terms, present-day humans may be cognitively predisposed to incorrectly identify patterns in random sequences. &quot;Gamblers&#x27; Fallacy&quot; is one example of this. Gamblers may falsely believe that they have hit a &quot;lucky streak&quot; even when each outcome is actually random and independent of previous trials. Most people believe that if a fair coin has been flipped 9 times and Heads appears each time, that on the tenth flip, there is a greater than 50% chance of getting Tails. Humans find it far easier to make diagnoses or predictions using frequency data than when the same information is presented as probabilities or percentages. This could be due to the ancestors of present-day humans living in relatively small tribes (usually with fewer than 150 people) where frequency information was more readily available and experienced less random occurrences in their lives.

====Personality====
Evolutionary psychology is primarily interested in finding commonalities between people, or basic human psychological nature. From an evolutionary perspective, the fact that people have fundamental differences in personality traits initially presents something of a puzzle. (Note: The field of behavioral genetics is concerned with statistically partitioning differences between people into genetic and environmental sources of variance. However, understanding the concept of heritability can be tricky – heritability refers only to the differences between people, never the degree to which the traits of an individual are due to environmental or genetic factors, since traits are always a complex interweaving of both.)

Personality traits are conceptualized by evolutionary psychologists as due to normal variation around an optimum, due to frequency-dependent selection (behavioral polymorphisms), or as facultative adaptations. Like variability in height, some personality traits may simply reflect inter-individual variability around a general optimum. Or, personality traits may represent different genetically predisposed &quot;behavioral morphs&quot; – alternate behavioral strategies that depend on the frequency of competing behavioral strategies in the population. For example, if most of the population is generally trusting and gullible, the behavioral morph of being a &quot;cheater&quot; (or, in the extreme case, a sociopath) may be advantageous. Finally, like many other psychological adaptations, personality traits may be facultative – sensitive to typical variations in the social environment, especially during early development. For example, later-born children are more likely than firstborns to be rebellious, less conscientious and more open to new experiences, which may be advantageous to them given their particular niche in family structure.

Shared environmental influences do play a role in personality and are not always of less importance than genetic factors. However, shared environmental influences often decrease to near zero after adolescence but do not completely disappear.

====Language====
According to Steven Pinker, who builds on the work by Noam Chomsky, the universal human ability to learn to talk between the ages of 1 – 4, basically without training, suggests that language acquisition is a distinctly human psychological adaptation (see, in particular, Pinker&#x27;s &quot;The Language Instinct&quot;). Pinker and Bloom (1990) argue that language as a mental faculty shares many likenesses with the complex organs of the body which suggests that, like these organs, language has evolved as an adaptation, since this is the only known mechanism by which such complex organs can develop.

Pinker follows Chomsky in arguing that the fact that children can learn any human language with no explicit instruction suggests that language, including most of grammar, is basically innate and that it only needs to be activated by interaction. Chomsky himself does not believe language to have evolved as an adaptation, but suggests that it likely evolved as a byproduct of some other adaptation, a so-called spandrel. But Pinker and Bloom argue that the organic nature of language strongly suggests that it has an adaptational origin.

Evolutionary psychologists hold that the FOXP2 gene may well be associated with the evolution of human language. In the 1980s, psycholinguist Myrna Gopnik identified a dominant gene that causes language impairment in the KE family of Britain. This gene turned out to be a mutation of the FOXP2 gene. Humans have a unique allele of this gene, which has otherwise been closely conserved through most of mammalian evolutionary history. This unique allele seems to have first appeared between 100 and 200 thousand years ago, and it is now all but universal in humans. However, the once-popular idea that FOXP2 is a &#x27;grammar gene&#x27; or that it triggered the emergence of language in &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; is now widely discredited.

Currently, several competing theories about the evolutionary origin of language coexist, none of them having achieved a general consensus. Researchers of language acquisition in primates and humans such as Michael Tomasello and Talmy Givón, argue that the innatist framework has understated the role of imitation in learning and that it is not at all necessary to posit the existence of an innate grammar module to explain human language acquisition. Tomasello argues that studies of how children and primates actually acquire communicative skills suggest that humans learn complex behavior through experience, so that instead of a module specifically dedicated to language acquisition, language is acquired by the same cognitive mechanisms that are used to acquire all other kinds of socially transmitted behavior.

On the issue of whether language is best seen as having evolved as an adaptation or as a spandrel, evolutionary biologist W. Tecumseh Fitch, following Stephen J. Gould, argues that it is unwarranted to assume that every aspect of language is an adaptation, or that language as a whole is an adaptation. He criticizes some strands of evolutionary psychology for suggesting a pan-adaptionist view of evolution, and dismisses Pinker and Bloom&#x27;s question of whether &quot;Language has evolved as an adaptation&quot; as being misleading. He argues instead that from a biological viewpoint the evolutionary origins of language is best conceptualized as being the probable result of a convergence of many separate adaptations into a complex system. A similar argument is made by Terrence Deacon who in &quot;The Symbolic Species&quot; argues that the different features of language have co-evolved with the evolution of the mind and that the ability to use symbolic communication is integrated in all other cognitive processes.

If the theory that language could have evolved as a single adaptation is accepted, the question becomes which of its many functions has been the basis of adaptation. Several evolutionary hypotheses have been posited: that language evolved for the purpose of social grooming, that it evolved as a way to show mating potential or that it evolved to form social contracts. Evolutionary psychologists recognize that these theories are all speculative and that much more evidence is required to understand how language might have been selectively adapted.

===Mating===

Given that sexual reproduction is the means by which genes are propagated into future generations, sexual selection plays a large role in human evolution. Human mating, then, is of interest to evolutionary psychologists who aim to investigate evolved mechanisms to attract and secure mates. Several lines of research have stemmed from this interest, such as studies of mate selection mate poaching, mate retention, mating preferences and conflict between the sexes.

In 1972 Robert Trivers published an influential paper on sex differences that is now referred to as parental investment theory. The size differences of gametes (anisogamy) is the fundamental, defining difference between males (small gametes – sperm) and females (large gametes – ova). Trivers noted that anisogamy typically results in different levels of parental investment between the sexes, with females initially investing more. Trivers proposed that this difference in parental investment leads to the sexual selection of different reproductive strategies between the sexes and to sexual conflict. For example, he suggested that the sex that invests less in offspring will generally compete for access to the higher-investing sex to increase their inclusive fitness. Trivers posited that differential parental investment led to the evolution of sexual dimorphisms in mate choice, intra- and inter- sexual reproductive competition, and courtship displays. In mammals, including humans, females make a much larger parental investment than males (i.e. gestation followed by childbirth and lactation). Parental investment theory is a branch of life history theory.

Buss and Schmitt&#x27;s (1993) sexual strategies theory proposed that, due to differential parental investment, humans have evolved sexually dimorphic adaptations related to &quot;sexual accessibility, fertility assessment, commitment seeking and avoidance, immediate and enduring resource procurement, paternity certainty, assessment of mate value, and parental investment.&quot; Their strategic interference theory suggested that conflict between the sexes occurs when the preferred reproductive strategies of one sex interfere with those of the other sex, resulting in the activation of emotional responses such as anger or jealousy.

Women are generally more selective when choosing mates, especially under long-term mating conditions. However, under some circumstances, short term mating can provide benefits to women as well, such as fertility insurance, trading up to better genes, reducing the risk of inbreeding, and insurance protection of her offspring.

Due to male paternity uncertainty, sex differences have been found in the domains of sexual jealousy. Females generally react more adversely to emotional infidelity and males will react more to sexual infidelity. This particular pattern is predicted because the costs involved in mating for each sex are distinct. Women, generally, might prefer a mate who can offer resources (e.g., financial, commitment), thus, a woman risks losing such resources with a mate who commits emotional infidelity. Men, on the other hand, are never certain of the genetic paternity of their children because they do not bear the offspring themselves. This suggests that for men sexual infidelity would generally be more aversive than emotional infidelity because investing resources in another man&#x27;s offspring does not lead to the propagation of their own genes.

Another interesting line of research is that which examines women&#x27;s mate preferences across the ovulatory cycle. The theoretical underpinning of this research is that ancestral women would have evolved mechanisms to select mates with certain traits depending on their hormonal status. Known as the ovulatory shift hypothesis, the theory posits that, during the ovulatory phase of a woman&#x27;s cycle (approximately days 10–15 of a woman&#x27;s cycle), a woman who mated with a male with high genetic quality would have been more likely, on average, to produce and bear a healthy offspring than a woman who mated with a male with low genetic quality. These putative preferences are predicted to be especially apparent for short-term mating domains because a potential male mate would only be offering genes to a potential offspring. This hypothesis allows researchers to examine whether women select mates who have characteristics that indicate high genetic quality during the high fertility phase of their ovulatory cycles. Indeed, studies have shown that women&#x27;s preferences vary across the ovulatory cycle. In particular, Haselton and Miller (2006) showed that highly fertile women prefer creative but poor men as short-term mates. Creativity may be a proxy for good genes. Research by Gangestad et al. (2004) indicates that highly fertile women prefer men who display social presence and intrasexual competition; these traits may act as cues that would help women predict which men may have, or would be able to acquire, resources.

===Parenting===
Reproduction is always costly for women, and can also be for men. Individuals are limited in the degree to which they can devote time and resources to producing and raising their young, and such expenditure may also be detrimental to their future condition, survival and further reproductive output.
Parental investment is any parental expenditure (time, energy etc.) that benefits one offspring at a cost to parents&#x27; ability to invest in other components of fitness (Clutton-Brock 1991: 9; Trivers 1972). Components of fitness (Beatty 1992) include the well-being of existing offspring, parents&#x27; future reproduction, and inclusive fitness through aid to kin (Hamilton, 1964). Parental investment theory is a branch of life history theory.

The benefits of parental investment to the offspring are large and are associated with the effects on condition, growth, survival, and ultimately, on the reproductive success of the offspring. However, these benefits can come at the cost of the parent&#x27;s ability to reproduce in the future e.g. through the increased risk of injury when defending offspring against predators, the loss of mating opportunities whilst rearing offspring, and an increase in the time to the next reproduction. Overall, parents are selected to maximize the difference between the benefits and the costs, and parental care will likely evolve when the benefits exceed the costs.

The Cinderella effect is an alleged high incidence of stepchildren being physically, emotionally or sexually abused, neglected, murdered, or otherwise mistreated at the hands of their stepparents at significantly higher rates than their genetic counterparts. It takes its name from the fairy tale character Cinderella, who in the story was cruelly mistreated by her stepmother and stepsisters. Daly and Wilson (1996) noted: &quot;Evolutionary thinking led to the discovery of the most important risk factor for child homicide – the presence of a stepparent. Parental efforts and investments are valuable resources, and selection favors those parental psyches that allocate effort effectively to promote fitness. The adaptive problems that challenge parental decision-making include both the accurate identification of one&#x27;s offspring and the allocation of one&#x27;s resources among them with sensitivity to their needs and abilities to convert parental investment into fitness increments…. Stepchildren were seldom or never so valuable to one&#x27;s expected fitness as one&#x27;s own offspring would be, and those parental psyches that were easily parasitized by just any appealing youngster must always have incurred a selective disadvantage&quot;(Daly &amp; Wilson, 1996, pp. 64–65). However, they note that not all stepparents will &quot;want&quot; to abuse their partner&#x27;s children, or that genetic parenthood is any insurance against abuse. They see step parental care as primarily &quot;mating effort&quot; towards the genetic parent.

===Family and kin===

Inclusive fitness is the sum of an organism&#x27;s classical fitness (how many of its own offspring it produces and supports) and the number of equivalents of its own offspring it can add to the population by supporting others. The first component is called classical fitness by Hamilton (1964).

From the gene&#x27;s point of view, evolutionary success ultimately depends on leaving behind the maximum number of copies of itself in the population. Until 1964, it was generally believed that genes only achieved this by causing the individual to leave the maximum number of viable offspring. However, in 1964 W. D. Hamilton proved mathematically that, because close relatives of an organism share some identical genes, a gene can also increase its evolutionary success by promoting the reproduction and survival of these related or otherwise similar individuals. Hamilton concluded that this leads natural selection to favor organisms that would behave in ways that maximize their inclusive fitness. It is also true that natural selection favors behavior that maximizes personal fitness.

Hamilton&#x27;s rule describes mathematically whether or not a gene for altruistic behavior will spread in a population:
:formula_1
where
* formula_2 is the reproductive cost to the altruist,
* formula_3 is the reproductive benefit to the recipient of the altruistic behavior, and
* formula_4 is the probability, above the population average, of the individuals sharing an altruistic gene – commonly viewed as &quot;degree of relatedness&quot;.

The concept serves to explain how natural selection can perpetuate altruism. If there is an &quot;altruism gene&quot; (or complex of genes) that influences an organism&#x27;s behavior to be helpful and protective of relatives and their offspring, this behavior also increases the proportion of the altruism gene in the population, because relatives are likely to share genes with the altruist due to common descent. Altruists may also have some way to recognize altruistic behavior in unrelated individuals and be inclined to support them. As Dawkins points out in &quot;The Selfish Gene&quot; (Chapter 6) and &quot;The Extended Phenotype&quot;, this must be distinguished from the green-beard effect.

Although it is generally true that humans tend to be more altruistic toward their kin than toward non-kin, the relevant proximate mechanisms that mediate this cooperation have been debated (see kin recognition), with some arguing that kin status is determined primarily via social and cultural factors (such as co-residence, maternal association of sibs, etc.), while others have argued that kin recognition can also be mediated by biological factors such as facial resemblance and immunogenetic similarity of the major histocompatibility complex (MHC). For a discussion of the interaction of these social and biological kin recognition factors see Lieberman, Tooby, and Cosmides (2007) (PDF).

Whatever the proximate mechanisms of kin recognition there is substantial evidence that humans act generally more altruistically to close genetic kin compared to genetic non-kin.

===Interactions with non-kin / reciprocity===
Although interactions with non-kin are generally less altruistic compared to those with kin, cooperation can be maintained with non-kin via mutually beneficial reciprocity as was proposed by Robert Trivers. If there are repeated encounters between the same two players in an evolutionary game in which each of them can choose either to &quot;cooperate&quot; or &quot;defect&quot;, then a strategy of mutual cooperation may be favored even if it pays each player, in the short term, to defect when the other cooperates. Direct reciprocity can lead to the evolution of cooperation only if the probability, w, of another encounter between the same two individuals exceeds the cost-to-benefit ratio of the altruistic act:
: w &gt; c/b

Reciprocity can also be indirect if information about previous interactions is shared. Reputation allows evolution of cooperation by indirect reciprocity. Natural selection favors strategies that base the decision to help on the reputation of the recipient: studies show that people who are more helpful are more likely to receive help. The calculations of indirect reciprocity are complicated and only a tiny fraction of this universe has been uncovered, but again a simple rule has emerged. Indirect reciprocity can only promote cooperation if the probability, q, of knowing someone&#x27;s reputation exceeds the cost-to-benefit ratio of the altruistic act:
: q &gt; c/b

One important problem with this explanation is that individuals may be able to evolve the capacity to obscure their reputation, reducing the probability, q, that it will be known.

Trivers argues that friendship and various social emotions evolved in order to manage reciprocity. Liking and disliking, he says, evolved to help present-day humans&#x27; ancestors form coalitions with others who reciprocated and to exclude those who did not reciprocate. Moral indignation may have evolved to prevent one&#x27;s altruism from being exploited by cheaters, and gratitude may have motivated present-day humans&#x27; ancestors to reciprocate appropriately after benefiting from others&#x27; altruism. Likewise, present-day humans feel guilty when they fail to reciprocate. These social motivations match what evolutionary psychologists expect to see in adaptations that evolved to maximize the benefits and minimize the drawbacks of reciprocity.

Evolutionary psychologists say that humans have psychological adaptations that evolved specifically to help us identify nonreciprocators, commonly referred to as &quot;cheaters.&quot; In 1993, Robert Frank and his associates found that participants in a prisoner&#x27;s dilemma scenario were often able to predict whether their partners would &quot;cheat&quot;, based on a half-hour of unstructured social interaction. In a 1996 experiment, for example, Linda Mealey and her colleagues found that people were better at remembering the faces of people when those faces were associated with stories about those individuals cheating (such as embezzling money from a church).

===Strong reciprocity (or &quot;tribal reciprocity&quot;)===
Humans may have an evolved set of psychological adaptations that predispose them to be more cooperative than otherwise would be expected with members of their tribal in-group, and, more nasty to members of tribal out groups. These adaptations may have been a consequence of tribal warfare. Humans may also have predispositions for &quot;altruistic punishment&quot; – to punish in-group members who violate in-group rules, even when this altruistic behavior cannot be justified in terms of helping those you are related to (kin selection), cooperating with those who you will interact with again (direct reciprocity), or cooperating to better your reputation with others (indirect reciprocity).

==Evolutionary psychology and culture==
Though evolutionary psychology has traditionally focused on individual-level behaviors, determined by species-typical psychological adaptations, considerable work has been done on how these adaptations shape and, ultimately govern, culture (Tooby and Cosmides, 1989). Tooby and Cosmides (1989) argued that the mind consists of many domain-specific psychological adaptations, some of which may constrain what cultural material is learned or taught. As opposed to a domain-general cultural acquisition program, where an individual passively receives culturally-transmitted material from the group, Tooby and Cosmides (1989), among others, argue that: &quot;the psyche evolved to generate adaptive rather than repetitive behavior, and hence critically analyzes the behavior of those surrounding it in highly structured and patterned ways, to be used as a rich (but by no means the only) source of information out of which to construct a &#x27;private culture&#x27; or individually tailored adaptive system; in consequence, this system may or may not mirror the behavior of others in any given respect.&quot; (Tooby and Cosmides 1989).

Biological explanations of human culture also brought criticism to evolutionary psychology: Evolutionary psychologists see the human psyche and physiology as a genetic product and assume that genes contain the information for the development and control of the organism and that this information is transmitted from one generation to the next via genes. Evolutionary psychologists thereby see physical and psychological characteristics of humans as genetically programmed. Even then, when evolutionary psychologists acknowledge the influence of the environment on human development, they understand the environment only as an activator or trigger for the programmed developmental instructions encoded in genes. Evolutionary psychologists, for example, believe that the human brain is made up of innate modules, each of which is specialised only for very specific tasks, e. g. an anxiety module. According to evolutionary psychologists, these modules are given before the organism actually develops and are then activated by some environmental event. Critics object that this view is reductionist and that cognitive specialisation only comes about through the interaction of humans with their real environment, rather than the environment of distant ancestors. Interdisciplinary approaches are increasingly striving to mediate between these opposing points of view and to highlight that biological and cultural causes need not be antithetical in explaining human behaviour and even complex cultural achievements.

==In psychology sub-fields==

===Developmental psychology===
According to Paul Baltes, the benefits granted by evolutionary selection decrease with age. Natural selection has not eliminated many harmful conditions and nonadaptive characteristics that appear among older adults, such as Alzheimer disease. If it were a disease that killed 20-year-olds instead of 70-year-olds this might have been a disease that natural selection could have eliminated ages ago. Thus, unaided by evolutionary pressures against nonadaptive conditions, modern humans suffer the aches, pains, and infirmities of aging and as the benefits of evolutionary selection decrease with age, the need for modern technological mediums against non-adaptive conditions increases.

===Social psychology===
As humans are a highly social species, there are many adaptive problems associated with navigating the social world (e.g., maintaining allies, managing status hierarchies, interacting with outgroup members, coordinating social activities, collective decision-making). Researchers in the emerging field of evolutionary social psychology have made many discoveries pertaining to topics traditionally studied by social psychologists, including person perception, social cognition, attitudes, altruism, emotions, group dynamics, leadership, motivation, prejudice, intergroup relations, and cross-cultural differences.

When endeavouring to solve a problem humans at an early age show determination while chimpanzees have no comparable facial expression. Researchers suspect the human determined expression evolved because when a human is determinedly working on a problem other people will frequently help.

===Abnormal psychology===

Adaptationist hypotheses regarding the etiology of psychological disorders are often based on analogies between physiological and psychological dysfunctions, as noted in the table below. Prominent theorists and evolutionary psychiatrists include Michael T. McGuire, Anthony Stevens, and Randolph M. Nesse. They, and others, suggest that mental disorders are due to the interactive effects of both nature and nurture, and often have multiple contributing causes.

Evolutionary psychologists have suggested that schizophrenia and bipolar disorder may reflect a side-effect of genes with fitness benefits, such as increased creativity. (Some individuals with bipolar disorder are especially creative during their manic phases and the close relatives of people with schizophrenia have been found to be more likely to have creative professions.) A 1994 report by the American Psychiatry Association found that people with schizophrenia at roughly the same rate in Western and non-Western cultures, and in industrialized and pastoral societies, suggesting that schizophrenia is not a disease of civilization nor an arbitrary social invention. Sociopathy may represent an evolutionarily stable strategy, by which a small number of people who cheat on social contracts benefit in a society consisting mostly of non-sociopaths. Mild depression may be an adaptive response to withdraw from, and re-evaluate, situations that have led to disadvantageous outcomes (the &quot;analytical rumination hypothesis&quot;) (see Evolutionary approaches to depression).

Trofimova reviewed the most consistent psychological and behavioural sex differences in psychological abilities and disabilities and linked them to the Geodakyan&#x27;s evolutionary theory of sex (ETS). She pointed out that a pattern of consistent sex differences in physical, verbal and social dis/abilities corresponds to the idea of the ETS considering sex dimorphism as a functional specialization of a species. Sex differentiation, according to the ETS, creates two partitions within a species, (1) conservational (females), and (2) variational (males). In females, superiority in verbal abilities, higher rule obedience, socialisation, empathy and agreeableness can be presented as a reflection of the systemic conservation function of the female sex. Male superiority is mostly noted in exploratory abilities - in risk- and sensation seeking, spacial orientation, physical strength and higher rates in physical aggression. In combination with higher birth and accidental death rates this pattern might be a reflection of the systemic variational function (testing the boundaries of beneficial characteristics) of the male sex. As a result, psychological sex differences might be influenced by a global tendency within a species to expand its norm of reaction, but at the same time to preserve the beneficial properties of the species. Moreover, Trofimova suggested a &quot;redundancy pruning&quot; hypothesis as an upgrade of the ETS theory. She pointed out to higher rates of psychopathy, dyslexia, autism and schizophrenia in males, in comparison to females. She suggested that the variational function of the &quot;male partition&quot; might also provide irrelevance/redundancy pruning of an excess in a bank of beneficial characteristics of a species, with a continuing resistance to any changes from the norm-driven conservational partition of species. This might explain a contradictory allocation of a high drive for social status/power in the male sex with the their least (among two sexes) abilities for social interaction. The high rates of communicative disorders and psychopathy in males might facilitate their higher rates of disengagement from normative expectations and their insensitivity to social disapproval, when they deliberately do not follow social norms.

Some of these speculations have yet to be developed into fully testable hypotheses, and a great deal of research is required to confirm their validity.

===Antisocial and criminal behavior===

Evolutionary psychology has been applied to explain criminal or otherwise immoral behavior as being adaptive or related to adaptive behaviors. Males are generally more aggressive than females, who are more selective of their partners because of the far greater effort they have to contribute to pregnancy and child-rearing. Males being more aggressive is hypothesized to stem from the more intense reproductive competition faced by them. Males of low status may be especially vulnerable to being childless. It may have been evolutionary advantageous to engage in highly risky and violently aggressive behavior to increase their status and therefore reproductive success. This may explain why males are generally involved in more crimes, and why low status and being unmarried are associated with criminality. Furthermore, competition over females is argued to have been particularly intensive in late adolescence and young adulthood, which is theorized to explain why crime rates are particularly high during this period. Some sociologists have underlined differential exposure to androgens as the cause of these behaviors, notably Lee Ellis in his evolutionary neuroandrogenic (ENA) theory.

Many conflicts that result in harm and death involve status, reputation, and seemingly trivial insults. Steven Pinker in his book &quot;The Better Angels of Our Nature&quot; argues that in non-state societies without a police it was very important to have a credible deterrence against aggression. Therefore, it was important to be perceived as having a credible reputation for retaliation, resulting in humans developing instincts for revenge as well as for protecting reputation (&quot;honor&quot;). Pinker argues that the development of the state and the police have dramatically reduced the level of violence compared to the ancestral environment. Whenever the state breaks down, which can be very locally such as in poor areas of a city, humans again organize in groups for protection and aggression and concepts such as violent revenge and protecting honor again become extremely important.

Rape is theorized to be a reproductive strategy that facilitates the propagation of the rapist&#x27;s progeny. Such a strategy may be adopted by men who otherwise are unlikely to be appealing to women and therefore cannot form legitimate relationships, or by high-status men on socially vulnerable women who are unlikely to retaliate to increase their reproductive success even further. The sociobiological theories of rape are highly controversial, as traditional theories typically do not consider rape to be a behavioral adaptation, and objections to this theory are made on ethical, religious, political, as well as scientific grounds.

===Psychology of religion===

Adaptationist perspectives on religious belief suggest that, like all behavior, religious behaviors are a product of the human brain. As with all other organ functions, cognition&#x27;s functional structure has been argued to have a genetic foundation, and is therefore subject to the effects of natural selection and sexual selection. Like other organs and tissues, this functional structure should be universally shared amongst humans and should have solved important problems of survival and reproduction in ancestral environments. However, evolutionary psychologists remain divided on whether religious belief is more likely a consequence of evolved psychological adaptations, or a byproduct of other cognitive adaptations.

===Coalitional psychology===
Coalitional psychology is an approach to explain political behaviors between different coalitions and the conditionality of these behaviors in evolutionary psychological perspective. This approach assumes that since human beings appeared on the earth, they have evolved to live in groups instead of living as individuals to achieve benefits such as more mating opportunities and increased status. Human beings thus naturally think and act in a way that manages and negotiates group dynamics.

Coalitional psychology offers falsifiable ex ante prediction by positing five hypotheses on how these psychological adaptations operate:
* Humans represent groups as a special category of individual, unstable and with a short shadow of the future
* Political entrepreneurs strategically manipulate the coalitional environment, often appealing to emotional devices such as &quot;outrage&quot; to inspire collective action.
* Relative gains dominate relations with enemies, whereas absolute gains characterize relations with allies.
* Coalitional size and male physical strength will positively predict individual support for aggressive foreign policies.
* Individuals with children, particularly women, will vary in adopting aggressive foreign policies than those without progeny.

==Reception and criticism==

Critics of evolutionary psychology accuse it of promoting genetic determinism, pan-adaptationism (the idea that all behaviors and anatomical features are adaptations), unfalsifiable hypotheses, distal or ultimate explanations of behavior when proximate explanations are superior, and malevolent political or moral ideas.

===Ethical implications===
Critics have argued that evolutionary psychology might be used to justify existing social hierarchies and reactionary policies. It has also been suggested by critics that evolutionary psychologists&#x27; theories and interpretations of empirical data rely heavily on ideological assumptions about race and gender.

In response to such criticism, evolutionary psychologists often caution against committing the naturalistic fallacy – the assumption that &quot;what is natural&quot; is necessarily a moral good. However, their caution against committing the naturalistic fallacy has been criticized as means to stifle legitimate ethical discussions.

===Contradictions in models===
Some criticisms of evolutionary psychology point at contradictions between different aspects of adaptive scenarios posited by evolutionary psychology. One example is the evolutionary psychology model of extended social groups selecting for modern human brains, a contradiction being that the synaptic function of modern human brains require high amounts of many specific essential nutrients so that such a transition to higher requirements of the same essential nutrients being shared by all individuals in a population would decrease the possibility of forming large groups due to bottleneck foods with rare essential nutrients capping group sizes. It is mentioned that some insects have societies with different ranks for each individual and that monkeys remain socially functioning after the removal of most of the brain as additional arguments against big brains promoting social networking. The model of males as both providers and protectors is criticized for the impossibility of being in two places at once, the male cannot both protect his family at home and be out hunting at the same time. In the case of the claim that a provider male could buy protection service for his family from other males by bartering food that he had hunted, critics point at the fact that the most valuable food (the food that contained the rarest essential nutrients) would be different in different ecologies and as such vegetable in some geographical areas and animal in others, making it impossible for hunting styles relying on physical strength or risk-taking to be universally of similar value in bartered food and instead of making it inevitable that in some parts of Africa, food gathered with no need for major physical strength would be the most valuable to barter for protection. A contradiction between evolutionary psychology&#x27;s claim of men needing to be more sexually visual than women for fast speed of assessing women&#x27;s fertility than women needed to be able to assess the male&#x27;s genes and its claim of male sexual jealousy guarding against infidelity is also pointed at, as it would be pointless for a male to be fast to assess female fertility if he needed to assess the risk of there being a jealous male mate and in that case his chances of defeating him before mating anyway (pointlessness of assessing one necessary condition faster than another necessary condition can possibly be assessed).

===Standard social science model===

Evolutionary psychology has been entangled in the larger philosophical and social science controversies related to the debate on nature versus nurture. Evolutionary psychologists typically contrast evolutionary psychology with what they call the standard social science model (SSSM). They characterize the SSSM as the &quot;blank slate&quot;, &quot;relativist&quot;, &quot;social constructionist&quot;, and &quot;cultural determinist&quot; perspective that they say dominated the social sciences throughout the 20th century and assumed that the mind was shaped almost entirely by culture.

Critics have argued that evolutionary psychologists created a false dichotomy between their own view and the caricature of the SSSM. Other critics regard the SSSM as a rhetorical device or a straw man and suggest that the scientists whom evolutionary psychologists associate with the SSSM did not believe that the mind was a blank state devoid of any natural predispositions.

===Reductionism and determinism===
Some critics view evolutionary psychology as a form of genetic reductionism and genetic determinism, a common critique being that evolutionary psychology does not address the complexity of individual development and experience and fails to explain the influence of genes on behavior in individual cases. Evolutionary psychologists respond that they are working within a nature-nurture interactionist framework that acknowledges that many psychological adaptations are facultative (sensitive to environmental variations during individual development). The discipline is generally not focused on proximate analyses of behavior, but rather its focus is on the study of distal/ultimate causality (the evolution of psychological adaptations). The field of behavioral genetics is focused on the study of the proximate influence of genes on behavior.

===Testability of hypotheses===
A frequent critique of the discipline is that the hypotheses of evolutionary psychology are frequently arbitrary and difficult or impossible to adequately test, thus questioning its status as an actual scientific discipline, for example because many current traits probably evolved to serve different functions than they do now. Thus because there are a potentially infinite number of alternative explanations for why a trait evolved, critics contend that it is impossible to determine the exact explanation. While evolutionary psychology hypotheses are difficult to test, evolutionary psychologists assert that it is not impossible. Part of the critique of the scientific base of evolutionary psychology includes a critique of the concept of the Environment of Evolutionary Adaptation (EEA). Some critics have argued that researchers know so little about the environment in which &quot;Homo sapiens&quot; evolved that explaining specific traits as an adaption to that environment becomes highly speculative. Evolutionary psychologists respond that they do know many things about this environment, including the facts that present day humans&#x27; ancestors were hunter-gatherers, that they generally lived in small tribes, etc. Edward Hagen argues that the human past environments were not radically different in the same sense as the Carboniferous or Jurassic periods and that the animal and plant taxa of the era were similar to those of the modern world, as was the geology and ecology. Hagen argues that few would deny that other organs evolved in the EEA (for example, lungs evolving in an oxygen rich atmosphere) yet critics question whether or not the brain&#x27;s EEA is truly knowable, which he argues constitutes selective scepticism. Hagen also argues that most evolutionary psychology research is based on the fact that females can get pregnant and males cannot, which Hagen observes was also true in the EEA.

John Alcock describes this as the &quot;No Time Machine Argument&quot;, as critics are arguing that since it is not possible to travel back in time to the EEA, then it cannot be determined what was going on there and thus what was adaptive. Alcock argues that present-day evidence allows researchers to be reasonably confident about the conditions of the EEA and that the fact that so many human behaviours are adaptive in the &quot;current&quot; environment is evidence that the ancestral environment of humans had much in common with the present one, as these behaviours would have evolved in the ancestral environment. Thus Alcock concludes that researchers can make predictions on the adaptive value of traits. Similarly, Dominic Murphy argues that alternative explanations cannot just be forwarded but instead need their own evidence and predictions - if one explanation makes predictions that the others cannot, it is reasonable to have confidence in that explanation. In addition, Murphy argues that other historical sciences also make predictions about modern phenomena to come up with explanations about past phenomena, for example, cosmologists look for evidence for what we would expect to see in the modern-day if the Big Bang was true, while geologists make predictions about modern phenomena to determine if an asteroid wiped out the dinosaurs. Murphy argues that if other historical disciplines can conduct tests without a time machine, then the onus is on the critics to show why evolutionary psychology is untestable if other historical disciplines are not, as &quot;methods should be judged across the board, not singled out for ridicule in one context.&quot;

===Modularity of mind===

Evolutionary psychologists generally presume that, like the body, the mind is made up of many evolved modular adaptations, although there is some disagreement within the discipline regarding the degree of general plasticity, or &quot;generality,&quot; of some modules. It has been suggested that modularity evolves because, compared to non-modular networks, it would have conferred an advantage in terms of fitness and because connection costs are lower.

In contrast, some academics argue that it is unnecessary to posit the existence of highly domain specific modules, and, suggest that the neural anatomy of the brain supports a model based on more domain general faculties and processes. Moreover, empirical support for the domain-specific theory stems almost entirely from performance on variations of the Wason selection task which is extremely limited in scope as it only tests one subtype of deductive reasoning.

===Cultural rather than genetic development of cognitive tools===
Psychologist Cecilia Heyes has argued that the picture presented by some evolutionary psychology of the human mind as a collection of cognitive instinctsorgans of thought shaped by genetic evolution over very long time periodsdoes not fit research results. She posits instead that humans have cognitive gadgets&quot;special-purpose organs of thought&quot; built in the course of development through social interaction. Similar criticisms are articulated by Subrena E. Smith of the University of New Hampshire.

===Response by evolutionary psychologists===
Evolutionary psychologists have addressed many of their critics (e.g. in books by Segerstråle (2000), Barkow (2005), and Alcock (2001)). Among their rebuttals are that some criticisms are straw men, or are based on an incorrect nature versus nurture dichotomy or on basic misunderstandings of the discipline. 

Robert Kurzban suggested that &quot;...critics of the field, when they err, are not slightly missing the mark. Their confusion is deep and profound. It&#x27;s not like they are marksmen who can&#x27;t quite hit the center of the target; they&#x27;re holding the gun backwards.&quot; Many have written specifically to correct basic misconceptions.

==See also==

* Behavioural genetics
* Biocultural evolution
* Biosocial criminology
* Darwinian Happiness
* Darwinian literary studies
* Deep social mind
* Dunbar&#x27;s number
* Evolution of the brain
* List of evolutionary psychologists
* Evolutionary origin of religions
* God gene
* Evolutionary psychiatry
* Evolutionary psychology and culture
* Primate cognition
* Hominid intelligence
* Chimpanzee intelligence
* Cooperative eye hypothesis
* Origin of language
* Origin of speech
* Ovulatory shift hypothesis
* Neuroethology
* r/K selection theory
* Sociobiology
* Universal Darwinism
==Notes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* Buss, D. M. (1994). &quot;The evolution of desire: Strategies of human mating&quot;. New York: Basic Books.
* 
* 
* 
* Gaulin, Steven J. C. and Donald H. McBurney. &quot;Evolutionary psychology&quot;. Prentice Hall. 2003. 
* 
*
* Nesse, R.M. (2000). Tingergen&#x27;s Four Questions Organized .
* 
* 
* 
* Schacter, Daniel L, Daniel Wegner and Daniel Gilbert. 2007. &quot;Psychology&quot;. Worth Publishers. .
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* 
* Heylighen F. (2012). &quot;Evolutionary Psychology&quot;, in: A. Michalos (ed.): Encyclopedia of Quality of Life Research (Springer, Berlin).
* 
* Gerhard Medicus (2017). Being Human – Bridging the Gap between the Sciences of Body and Mind, Berlin VWB
* Oikkonen, Venla: &quot;Gender, Sexuality and Reproduction in Evolutionary Narratives.&quot; London: Routledge, 2013. 
==External links==
* PsychTable.org Collaborative effort to catalog human psychological adaptations
* What Is Evolutionary Psychology? by Clinical Evolutionary Psychologist Dale Glaebach.
* Evolutionary Psychology – Approaches in Psychology
* Gerhard Medicus (2017). Being Human – Bridging the Gap between the Sciences of Body and Mind, Berlin VWB

===Academic societies===
* Human Behavior and Evolution Society; international society dedicated to using evolutionary theory to study human nature
* The International Society for Human Ethology; promotes ethological perspectives on the study of humans worldwide
* European Human Behaviour and Evolution Association an interdisciplinary society that supports the activities of European researchers with an interest in evolutionary accounts of human cognition, behavior and society
* The Association for Politics and the Life Sciences; an international and interdisciplinary association of scholars, scientists, and policymakers concerned with evolutionary, genetic, and ecological knowledge and its bearing on political behavior, public policy and ethics.
* Society for Evolutionary Analysis in Law a scholarly association dedicated to fostering interdisciplinary exploration of issues at the intersection of law, biology, and evolutionary theory
* The New England Institute for Cognitive Science and Evolutionary Psychology aims to foster research and education into the interdisciplinary nexus of cognitive science and evolutionary studies
* The NorthEastern Evolutionary Psychology Society; regional society dedicated to encouraging scholarship and dialogue on the topic of evolutionary psychology
* Feminist Evolutionary Psychology Society researchers that investigate the active role that females have had in human evolution

===Journals===
* &quot;Evolutionary Psychology&quot; – free access online scientific journal
* &quot;Evolution and Human Behavior&quot; – journal of the Human Behavior and Evolution Society
* &quot;Evolutionary Psychological Science&quot; - An international, interdisciplinary forum for original research papers that address evolved psychology. Spans social and life sciences, anthropology, philosophy, criminology, law and the humanities.
* &quot;Politics and the Life Sciences&quot; – an interdisciplinary peer-reviewed journal published by the Association for Politics and the Life Sciences
* &quot;Human Nature: An Interdisciplinary Biosocial Perspective&quot; – advances the interdisciplinary investigation of the biological, social, and environmental factors that underlie human behavior. It focuses primarily on the functional unity in which these factors are continuously and mutually interactive. These include the evolutionary, biological, and sociological processes as they interact with human social behavior.
* &quot;Biological Theory: Integrating Development, Evolution and Cognition&quot; – devoted to theoretical advances in the fields of biology and cognition, with an emphasis on the conceptual integration afforded by evolutionary and developmental approaches.
* &quot;Evolutionary Anthropology&quot;
* &quot;Behavioral and Brain Sciences&quot; – interdisciplinary articles in psychology, neuroscience, behavioral biology, cognitive science, artificial intelligence, linguistics and philosophy. About 30% of the articles have focused on evolutionary analyses of behavior.
* &quot;Evolution and Development&quot; – research relevant to interface of evolutionary and developmental biology
* &quot;The Evolutionary Review – Art, Science, and Culture&quot;

===Videos===
* Brief video clip from the &quot;Evolution&quot; PBS Series
* TED talk by Steven Pinker about his book The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature
* RSA talk by evolutionary psychologist Robert Kurzban on modularity of mind, based on his book &quot;Why Everyone (Else) is a Hypocrite&quot;
* Richard Dawkins&#x27; lecture on natural selection and evolutionary psychology
* Evolutionary Psychology – Steven Pinker &amp; Frans de Waal Audio recording
* Stone Age Minds: A conversation with evolutionary psychologists Leda Cosmides and John Tooby
* Margaret Mead and Samoa. Review of the nature versus nurture debate triggered by Mead&#x27;s book &quot;Coming of Age in Samoa.&quot;
* &quot;Evolutionary Psychology&quot;, &quot;In Our Time&quot;, BBC Radio 4 discussion with Janet Radcliffe Richards, Nicholas Humphrey and Steven Rose (November 2, 2000)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q219695" start="0" end="23" title="Evolutionary psychology" label="Evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="53" end="63" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="115" end="124" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="162" end="167" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q483921" start="182" end="192" title="adaptation" label="adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="345" end="352" title="natural selection" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458821" start="357" end="373" title="sexual selection in human evolution" label="sexual selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q693754" start="390" end="401" title="Spandrel (biology)" label="by-products"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306941" start="430" end="443" title="Adaptationist" label="Adaptationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="459" end="472" title="Physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072" start="497" end="502" title="heart" label="heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7886" start="504" end="509" title="Lung" label="lungs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="519" end="524" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q840400" start="539" end="559" title="evolutionary biology" label="evolutionary biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317963" start="777" end="795" title="modularity of mind" label="modularity of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256373" start="969" end="993" title="psychological adaptation" label="psychological adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096708" start="1161" end="1176" title="Metatheory" label="metatheoretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="1649" end="1660" title="infanticide" label="infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="1662" end="1674" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1676" end="1684" title="marriage" label="marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q261290" start="1695" end="1706" title="promiscuity" label="promiscuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242" start="1722" end="1728" title="beauty" label="beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="1730" end="1741" title="bride price" label="bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q526071" start="1747" end="1766" title="parental investment" label="parental investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="1865" end="1874" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="1914" end="1924" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="1926" end="1934" title="politics" label="politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="1940" end="1950" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186837" start="1953" end="1989" title="Criticism of evolutionary psychology" label="Criticism of evolutionary psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149495" start="2012" end="2023" title="testability" label="testability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="2025" end="2034" title="Cognition" label="cognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="2538" end="2555" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="2915" end="2934" title="evolutionary theory" label="evolutionary theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="2960" end="2970" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="2986" end="2993" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701956" start="3010" end="3020" title="John Tooby" label="John Tooby"/>
<link wikidata="Q451962" start="3038" end="3051" title="Leda Cosmides" label="Leda Cosmides"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="3073" end="3083" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q279999" start="3088" end="3111" title="evolutionary physiology" label="evolutionary physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="3390" end="3403" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573697" start="3740" end="3768" title="computational theory of mind" label="computational theory of mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289790" start="4091" end="4114" title="domain-general learning" label="domain-general learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668364" start="4144" end="4167" title="combinatorial explosion" label="combinatorial explosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141220" start="4622" end="4639" title="Cognitive module" label="cognitive modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q815859" start="4738" end="4766" title="language acquisition" label="language-acquisition modules"/>
<link wikidata="Q631021" start="4768" end="4795" title="Westermarck effect" label="incest-avoidance mechanisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q239479" start="4797" end="4825" title="Wason selection task" label="cheater-detection mechanisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144597" start="4992" end="5019" title="domain specificity" label="&amp;quot;domain-specific&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289790" start="5106" end="5132" title="Domain-general learning" label="&amp;quot;Domain-general&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23373" start="5250" end="5270" title="cognitive psychology" label="cognitive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205637" start="5314" end="5332" title="behavioral ecology" label="behavioral ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="5334" end="5357" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="5359" end="5367" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155" start="5369" end="5377" title="ethology" label="ethology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="5379" end="5391" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="5393" end="5404" title="archaeology" label="archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088481" start="5415" end="5427" title="Ecopsychology" label="ecopsycology"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="5432" end="5439" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q190553" start="5465" end="5477" title="sociobiology" label="sociobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q331710" start="5664" end="5671" title="fitness (biology)" label="fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316344" start="5691" end="5706" title="mismatch theory" label="mismatch theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q153890" start="5746" end="5764" title="Nikolaas Tinbergen" label="Nikolaas Tinbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808012" start="5772" end="5800" title="Tinbergen&amp;#x27;s four questions" label="four categories of questions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="7067" end="7081" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165434" start="7317" end="7369" title="The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex" label="The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192325" start="7394" end="7443" title="The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals" label="The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q125249" start="7487" end="7500" title="William James" label="William James"/>
<link wikidata="Q7206" start="7870" end="7887" title="paleoanthropology" label="paleoanthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="7999" end="8018" title="academic discipline" label="academic discipline"/>
<link wikidata="Q337897" start="8036" end="8052" title="Modern synthesis (20th century)" label="modern synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q78496" start="8222" end="8235" title="Konrad Lorenz" label="Konrad Lorenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q60060" start="8240" end="8255" title="Karl von Frisch" label="Karl von Frisch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="8296" end="8313" title="inclusive fitness" label="inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q918334" start="8318" end="8332" title="Robert Trivers" label="Robert Trivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302484" start="8359" end="8370" title="reciprocity (evolution)" label="reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q211029" start="8491" end="8507" title="E.O. Wilson" label="Edward O. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190553" start="8799" end="8811" title="sociobiology" label="sociobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937699" start="9233" end="9238" title="human behavioral ecology" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q174568" start="9448" end="9461" title="Donald Symons" label="Donald Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732719" start="9484" end="9516" title="The Evolution of Human Sexuality" label="The Evolution of Human Sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q451962" start="9527" end="9540" title="Leda Cosmides" label="Leda Cosmides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701956" start="9545" end="9555" title="John Tooby" label="John Tooby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712354" start="9579" end="9595" title="The Adapted Mind" label="The Adapted Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q175002" start="10088" end="10101" title="developmental psychology" label="developmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q161272" start="10103" end="10109" title="social psychology" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204375" start="10252" end="10271" title="Behavioural genetics" label="behavioral genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699472" start="10406" end="10429" title="Dual inheritance theory" label="Dual inheritance theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769299" start="10544" end="10558" title="human behavior" label="human behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="10629" end="10646" title="genetic evolution" label="genetic evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q12031891" start="10651" end="10669" title="cultural evolution" label="cultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="11623" end="11629" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q167323" start="12069" end="12079" title="Altruism" label="altruistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="12346" end="12365" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="William D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="12375" end="12392" title="inclusive fitness" label="inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080021" start="12415" end="12446" title="gene-centered view of evolution" label="gene-centered view of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="12804" end="12824" title="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298789" start="13191" end="13215" title="evolutionary game theory" label="evolutionary game theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367487" start="13217" end="13228" title="tit-for-tat" label="tit-for-tat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139299" start="13521" end="13534" title="r/K selection" label="r/K selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454501" start="13975" end="14001" title="Trivers–Willard hypothesis" label="Trivers–Willard hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139127" start="14269" end="14288" title="life history theory" label="life history theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q789352" start="14646" end="14660" title="Baldwin effect" label="Baldwin effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11990" start="15087" end="15099" title="reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="15909" end="15919" title="common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19537" start="15925" end="15931" title="bonobo" label="bonobo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613433" start="17149" end="17158" title="Lynn Hunt" label="Lynn Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356572" start="17676" end="17686" title="exaptation" label="exaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q552019" start="18826" end="18844" title="George C. Williams (biologist)" label="George C. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131261" start="21069" end="21098" title="standard social science model" label="standard social science model"/>
<link wikidata="Q909609" start="21620" end="21637" title="attachment theory" label="attachment theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q128868" start="21641" end="21652" title="John Bowlby" label="John Bowlby"/>
<link wikidata="Q171283" start="22044" end="22048" title="Homo (genus)" label="Homo"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="22156" end="22167" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529558" start="22336" end="22357" title="stabilizing selection" label="stabilizing selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q635162" start="24130" end="24139" title="great ape" label="great ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="24373" end="24384" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499512" start="25112" end="25132" title="supernormal stimulus" label="supernormal stimulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q153890" start="25256" end="25270" title="Niko Tinbergen" label="Niko Tinbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5252549" start="25327" end="25342" title="Deirdre Barrett" label="Deirdre Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780995" start="25922" end="25935" title="Mark van Vugt" label="Mark van Vugt"/>
<link wikidata="Q201413" start="26516" end="26525" title="heuristic" label="heuristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418697" start="27413" end="27450" title="Evolutionary developmental psychology" label="Evolutionary developmental psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2686349" start="27988" end="28009" title="archaeological record" label="archaeological record"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257959" start="28117" end="28130" title="public record" label="public record"/>
<link wikidata="Q392811" start="28268" end="28300" title="Agent based model" label="multi-agent computer simulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q552019" start="28992" end="29007" title="George C. Williams (biologist)" label="George Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211967" start="29091" end="29096" title="Phenotypic trait" label="trait"/>
<link wikidata="Q273223" start="29186" end="29197" title="John Eccles (neurophysiologist)" label="John Eccles"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="29271" end="29286" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q822277" start="29884" end="29900" title="Bernard J. Baars" label="Bernard J. Baars"/>
<link wikidata="Q44461" start="29902" end="29917" title="Richard Dawkins" label="Richard Dawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q102470" start="30067" end="30070" title="ape" label="ape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110897" start="30208" end="30221" title="Gordon Gallup" label="Gordon Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="30233" end="30243" title="chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q41050" start="30249" end="30258" title="orangutan" label="orangutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36611" start="30299" end="30306" title="gorilla" label="gorilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q319186" start="31279" end="31290" title="Jerry Fodor" label="Jerry Fodor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749840" start="31447" end="31463" title="depth perception" label="depth perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q626890" start="34871" end="34886" title="critical period" label="critical period"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="35168" end="35190" title="Pavlovian conditioning" label="Pavlovian conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q355527" start="35876" end="35886" title="Paul Ekman" label="Paul Ekman"/>
<link wikidata="Q670713" start="36557" end="36570" title="reward system" label="reward system"/>
<link wikidata="Q352099" start="36683" end="36691" title="inherent" label="inherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q638123" start="36707" end="36716" title="trade-off" label="trade-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503548" start="38883" end="38895" title="heritability" label="heritability"/>
<link wikidata="Q485680" start="39292" end="39305" title="polymorphism (biology)" label="polymorphisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="40552" end="40565" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q9049" start="40593" end="40605" title="Noam Chomsky" label="Noam Chomsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q470501" start="40830" end="40851" title="The Language Instinct" label="The Language Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590549" start="40871" end="40876" title="Paul Bloom (psychologist)" label="Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q693754" start="41555" end="41563" title="Spandrel (biology)" label="spandrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q227241" start="41724" end="41729" title="FOXP2" label="FOXP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948389" start="41825" end="41837" title="Myrna Gopnik" label="Myrna Gopnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6328839" start="41904" end="41913" title="KE family" label="KE family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="42375" end="42387" title="Homo sapiens" label="Homo sapiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q714346" start="42628" end="42645" title="Michael Tomasello" label="Michael Tomasello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137966" start="42650" end="42661" title="Talmy Givón" label="Talmy Givón"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399713" start="43361" end="43378" title="W. Tecumseh Fitch" label="W. Tecumseh Fitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q180619" start="43390" end="43406" title="Stephen J. Gould" label="Stephen J. Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703450" start="44016" end="44031" title="Terrence Deacon" label="Terrence Deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767806" start="44045" end="44065" title="The Symbolic Species" label="The Symbolic Species"/>
<link wikidata="Q228395" start="44993" end="44999" title="mating" label="mating"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787575" start="45247" end="45265" title="mating preferences" label="mating preferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992545" start="45270" end="45296" title="sexual conflict" label="conflict between the sexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q918334" start="45307" end="45321" title="Robert Trivers" label="Robert Trivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q526071" start="45399" end="45425" title="Parental investment" label="parental investment theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q211050" start="45451" end="45458" title="gametes" label="gametes"/>
<link wikidata="Q770370" start="45460" end="45469" title="anisogamy" label="anisogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q206913" start="45806" end="45822" title="sexual selection" label="sexual selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003481" start="45836" end="45859" title="Human mating strategies" label="reproductive strategies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992545" start="45885" end="45900" title="sexual conflict" label="sexual conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005215" start="46052" end="46069" title="inclusive fitness" label="inclusive fitness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209263" start="46171" end="46182" title="mate choice" label="mate choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968643" start="46239" end="46256" title="courtship display" label="courtship display"/>
<link wikidata="Q28627" start="46353" end="46362" title="gestation" label="gestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="46390" end="46399" title="lactation" label="lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139127" start="46444" end="46463" title="life history theory" label="life history theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173874" start="46466" end="46470" title="David Buss" label="Buss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238330" start="46475" end="46482" title="David P. Schmitt" label="Schmitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q29392351" start="46497" end="46521" title="sexual strategies theory" label="sexual strategies theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7458796" start="47517" end="47532" title="sexual jealousy" label="sexual jealousy"/>
<link wikidata="Q187082" start="48382" end="48397" title="ovulation" label="ovulatory cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q47207606" start="48584" end="48610" title="ovulatory shift hypothesis" label="ovulatory shift hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q239526" start="50230" end="50239" title="offspring" label="offspring"/>
<link wikidata="Q182353" start="50458" end="50470" title="sexual reproduction" label="reproduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="50514" end="50522" title="W. D. Hamilton" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="51109" end="51117" title="Selection (biology)" label="selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436081" start="51259" end="51276" title="Cinderella effect" label="Cinderella effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988338" start="54766" end="54780" title="identical by descent" label="common descent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048950" start="55048" end="55066" title="green-beard effect" label="green-beard effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410321" start="55263" end="55278" title="kin recognition" label="kin recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q41575767" start="58791" end="58803" title="Linda Mealey" label="Linda Mealey"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="59237" end="59245" title="ingroups and outgroups" label="in-group"/>
<link wikidata="Q375181" start="59284" end="59294" title="ingroups and outgroups" label="out groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q137333" start="59408" end="59429" title="Third-party punishment" label="altruistic punishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="59594" end="59607" title="kin selection" label="kin selection"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59667" end="59685" title="Reciprocity (evolution)#Direct reciprocity" label="direct reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302484" start="59742" end="59762" title="indirect reciprocity" label="indirect reciprocity"/>
<link wikidata="Q75594" start="62526" end="62537" title="Paul Baltes" label="Paul Baltes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="62738" end="62755" title="Alzheimer disease" label="Alzheimer disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q839578" start="63733" end="63747" title="group dynamics" label="group dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="63749" end="63759" title="leadership" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834764" start="64401" end="64419" title="Michael T. McGuire" label="Michael T. McGuire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2852971" start="64421" end="64436" title="Anthony Stevens (Jungian analyst)" label="Anthony Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3117946" start="64442" end="64459" title="Randolph M. Nesse" label="Randolph M. Nesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418690" start="65662" end="65699" title="Evolutionary approaches to depression" label="Evolutionary approaches to depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q83267" start="68235" end="68243" title="criminal" label="criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q98139901" start="69332" end="69373" title="Evolutionary neuroandrogenic theory" label="evolutionary neuroandrogenic (ENA) theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q212730" start="69480" end="69493" title="Steven Pinker" label="Steven Pinker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520283" start="69512" end="69543" title="The Better Angels of Our Nature" label="The Better Angels of Our Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949683" start="69643" end="69653" title="deterrence theory" label="deterrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1712140" start="69812" end="69819" title="revenge" label="revenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207333" start="69864" end="69869" title="honor" label="honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7552774" start="70665" end="70697" title="sociobiological theories of rape" label="sociobiological theories of rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="70975" end="70991" title="religious belief" label="religious belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="71114" end="71123" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="71790" end="71800" title="coalitions" label="coalitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q380245" start="71809" end="71823" title="conditionality" label="conditionality"/>
<link wikidata="Q839578" start="72179" end="72193" title="group dynamics" label="group dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q940039" start="72238" end="72245" title="Ex-ante" label="ex ante"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256373" start="72298" end="72322" title="psychological adaptation" label="psychological adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210298" start="72445" end="72468" title="Political entrepreneurs" label="Political entrepreneurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471594" start="72599" end="72616" title="collective action" label="collective action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310792" start="72620" end="72634" title="Relative gains" label="Relative gains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4669814" start="72676" end="72690" title="absolute gains" label="absolute gains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306941" start="73085" end="73102" title="pan-adaptationism" label="pan-adaptationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="73461" end="73472" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="73622" end="73633" title="Ideology" label="ideological"/>
<link wikidata="Q376789" start="73765" end="73785" title="naturalistic fallacy" label="naturalistic fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="74406" end="74425" title="nutrient#Essentiality" label="essential nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="75246" end="75252" title="barter" label="barter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773859" start="76621" end="76642" title="nature versus nurture" label="nature versus nurture"/>
<link wikidata="Q223802" start="76816" end="76827" title="blank slate" label="blank slate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428820" start="76841" end="76851" title="Factual relativism" label="relativist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642673" start="76865" end="76887" title="Social constructionism" label="social constructionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193343" start="76905" end="76925" title="Cultural determinism" label="cultural determinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="76972" end="76986" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q265623" start="77144" end="77159" title="False dilemma" label="false dichotomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="77191" end="77201" title="caricature" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762471" start="77250" end="77267" title="rhetorical device" label="rhetorical device"/>
<link wikidata="Q912820" start="77273" end="77282" title="straw man" label="straw man"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="77557" end="77569" title="Reductionism#Reductionism and science" label="reductionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q252962" start="77574" end="77593" title="genetic determinism" label="genetic determinism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81021" end="81035" title="Dominic Murphy" label="Dominic Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q239479" start="82811" end="82831" title="Wason selection task" label="Wason selection task"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225831" start="83001" end="83014" title="Cecilia Heyes" label="Cecilia Heyes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="83445" end="83461" title="Subrena E. Smith" label="Subrena E. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="83469" end="83496" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q912820" start="83732" end="83741" title="Straw man" label="straw men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157939" start="83855" end="83869" title="Robert Kurzban" label="Robert Kurzban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204375" start="84219" end="84239" title="Behavioural genetics" label="Behavioural genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699472" start="84242" end="84263" title="Biocultural evolution" label="Biocultural evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915287" start="84266" end="84287" title="Biosocial criminology" label="Biosocial criminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226062" start="84290" end="84309" title="Darwinian Happiness" label="Darwinian Happiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226066" start="84312" end="84338" title="Darwinian literary studies" label="Darwinian literary studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001588" start="84341" end="84357" title="Deep social mind" label="Deep social mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137451" start="84360" end="84380" title="Dunbar&amp;#x27;s number" label="Dunbar&amp;#x27;s number"/>
<link wikidata="Q125511837" start="84383" end="84405" title="Evolution of the brain" label="Evolution of the brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619093" start="84408" end="84442" title="List of evolutionary psychologists" label="List of evolutionary psychologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q477774" start="84445" end="84477" title="Evolutionary origin of religions" label="Evolutionary origin of religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355586" start="84480" end="84488" title="God gene" label="God gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q85760017" start="84491" end="84514" title="Evolutionary psychiatry" label="Evolutionary psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25091718" start="84517" end="84552" title="Evolutionary psychology and culture" label="Evolutionary psychology and culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826625" start="84555" end="84572" title="Primate cognition" label="Primate cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117055" start="84575" end="84595" title="Hominid intelligence" label="Hominid intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84598" end="84621" title="Common chimpanzee#Behaviour" label="Chimpanzee intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167915" start="84624" end="84650" title="Cooperative eye hypothesis" label="Cooperative eye hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q501032" start="84653" end="84671" title="Origin of language" label="Origin of language"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102483" start="84674" end="84690" title="Origin of speech" label="Origin of speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q47207606" start="84693" end="84719" title="Ovulatory shift hypothesis" label="Ovulatory shift hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336265" start="84722" end="84735" title="Neuroethology" label="Neuroethology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139299" start="84738" end="84758" title="r/K selection theory" label="r/K selection theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190553" start="84761" end="84773" title="Sociobiology" label="Sociobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893935" start="84776" end="84795" title="Universal Darwinism" label="Universal Darwinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081489" start="85273" end="85285" title="Francis Heylighen" label="Heylighen F."/>
<link wikidata="Q5418682" start="87448" end="87471" title="Evolutionary Psychology (journal)" label="Evolutionary Psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418623" start="87526" end="87554" title="Evolution and Human Behavior" label="Evolution and Human Behavior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453618" start="89315" end="89365" title="The Blank Slate" label="The Blank Slate: The Modern Denial of Human Nature"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9705" wikidata="Q48366" url="?curid=9705" title="Languages of Europe">
<text>There are over 250 languages indigenous to Europe, and most belong to the Indo-European language family. Out of a total European population of 744 million as of 2018, some 94% are native speakers of an Indo-European language. The three largest phyla of the Indo-European language family in Europe are Romance, Germanic, and Slavic; they have more than 200 million speakers each, and together account for close to 90% of Europeans.

Smaller phyla of Indo-European found in Europe include Hellenic (Greek, 13 million), Baltic ( 4.5 million), Albanian ( 7.5 million), Celtic ( 4 million), and Armenian ( 4 million). Indo-Aryan, though a large subfamily of Indo-European, has a relatively small number of languages in Europe, and a small number of speakers (Romani, 1.5 million). However, a number of Indo-Aryan languages not native to Europe are spoken in Europe today.

Of the approximately 45 million Europeans speaking non-Indo-European languages, most speak languages within either the Uralic or Turkic families. Still smaller groups — such as Basque (language isolate), Semitic languages (Maltese, 0.5 million), and various languages of the Caucasus — account for less than 1% of the European population among them. Immigration has added sizeable communities of speakers of African and Asian languages, amounting to about 4% of the population, with Arabic being the most widely spoken of them.

Five languages have more than 50 million native speakers in Europe: Russian, German, French, Italian, and English. Russian is the most-spoken native language in Europe, and English has the largest number of speakers in total, including some 200 million speakers of English as a second or foreign language. (See English language in Europe.)

== Indo-European languages ==
The Indo-European language family is descended from Proto-Indo-European, which is believed to have been spoken thousands of years ago. Early speakers of Indo-European daughter languages most likely expanded into Europe with the incipient Bronze Age, around 4,000 years ago (Bell-Beaker culture).

=== Germanic ===
The Germanic languages make up the predominant language family in Western, Northern and Central Europe. It is estimated that over 500 million Europeans are speakers of Germanic languages, the largest groups being German ( 95 million), English ( 400 million), Dutch ( 24 million), Swedish ( 10 million), Danish ( 6 million), Norwegian ( 5 million) and Limburgish (c. 1.3 million).

There are two extant major sub-divisions: &quot;West Germanic&quot; and &quot;North Germanic&quot;. A third group, East Germanic, is now extinct; the only known surviving East Germanic texts are written in the Gothic language. West Germanic is divided into Anglo-Frisian (including English), Low German, Low Franconian (including Dutch) and High German (including Standard German).

====Anglo-Frisian====
The Anglo-Frisian language family is now mostly represented by English (Anglic), descended from the Old English language spoken by the Anglo-Saxons:

* English, the main language of the United Kingdom and the most widespread language in the Republic of Ireland, also spoken as a second or third language by many Europeans.
* Scots, spoken in Scotland and Ulster, recognized by some as a language and by others as a dialect of English (not to be confused with Scots-Gaelic of the Celtic language family).
The Frisian languages are spoken by about 400,000 () Frisians, who live on the southern coast of the North Sea in the Netherlands and Germany. These languages include West Frisian, East Frisian (of which the only surviving dialect is Saterlandic) and North Frisian.

====Dutch====
Dutch is spoken throughout the Netherlands, the northern half of Belgium, as well as the Nord-Pas de Calais region of France. The traditional dialects of the Lower Rhine region of Germany are linguistically more closely related to Dutch than to modern German. In Belgian and French contexts, Dutch is sometimes referred to as Flemish. Dutch dialects are numerous and varied.

====German====
German is spoken throughout Germany, Austria, Liechtenstein, much of Switzerland (including the northeast areas bordering on Germany and Austria), northern Italy (South Tyrol), Luxembourg, the East Cantons of Belgium and the Alsace and Lorraine regions of France.

There are several groups of German dialects:

* High German includes several dialect families:
** Standard German
** Central German dialects, spoken in central Germany and including Luxembourgish
** High Franconian, a family of transitional dialects between Central and Upper High German
** Upper German, including Bavarian and Swiss German
** Yiddish is a Jewish language developed in Germany and Eastern Europe. It shares many features of High German dialects and Hebrew.

====Low German==== 
Low German is spoken in various regions throughout Northern Germany and the northern and eastern parts of the Netherlands. It may be separated into West Low German and East Low German.

====North Germanic (Scandinavian)====
The &quot;North Germanic languages&quot; are spoken in Nordic countries and include 
Swedish (Sweden and parts of Finland), 
Danish (Denmark), 
Norwegian (Norway), 
Icelandic (Iceland),
Faroese (Faroe Islands), 
and Elfdalian (in a small part of central Sweden).

English has a long history of contact with Scandinavian languages, given the immigration of Scandinavians early in the history of Britain, and shares various features with the Scandinavian languages. Even so, especially Dutch and Swedish, but also Danish and Norwegian, have strong vocabulary connections to the German language.

=== Romance ===
Roughly 215 million Europeans (primarily in Southern and Western Europe) are native speakers of Romance languages, the largest groups including:

French ( 72 million),
Italian ( 65 million),
Spanish ( 40 million), 
Romanian ( 24 million),
Portuguese ( 10 million),
Catalan ( 7 million),
Neapolitan ( 6 million), 
Sicilian ( 5 million), 
Venetian ( 4 million),
Galician ( 2 million),
Sardinian ( 1 million),
Occitan ( 500,000), besides numerous smaller communities.

The Romance languages evolved from varieties of Vulgar Latin spoken in the various parts of the Roman Empire in Late Antiquity. Latin was itself part of the (otherwise extinct) Italic branch of Indo-European. Romance languages are divided phylogenetically into &quot;Italo-Western&quot;, &quot;Eastern Romance&quot; (including Romanian) and &quot;Sardinian&quot;. The Romance-speaking area of Europe is occasionally referred to as &quot;Latin Europe&quot;.

Italo-Western can be further broken down into the &quot;Italo-Dalmatian languages&quot; (sometimes grouped with Eastern Romance), including the Tuscan-derived Italian and numerous local Romance languages in Italy as well as Dalmatian, and the &quot;Western Romance languages&quot;. The Western Romance languages in turn separate into the Gallo-Romance languages, including Langues d&#x27;oïl such as French, the Francoprovencalic languages Arpitan and Faetar, the Rhaeto-Romance languages, and the Gallo-Italic languages; the Occitano-Romance languages, grouped with either Gallo-Romance or East Iberian, including Occitanic languages such as Occitan and Gardiol, and Catalan; Aragonese, grouped in with either Occitano-Romance or West Iberian, and finally the West Iberian languages, including the Astur-Leonese languages, the Galician-Portuguese languages, and the Castilian languages.

=== Slavic ===


Slavic languages are spoken in large areas of Southern, Central and Eastern Europe. An estimated 315 million people speak a Slavic language, the largest groups being 
Russian ( 110 million in European Russia and adjacent parts of Eastern Europe, Russian forming the largest linguistic community in Europe),
Polish ( 40 million),
Ukrainian ( 33 million), 
Serbo-Croatian ( 18 million),
Czech ( 11 million),
Bulgarian ( 8 million), 
Slovak ( 5 million),
Belarusian (c. 3.7 million), Slovene ( 2.3 million)
and Macedonian ( 1.6 million).

Phylogenetically, Slavic is divided into three subgroups:

* &quot;West Slavic&quot; includes Polish, Polabian, Czech, Knaanic, Slovak, Lower Sorbian, Upper Sorbian, Silesian and Kashubian.
* &quot;East Slavic&quot; includes Russian, Ukrainian, Belarusian, Ruthenian, and Rusyn.
* &quot;South Slavic&quot; includes Slovene and Serbo-Croatian in the southwest and Bulgarian, Macedonian and Church Slavonic (a liturgical language) in the southeast, each with numerous distinctive dialects. South Slavic languages constitute a dialect continuum where standard Slovene, Macedonian and Bulgarian are each based on a distinct dialect, whereas pluricentric Serbo-Croatian boasts four mutually intelligible national standard varieties all based on a single dialect, Shtokavian.

=== Others ===
* Greek ( 13 million) is the official language of Greece and Cyprus, and there are Greek-speaking enclaves in Albania, Bulgaria, Italy, North Macedonia, Romania, Georgia, Ukraine, Lebanon, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, and Turkey, and in Greek communities around the world. Dialects of modern Greek that originate from Attic Greek (through Koine and then Medieval Greek) are Cappadocian, Pontic, Cretan, Cypriot, Katharevousa, and Yevanic.
** Italiot Greek is, debatably, a Doric dialect of Greek. It is spoken in southern Italy only, in the southern Calabria region (as Grecanic) and in the Salento region (as Griko). It was studied by the German linguist Gerhard Rohlfs during the 1930s and 1950s.
** Tsakonian is a Doric dialect of the Greek language spoken in the lower Arcadia region of the Peloponnese around the village of Leonidio


* The Baltic languages are spoken in Lithuania (Lithuanian ( 3 million), Samogitian) and Latvia (Latvian ( 1.5 million), Latgalian). Samogitian and Latgalian used to be considered dialects of Lithuanian and Latvian respectively.
** There are also several extinct Baltic languages, including: Curonian, Galindian, Old Prussian, Selonian, Semigallian, and Sudovian.
* Albanian ( 7.5 million) has two major dialects, Tosk Albanian and Gheg Albanian. It is spoken in Albania and Kosovo, neighboring North Macedonia, Serbia, Italy, and Montenegro. It is also widely spoken in the Albanian diaspora.
* Armenian ( 7 million) has two major forms, Western Armenian and Eastern Armenian. It is spoken in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia (Samtskhe-Javakheti) and Abkhazia, also Russia, France, Italy, Turkey, Greece, and Cyprus. It is also widely spoken in the Armenian Diaspora. 
* There are six living Celtic languages, spoken in areas of northwestern Europe dubbed the &quot;Celtic nations&quot;. All six are members of the Insular Celtic family, which in turn is divided into:
** Brittonic family: Welsh (Wales, 462,000), Cornish (Cornwall, 500) and Breton (Brittany, 206,000)
** Goidelic family: Irish (Ireland, 1.7 million), Scottish Gaelic (Scotland, 57,400), and Manx (Isle of Man, 1,660)
: Continental Celtic languages had previously been spoken across Europe from Iberia and Gaul to Asia Minor, but became extinct in the first millennium CE.
* The Indo-Aryan languages have one major representative: Romani ( 1.5 million speakers), introduced in Europe during the late medieval period. Lacking a nation state, Romani is spoken as a minority language throughout Europe.
* The Iranian languages in Europe are natively represented in the North Caucasus, notably with Ossetian ( 600,000).

== Non-Indo-European languages ==
=== Turkic ===


* Oghuz languages in Europe include Turkish, spoken in East Thrace and by immigrant communities; Azerbaijani is spoken in Northeast Azerbaijan and parts of Southern Russia and Gagauz is spoken in Gagauzia.
* Kipchak languages in Europe include Karaim, Crimean Tatar and Krymchak, which is spoken mainly in Crimea; Tatar, which is spoken in Tatarstan; Bashkir, which is spoken in Bashkortostan; Karachay-Balkar, which is spoken in the North Caucasus, and Kazakh, which is spoken in Northwest Kazakhstan.
* Oghur languages were historically indigenous to much of Eastern Europe; however, most of them are extinct today, with the exception of Chuvash, which is spoken in Chuvashia.

=== Uralic ===


Uralic language family is native to northern Eurasia.
Finnic languages include Finnish ( 5 million) and Estonian ( 1 million), as well as smaller languages such as Kven ( 8,000). Other languages of the Finno-Permic branch of the family include e.g. Mari (c. 400,000), and the Sami languages ( 30,000).

The Ugric branch of the language family is represented in Europe by the Hungarian language ( 13 million), historically introduced with the Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin of the 9th century.
The Samoyedic Nenets language is spoken in Nenets Autonomous Okrug of Russia, located in the far northeastern corner of Europe (as delimited by the Ural Mountains).

=== Semitic ===

* Maltese ( 500,000) is a Semitic language with Romance and Germanic influences, spoken in Malta. It is based on Sicilian Arabic, with influences from Sicilian, Italian, French and, more recently, English. It is the only Semitic language whose standard form is written in Latin script. It is also the second smallest official language of the EU in terms of speakers (after Irish), and the only official Semitic language within the EU.
* Cypriot Maronite Arabic (also known as Cypriot Arabic) is a variety of Arabic spoken by Maronites in Cyprus. Most speakers live in Nicosia, but others are in the communities of Kormakiti and Lemesos. Brought to the island by Maronites fleeing Lebanon over 700 years ago, this variety of Arabic has been influenced by Greek in both phonology and vocabulary, while retaining certain unusually archaic features in other respects.
* Eastern Aramaic, a Semitic language is spoken by Assyrian communities in the Caucasus and southern Russia who fled the Assyrian Genocide during World War I, and also by Assyrian communities in the Assyrian diaspora in other parts of Europe.

=== Others ===
* The Basque language (or &quot;Euskara&quot;, 750,000) is a language isolate and the ancestral language of the Basque people who inhabit the Basque Country, a region in the western Pyrenees mountains mostly in northeastern Spain and partly in southwestern France of about 3 million inhabitants, where it is spoken fluently by about 750,000 and understood by more than 1.5 million people. Basque is directly related to ancient Aquitanian, and it is likely that an early form of the Basque language was present in Western Europe before the arrival of the Indo-European languages in the area in the Bronze Age. 
* North Caucasian languages is a geographical blanket term for two unrelated language families spoken chiefly in the north Caucasus and Turkey—the Northwest Caucasian family (including Abkhaz and Circassian) and the Northeast Caucasian family, spoken mainly in the border area of the southern Russian Federation (including Dagestan, Chechnya, and Ingushetia) and northern Azerbaijan
* Kalmyk is a Mongolic language, spoken in the Republic of Kalmykia, part of the Russian Federation. Its speakers entered the Volga region in the early 17th century.
* Kartvelian languages (also known as Southwest Caucasian languages), the most common of which is Georgian ( 3.5 million), others being Mingrelian and Svan, spoken mainly in the Caucasus and Anatolia.

===Sign languages===
Several dozen manual languages exist across Europe, with the most widespread sign language family being the Francosign languages, with its languages found in countries from Iberia to the Balkans and the Baltics. Accurate historical information of sign and tactile languages is difficult to come by, with folk histories noting the existence signing communities across Europe hundreds of years ago. British Sign Language (BSL) and French Sign Language (LSF) are probably the oldest confirmed, continuously used sign languages. Alongside German Sign Language (DGS) according to Ethnologue, these three have the most numbers of signers, though very few institutions take appropriate statistics on contemporary signing populations, making legitimate data hard to find.

Notably, few European sign languages have overt connections with the local majority/oral languages, aside from standard language contact and borrowing, meaning grammatically the sign languages and the oral languages of Europe are quite distinct from one another. Due to (visual/aural) modality differences, most sign languages are named for the larger ethnic nation in which they are spoken, plus the words &quot;sign language&quot;, rendering what is spoken across much of France, Wallonia and Romandy as French Sign Language or LSF for: &quot;langue des signes française&quot;.

Recognition of non-oral languages varies widely from region to region. Some countries afford legal recognition, even to official on a state level, whereas others continue to be actively suppressed.

Though &quot;there is a widespread belief—among both Deaf people and sign language linguists—that there &quot;are&quot; sign language families,&quot; the actual relationship between sign languages is difficult to ascertain. Concepts and methods used in historical linguistics to describe language families for written and spoken languages are not easily mapped onto signed languages. Some of the current understandings of sign language relationships, however, provide some reasonable estimates about potential sign language families:

* Francosign languages, such as LSF, ASL, Dutch Sign Language, Flemish Sign Language, and Italian Sign Language.
* BANZSL languages, including British Sign Language (BSL), New Zealand Sign Language (NZSL), Australian Sign Language (Auslan), and Swedish Sign Language.
* Isolate languages, such as Albanian Sign Language, Armenian Sign Language, Caucasian Sign Language, Spanish Sign Language (LSE), Turkish Sign Language (TİD), and perhaps Ghardaia Sign Language.
* Many other sign languages, such as Irish Sign Language (ISL), have unclear origins.

== History of standardization ==
=== Language and identity, standardization processes ===
In the Middle Ages the two most important defining elements of Europe were &quot;Christianitas&quot; and &quot;Latinitas&quot;.

The earliest dictionaries were glossaries: more or less structured lists of lexical pairs (in alphabetical order or according to conceptual fields). The Latin-German (Latin-Bavarian) &quot;Abrogans&quot; was among the first. A new wave of lexicography can be seen from the late 15th century onwards (after the introduction of the printing press, with the growing interest in standardisation of languages).

The concept of the nation state began to emerge in the early modern period. Nations adopted particular dialects as their national language. This, together with improved communications, led to official efforts to standardise the national language, and a number of language academies were established: 1582 &quot;Accademia della Crusca&quot; in Florence, 1617 &quot;Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft&quot; in Weimar, 1635 &quot;Académie française&quot; in Paris, 1713 &quot;Real Academia Española&quot; in Madrid. Language became increasingly linked to nation as opposed to culture, and was also used to promote religious and ethnic identity: e.g. different Bible translations in the same language for Catholics and Protestants.

The first languages whose standardisation was promoted included Italian (&quot;questione della lingua&quot;: Modern Tuscan/Florentine vs. Old Tuscan/Florentine vs. Venetian → Modern Florentine + archaic Tuscan + Upper Italian), French (the standard is based on Parisian), English (the standard is based on the London dialect) and (High) German (based on the dialects of the chancellery of Meissen in Saxony, Middle German, and the chancellery of Prague in Bohemia (&quot;Common German&quot;)). But several other nations also began to develop a standard variety in the 16th century.

=== Lingua franca ===
Europe has had a number of languages that were considered linguae francae over some ranges for some periods according to some historians. Typically in the rise of a national language the new language becomes a lingua franca to peoples in the range of the future nation until the consolidation and unification phases. If the nation becomes internationally influential, its language may become a lingua franca among nations that speak their own national languages. Europe has had no lingua franca ranging over its entire territory spoken by all or most of its populations during any historical period. Some linguae francae of past and present over some of its regions for some of its populations are:

* Classical Greek and then Koine Greek in the Mediterranean Basin from the Athenian Empire to the Eastern Roman Empire, being replaced by Modern Greek.
* Koine Greek and Modern Greek, in the Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire and other parts of the Balkans south of the Jireček Line.
* Vulgar Latin and Late Latin among the uneducated and educated populations respectively of the Roman Empire and the states that followed it in the same range no later than 900 AD; Medieval Latin and Renaissance Latin among the educated populations of western, northern, central and part of eastern Europe until the rise of the national languages in that range, beginning with the first language academy in Italy in 1582/83; Neo-Latin written only in scholarly and scientific contexts by a small minority of the educated population at scattered locations over all of Europe; ecclesiastical Latin, in spoken and written contexts of liturgy and church administration only, over the range of the Roman Catholic Church.
* Old Occitan in central and southern France, north-western Italy and the main territories of the crown of Aragon (Catalonia, Valencia, the Balearic Islands and Aragon).
* Lingua Franca or Sabir, the original of the name, an Italian and Catalan-based pidgin language of mixed origins used by maritime commercial interests around the Mediterranean in the Middle Ages and early Modern Age.
* Old French in continental western European countries and in the Crusader states.
* Czech, mainly during the reign of Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV (14th century) but also during other periods of Bohemian control over the Holy Roman Empire.
* Middle Low German, around the 14th–16th century, during the heyday of the Hanseatic League, mainly in Northeastern Europe across the Baltic Sea.
* Spanish as Castilian in Spain and New Spain from the times of the Catholic Monarchs and Columbus, c. 1492; that is, after the Reconquista, until established as a national language in the times of Louis XIV, c. 1648; subsequently multinational in all nations in or formerly in the Spanish Empire.
* Polish, due to the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth (16th–18th centuries).
* Italian due to the Renaissance, the opera, the Italian Empire, the fashion industry and the influence of the Roman Catholic church.
* French from the golden age under Cardinal Richelieu and Louis XIV c. 1648; i.e., after the Thirty Years&#x27; War, in France and the French colonial empire, until established as the national language during the French Revolution of 1789 and subsequently multinational in all nations in or formerly in the various French Empires.
* German in Northern, Central, and Eastern Europe.
* English in Great Britain until its consolidation as a national language in the Renaissance and the rise of Modern English; subsequently internationally under the various states in or formerly in the British Empire; globally since the victories of the predominantly English speaking countries (United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and others) and their allies in the two world wars ending in 1918 (World War I) and 1945 (World War II) and the subsequent rise of the United States as a superpower and major cultural influence.
* Russian in the former Soviet Union and Russian Empire including Northern and Central Asia.

=== Linguistic minorities ===
Historical attitudes towards linguistic diversity are illustrated by two French laws: the Ordonnance de Villers-Cotterêts (1539), which said that every document in France should be written in French (neither in Latin nor in Occitan) and the Loi Toubon (1994), which aimed to eliminate anglicisms from official documents. States and populations within a state have often resorted to war to settle their differences. There have been attempts to prevent such hostilities: two such initiatives were promoted by the Council of Europe, founded in 1949, which affirms the right of minority language speakers to use their language fully and freely. The Council of Europe is committed to protecting linguistic diversity. Currently all European countries except France, Andorra and Turkey have signed the Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities, while Greece, Iceland and Luxembourg have signed it, but have not ratified it; this framework entered into force in 1998. Another European treaty, the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, was adopted in 1992 under the auspices of the Council of Europe: it entered into force in 1998, and while it is legally binding for 24 countries, France, Iceland, Italy, North Macedonia, Moldova and Russia have chosen to sign without ratifying the convention.

=== Scripts ===

The main scripts used in Europe today are the Latin and Cyrillic.

The Greek alphabet was derived from the Phoenician alphabet, and Latin was derived from the Greek via the Old Italic alphabet. In the Early Middle Ages, Ogham was used in Ireland and runes (derived from Old Italic script) in Scandinavia. Both were replaced in general use by the Latin alphabet by the Late Middle Ages. The Cyrillic script was derived from the Greek with the first texts appearing around 940 AD.
Around 1900 there were mainly two typeface variants of the Latin alphabet used in Europe: Antiqua and Fraktur. Fraktur was used most for German, Estonian, Latvian, Norwegian and Danish whereas Antiqua was used for Italian, Spanish, French, Polish, Portuguese, English, Romanian, Swedish and Finnish. The Fraktur variant was banned by Hitler in 1941, having been described as &quot;Schwabacher Jewish letters&quot;. Other scripts have historically been in use in Europe, including Phoenician, from which modern Latin letters descend, Ancient Egyptian hieroglyphs on Egyptian artefacts traded during Antiquity, various runic systems used in Northern Europe preceding Christianisation, and Arabic during the era of the Ottoman Empire.

Hungarian rovás was used by the Hungarian people in the early Middle Ages, but it was gradually replaced with the Latin-based Hungarian alphabet when Hungary became a kingdom, though it was revived in the 20th century and has certain marginal, but growing area of usage since then.

=== European Union ===

The European Union (as of 2021) had 27 member states accounting for a population of 447 million, or about 60% of the population of Europe.

The European Union has designated by agreement with the member states 24 languages as &quot;official and working&quot;: Bulgarian, Croatian, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Estonian, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Irish, Italian, Latvian, Lithuanian, Maltese, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Slovak, Slovenian, Spanish and Swedish. This designation provides member states with two &quot;entitlements&quot;: the member state may communicate with the EU in any of the designated languages, and view &quot;EU regulations and other legislative documents&quot; in that language.

The European Union and the Council of Europe have been collaborating in education of member populations in languages for &quot;the promotion of plurilingualism&quot; among EU member states. The joint document, &quot;Common European Framework of Reference for Languages: Learning, Teaching, Assessment (CEFR)&quot;, is an educational standard defining &quot;the competencies necessary for communication&quot; and related knowledge for the benefit of educators in setting up educational programs. 
In a 2005 independent survey requested by the EU&#x27;s Directorate-General for Education and Culture regarding the extent to which major European languages were spoken in member states. The results were published in a 2006 document, &quot;Europeans and Their Languages&quot;, or &quot;Eurobarometer 243&quot;. In this study, statistically relevant samples of the population in each country were asked to fill out a survey form concerning the languages that they spoke with sufficient competency &quot;to be able to have a conversation&quot;.

== List of languages ==

The following is a table of European languages. The number of speakers as a first or second language (L1 and L2 speakers) listed are speakers in Europe only; see list of languages by number of native speakers and list of languages by total number of speakers for global estimates on numbers of speakers.

The list is intended to include any language variety with an ISO 639 code. However, it omits sign languages. Because the ISO-639-2 and ISO-639-3 codes have different definitions, this means that some communities of speakers may be listed more than once. For instance, speakers of Bavarian are listed both under &quot;Bavarian&quot; (ISO-639-3 code &quot;bar&quot;) as well as under &quot;German&quot; (ISO-639-2 code &quot;de&quot;).

=== Languages spoken in Armenia, Azerbaijan, Cyprus, Georgia, and Turkey ===
There are various definitions of Europe, which may or may not include all or parts of Turkey, Cyprus, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Georgia. For convenience, the languages and associated statistics for all five of these countries are grouped together on this page, as they are usually presented at a national, rather than subnational, level.

==Immigrant communities==
Recent (post–1945) immigration to Europe introduced substantial communities of speakers of non-European languages.

The largest such communities include Arabic speakers (see Arabs in Europe)
and Turkish speakers (beyond European Turkey and the historical sphere of influence of the Ottoman Empire, see Turks in Europe).
Armenians, Berbers, and Kurds have diaspora communities of 1–2,000,000 each. The various languages of Africa and languages of India form numerous smaller diaspora communities.

;List of the largest immigrant languages 


== See also ==

* Ethnic groups in Europe
* Eurolinguistics
* European Day of Languages
* &quot;Greek East&quot; and &quot;Latin West&quot;
* List of endangered languages in Europe
* List of multilingual countries and regions of Europe
* Standard Average European
* Travellingua

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Map of Minorities &amp; Regional and Minority Languages of Europe, Language Diversity (2017) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="19" end="49" title="Languages of Europe" label="languages indigenous to Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="74" end="103" title="Indo-European language family" label="Indo-European language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067887" start="114" end="139" title="demographics of Europe" label="total European population"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="301" end="308" title="Romance languages" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="310" end="318" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="324" end="330" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042538" start="487" end="495" title="Hellenic languages" label="Hellenic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="497" end="502" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q33136" start="517" end="523" title="Baltic languages" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="540" end="548" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="565" end="571" title="Celtic language" label="Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="590" end="598" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="613" end="623" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="754" end="760" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34113" start="987" end="993" title="Uralic languages" label="Uralic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34090" start="997" end="1003" title="Turkic languages" label="Turkic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="1045" end="1051" title="Basque language" label="Basque"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="1053" end="1069" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="1072" end="1089" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="1091" end="1098" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12237297" start="1126" end="1151" title="languages of the Caucasus" label="languages of the Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="1351" end="1357" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="1465" end="1472" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1474" end="1480" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="1482" end="1488" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="1490" end="1497" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1503" end="1510" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q36870" start="1539" end="1554" title="native language" label="native language"/>
<link wikidata="Q130192" start="1662" end="1701" title="English as a second or foreign language" label="English as a second or foreign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849614" start="1708" end="1734" title="English language in Europe" label="English language in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="1772" end="1801" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="1820" end="1839" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Proto-Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="2006" end="2016" title="European Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q470867" start="2042" end="2061" title="Bell-Beaker culture" label="Bell-Beaker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="2086" end="2104" title="Germanic languages" label="Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="2157" end="2165" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="2170" end="2184" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q872260" start="2295" end="2301" title="German-speaking Europe" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849614" start="2317" end="2324" title="English language in Europe" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2341" end="2346" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="2362" end="2369" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="2385" end="2391" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="2406" end="2415" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q102172" start="2433" end="2443" title="Limburgish" label="Limburgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q26721" start="2511" end="2524" title="West Germanic languages" label="West Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="2541" end="2555" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q108662" start="2578" end="2591" title="East Germanic languages" label="East Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35722" start="2673" end="2688" title="Gothic language" label="Gothic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329170" start="2720" end="2733" title="Anglo-Frisian languages" label="Anglo-Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2745" end="2752" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="2755" end="2765" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q153050" start="2767" end="2781" title="Low Franconian languages" label="Low Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="2793" end="2798" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q52040" start="2804" end="2815" title="High German" label="High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="2827" end="2842" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329170" start="2872" end="2901" title="Anglo-Frisian languages" label="Anglo-Frisian language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329170" start="2931" end="2947" title="Anglic languages" label="English (Anglic)"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2968" end="2988" title="Old English language" label="Old English language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="3003" end="3015" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="3020" end="3027" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3054" end="3068" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="3109" end="3128" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Republic of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849614" start="3147" end="3189" title="European English" label="second or third language by many Europeans"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="3193" end="3198" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="3210" end="3218" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="3223" end="3229" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="3327" end="3339" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scots-Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3347" end="3369" title="#Others" label="Celtic language family"/>
<link wikidata="Q25325" start="3376" end="3393" title="Frisian languages" label="Frisian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q106416" start="3425" end="3433" title="Frisians" label="Frisians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="3473" end="3482" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3490" end="3501" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3506" end="3513" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q85815016" start="3539" end="3551" title="West Frisian languages" label="West Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q494355" start="3553" end="3565" title="East Frisian language" label="East Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27154" start="3606" end="3617" title="Saterlandic" label="Saterlandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224" start="3623" end="3636" title="North Frisian language" label="North Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="3653" end="3658" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="3684" end="3695" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3718" end="3725" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987" start="3742" end="3760" title="Nord-Pas de Calais" label="Nord-Pas de Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3771" end="3777" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q445609" start="3811" end="3822" title="Lower Rhine region" label="Lower Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34147" start="3979" end="3986" title="Flemish dialects" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323611" start="3988" end="4002" title="Dutch dialects" label="Dutch dialects"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="4044" end="4050" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="4072" end="4079" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="4081" end="4088" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q347" start="4090" end="4103" title="Liechtenstein" label="Liechtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4113" end="4124" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4200" end="4205" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15124" start="4207" end="4218" title="South Tyrol" label="South Tyrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="4221" end="4231" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514886" start="4237" end="4260" title="East Cantons of Belgium" label="East Cantons of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="4269" end="4275" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="4280" end="4288" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4300" end="4306" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q52040" start="4357" end="4368" title="High German" label="High German"/>
<link wikidata="Q279350" start="4407" end="4422" title="Standard German" label="Standard German"/>
<link wikidata="Q704841" start="4426" end="4440" title="Central German" label="Central German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051" start="4491" end="4504" title="Luxembourgish" label="Luxembourgish"/>
<link wikidata="Q635271" start="4508" end="4523" title="High Franconian" label="High Franconian"/>
<link wikidata="Q263522" start="4600" end="4612" title="Upper German" label="Upper German"/>
<link wikidata="Q29540" start="4624" end="4632" title="Bavarian language" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q387066" start="4637" end="4649" title="Swiss German" label="Swiss German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="4653" end="4660" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q615948" start="4666" end="4681" title="Jewish languages" label="Jewish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="4775" end="4781" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q25433" start="4788" end="4798" title="Low German" label="Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q168446" start="4952" end="4967" title="West Low German" label="West Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q36443" start="4972" end="4987" title="East Low German" label="East Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="5038" end="5062" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q52062" start="5083" end="5099" title="Nordic countries" label="Nordic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="5113" end="5120" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="5122" end="5128" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="5142" end="5149" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="5153" end="5159" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="5161" end="5168" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="5172" end="5181" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5183" end="5189" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="5193" end="5202" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="5204" end="5211" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25258" start="5214" end="5221" title="Faroese language" label="Faroese"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="5223" end="5236" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q254950" start="5244" end="5253" title="Elfdalian" label="Elfdalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="5604" end="5619" title="German language" label="German language"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449" start="5682" end="5690" title="Southern Europe" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="5695" end="5702" title="Western Europe" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="5734" end="5751" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5784" end="5790" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="5806" end="5813" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="5829" end="5836" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="5853" end="5861" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="5877" end="5887" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="5903" end="5910" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="5925" end="5935" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="5951" end="5959" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="5975" end="5983" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="5998" end="6006" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="6021" end="6030" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="6045" end="6052" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="6152" end="6164" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6200" end="6212" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="6216" end="6230" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6232" end="6237" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q131848" start="6281" end="6287" title="Italic languages" label="Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q112608" start="6371" end="6384" title="Italo-Western" label="Italo-Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="6398" end="6413" title="Eastern Romance" label="Eastern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="6431" end="6439" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="6451" end="6460" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6541" end="6553" title="Latins#Latin peoples and regions" label="Latin Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="6618" end="6643" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="6721" end="6728" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085198" start="6742" end="6774" title="Languages of Italy" label="local Romance languages in Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q35527" start="6786" end="6795" title="Dalmatian language" label="Dalmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714388" start="6811" end="6836" title="Western Romance languages" label="Western Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q500394" start="6900" end="6923" title="Gallo-Romance languages" label="Gallo-Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37351" start="6935" end="6953" title="Langues d&amp;#x27;oïl" label="Langues d&amp;#x27;oïl"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="6962" end="6968" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="7002" end="7009" title="Franco-Provençal" label="Arpitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064408" start="7014" end="7020" title="Faetar language" label="Faetar"/>
<link wikidata="Q515593" start="7026" end="7050" title="Rhaeto-Romance languages" label="Rhaeto-Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q516074" start="7060" end="7082" title="Gallo-Italic languages" label="Gallo-Italic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q599958" start="7088" end="7114" title="Occitano-Romance languages" label="Occitano-Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="7205" end="7212" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649613" start="7217" end="7224" title="Vivaro-Alpine dialect" label="Gardiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="7230" end="7237" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8765" start="7239" end="7248" title="Aragonese language" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377152" start="7323" end="7345" title="West Iberian languages" label="West Iberian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q35390" start="7361" end="7384" title="Astur-Leonese languages" label="Astur-Leonese languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072111" start="7390" end="7419" title="Galician-Portuguese" label="Galician-Portuguese languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377152" start="7429" end="7448" title="Castilian languages" label="Castilian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q23526" start="7468" end="7484" title="Slavic languages" label="Slavic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="7536" end="7550" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="7635" end="7642" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q875134" start="7660" end="7675" title="European Russia" label="European Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="7775" end="7781" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="7797" end="7806" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="7823" end="7837" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="7853" end="7858" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="7874" end="7883" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="7899" end="7905" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="7920" end="7930" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="7949" end="7956" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="7976" end="7986" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q145852" start="8071" end="8082" title="West Slavic languages" label="West Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="8098" end="8104" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36741" start="8106" end="8114" title="Polabian language" label="Polabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="8116" end="8121" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q56384" start="8123" end="8130" title="Knaanic language" label="Knaanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="8132" end="8138" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q13286" start="8140" end="8153" title="Lower Sorbian language" label="Lower Sorbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13248" start="8155" end="8168" title="Upper Sorbian language" label="Upper Sorbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q30319" start="8170" end="8178" title="Silesian language" label="Silesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33690" start="8183" end="8192" title="Kashubian language" label="Kashubian"/>
<link wikidata="Q144713" start="8202" end="8213" title="East Slavic languages" label="East Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="8229" end="8236" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="8238" end="8247" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="8249" end="8259" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13211" start="8261" end="8270" title="Ruthenian language" label="Ruthenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26245" start="8276" end="8281" title="Rusyn language" label="Rusyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q146665" start="8291" end="8303" title="South Slavic languages" label="South Slavic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="8319" end="8326" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="8331" end="8345" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="8367" end="8376" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="8378" end="8388" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33251" start="8393" end="8408" title="Church Slavonic" label="Church Slavonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q839470" start="8412" end="8431" title="liturgical language" label="liturgical language"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8528" end="8545" title="Dialect continuum#South Slavic continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q250858" start="8641" end="8653" title="pluricentric language" label="pluricentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="8681" end="8702" title="mutual intelligibility" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q221190" start="8703" end="8730" title="Comparison of standard Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin and Serbian" label="national standard varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="8762" end="8772" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="8792" end="8797" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="8840" end="8846" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="8851" end="8857" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="8900" end="8907" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="8909" end="8917" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8919" end="8924" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="8926" end="8941" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="8943" end="8950" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="8952" end="8959" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="8961" end="8968" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="8970" end="8977" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8979" end="8984" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="8986" end="8992" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q810" start="8994" end="9000" title="Jordan" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9006" end="9012" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q132203" start="9021" end="9038" title="Greek diaspora" label="Greek communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q506588" start="9102" end="9113" title="Attic Greek" label="Attic Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="9123" end="9128" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36387" start="9138" end="9152" title="Medieval Greek" label="Medieval Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q853414" start="9158" end="9169" title="Cappadocian Greek" label="Cappadocian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36748" start="9171" end="9177" title="Pontic Greek" label="Pontic"/>
<link wikidata="Q588306" start="9179" end="9185" title="Cretan Greek" label="Cretan"/>
<link wikidata="Q245899" start="9187" end="9194" title="Cypriot Greek" label="Cypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35961" start="9196" end="9208" title="Katharevousa" label="Katharevousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34200" start="9214" end="9221" title="Yevanic" label="Yevanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146398" start="9226" end="9239" title="Greek-Bovesian" label="Italiot Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q285494" start="9257" end="9262" title="Doric Greek" label="Doric"/>
<link wikidata="Q16253" start="9325" end="9342" title="Province of Reggio Calabria" label="southern Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146398" start="9354" end="9362" title="Greek-Bovesian" label="Grecanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q735628" start="9375" end="9382" title="Salento" label="Salento"/>
<link wikidata="Q35719" start="9394" end="9399" title="Griko" label="Griko"/>
<link wikidata="Q77552" start="9440" end="9454" title="Gerhard Rohlfs" label="Gerhard Rohlfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q220607" start="9486" end="9495" title="Tsakonian language" label="Tsakonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170054" start="9557" end="9564" title="Arcadia (regional unit)" label="Arcadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q78967" start="9579" end="9590" title="Peloponnese" label="Peloponnese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1819480" start="9613" end="9621" title="Leonidio" label="Leonidio"/>
<link wikidata="Q33136" start="9630" end="9646" title="Baltic languages" label="Baltic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="9661" end="9670" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q9083" start="9672" end="9682" title="Lithuanian language" label="Lithuanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q213434" start="9697" end="9707" title="Samogitian language" label="Samogitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="9713" end="9719" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="9721" end="9728" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36212" start="9745" end="9754" title="Latgalian language" label="Latgalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35857" start="9916" end="9924" title="Curonian language" label="Curonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190494" start="9926" end="9935" title="Galindian language" label="Galindian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35501" start="9937" end="9949" title="Old Prussian language" label="Old Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36491" start="9951" end="9959" title="Selonian language" label="Selonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47631" start="9961" end="9972" title="Semigallian language" label="Semigallian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35603" start="9978" end="9986" title="Sudovian language" label="Sudovian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8748" start="9990" end="9998" title="Albanian language" label="Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180937" start="10038" end="10051" title="Tosk Albanian" label="Tosk Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181037" start="10056" end="10069" title="Gheg Albanian" label="Gheg Albanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="10087" end="10094" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246" start="10099" end="10105" title="Kosovo" label="Kosovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="10119" end="10134" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="10136" end="10142" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10144" end="10149" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="10155" end="10165" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709195" start="10199" end="10216" title="Albanian diaspora" label="Albanian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q8785" start="10220" end="10228" title="Armenian language" label="Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q180945" start="10263" end="10279" title="Western Armenian" label="Western Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q181059" start="10284" end="10300" title="Eastern Armenian" label="Eastern Armenian"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="10318" end="10325" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="10327" end="10337" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="10339" end="10346" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19039" start="10348" end="10366" title="Samtskhe-Javakheti" label="Samtskhe-Javakheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q31354462" start="10372" end="10380" title="Abkhazia" label="Abkhazia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="10387" end="10393" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="10395" end="10401" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="10403" end="10408" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="10410" end="10416" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="10418" end="10424" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="10430" end="10436" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q550095" start="10470" end="10487" title="Armenian Diaspora" label="Armenian Diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q25293" start="10513" end="10529" title="Celtic languages" label="Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q236626" start="10587" end="10601" title="Celtic nations" label="Celtic nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q214506" start="10636" end="10650" title="Insular Celtic languages" label="Insular Celtic"/>
<link wikidata="Q156877" start="10693" end="10709" title="Brittonic languages" label="Brittonic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="10711" end="10716" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="10718" end="10723" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="10735" end="10742" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="10744" end="10752" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="10763" end="10769" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q327" start="10771" end="10779" title="Brittany" label="Brittany"/>
<link wikidata="Q56433" start="10793" end="10808" title="Goidelic languages" label="Goidelic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="10810" end="10815" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="10817" end="10824" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="10840" end="10855" title="Scottish Gaelic language" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="10857" end="10865" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12175" start="10880" end="10884" title="Manx language" label="Manx"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="10886" end="10897" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q215566" start="10908" end="10936" title="Continental Celtic languages" label="Continental Celtic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33577" start="11067" end="11087" title="Indo-Aryan languages" label="Indo-Aryan languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="11119" end="11125" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33527" start="11294" end="11311" title="Iranian languages" label="Iranian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33968" start="11383" end="11391" title="Ossetic language" label="Ossetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q494600" start="11458" end="11473" title="Oghuz languages" label="Oghuz languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="11492" end="11499" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="11511" end="11522" title="East Thrace" label="East Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="11553" end="11564" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="11578" end="11598" title="Azerbaijan" label="Northeast Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14324291" start="11612" end="11627" title="Southern Russia" label="Southern Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="11632" end="11638" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q164819" start="11652" end="11660" title="Gagauzia" label="Gagauzia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339898" start="11664" end="11681" title="Kipchak languages" label="Kipchak languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33725" start="11700" end="11706" title="Karaim language" label="Karaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q33357" start="11708" end="11721" title="Crimean Tatar language" label="Crimean Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33723" start="11726" end="11734" title="Krymchak language" label="Krymchak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="11762" end="11768" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25285" start="11770" end="11775" title="Tatar language" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481" start="11796" end="11805" title="Tatarstan" label="Tatarstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389" start="11807" end="11814" title="Bashkir language" label="Bashkir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5710" start="11835" end="11848" title="Bashkortostan" label="Bashkortostan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33714" start="11850" end="11865" title="Karachay-Balkar language" label="Karachay-Balkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37736" start="11890" end="11904" title="North Caucasus" label="North Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9252" start="11910" end="11916" title="Kazakh language" label="Kazakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="11937" end="11957" title="Kazakhstan" label="Northwest Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422731" start="11961" end="11976" title="Oghur languages" label="Oghur languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q33348" start="12096" end="12103" title="Chuvash language" label="Chuvash"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466" start="12124" end="12133" title="Chuvashia" label="Chuvashia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33328" start="12207" end="12223" title="Finnic languages" label="Finnic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="12232" end="12239" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="12257" end="12265" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q165795" start="12317" end="12321" title="Kven language" label="Kven"/>
<link wikidata="Q161240" start="12355" end="12367" title="Finno-Permic" label="Finno-Permic"/>
<link wikidata="Q973685" start="12402" end="12406" title="Mari language" label="Mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q56463" start="12429" end="12443" title="Sami languages" label="Sami languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q156631" start="12460" end="12465" title="Ugric" label="Ugric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9067" start="12528" end="12546" title="Hungarian language" label="Hungarian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4218" start="12595" end="12637" title="Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin" label="Hungarian conquest of the Carpathian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36452" start="12672" end="12687" title="Nenets language" label="Nenets language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164" start="12701" end="12724" title="Nenets Autonomous Okrug" label="Nenets Autonomous Okrug"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12789" end="12798" title="Extreme points of Europe#Mainland Europe" label="delimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="12806" end="12820" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="12843" end="12850" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="12867" end="12883" title="Semitic language" label="Semitic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="12889" end="12896" title="Romance language" label="Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q21200" start="12901" end="12909" title="Germanic language" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="12932" end="12937" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069489" start="12954" end="12969" title="Sicilian Arabic" label="Sicilian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="12992" end="13000" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="13002" end="13009" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="13011" end="13017" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="13038" end="13045" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="13085" end="13098" title="standard language" label="standard form"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="13113" end="13125" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="13183" end="13185" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
<link wikidata="Q56416" start="13278" end="13301" title="Cypriot Maronite Arabic" label="Cypriot Maronite Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422423" start="13338" end="13355" title="varieties of Arabic" label="variety of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4988656" start="13366" end="13374" title="Maronite" label="Maronite"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="13379" end="13385" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856" start="13409" end="13416" title="Nicosia" label="Nicosia"/>
<link wikidata="Q578431" start="13455" end="13464" title="Kormakiti" label="Kormakiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="13469" end="13476" title="Limassol" label="Lemesos"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="13521" end="13528" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="13595" end="13600" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q40998" start="13609" end="13618" title="phonology" label="phonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="13623" end="13633" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410322" start="13707" end="13722" title="Eastern Aramaic" label="Eastern Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34049" start="13726" end="13742" title="Semitic languages" label="Semitic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q377085" start="13756" end="13764" title="Assyrian people" label="Assyrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q852236" start="13826" end="13843" title="Sayfo" label="Assyrian Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q935440" start="13904" end="13921" title="Assyrian diaspora" label="Assyrian diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q8752" start="13970" end="13985" title="Basque language" label="Basque language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33648" start="14025" end="14041" title="language isolate" label="language isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q126756" start="14076" end="14089" title="Basque people" label="Basque people"/>
<link wikidata="Q47588" start="14106" end="14120" title="Basque Country (greater region)" label="Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="14146" end="14154" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="14188" end="14193" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14221" end="14227" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q500522" start="14383" end="14401" title="Aquitanian language" label="ancient Aquitanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394404" start="14561" end="14571" title="Bronze Age Europe" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q33732" start="14576" end="14601" title="North Caucasian languages" label="North Caucasian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q25295" start="14651" end="14668" title="Language family" label="language families"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="14697" end="14705" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="14710" end="14716" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q33852" start="14721" end="14740" title="Northwest Caucasian languages" label="Northwest Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111" start="14759" end="14765" title="Abkhaz language" label="Abkhaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q27776" start="14770" end="14780" title="Adyghe language" label="Circassian"/>
<link wikidata="Q27387" start="14790" end="14809" title="Northeast Caucasian languages" label="Northeast Caucasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="14867" end="14885" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="14897" end="14905" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="14907" end="14915" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219" start="14921" end="14931" title="Ingushetia" label="Ingushetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="14946" end="14956" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33634" start="14959" end="14965" title="Kalmyk language" label="Kalmyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="14971" end="14988" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3953" start="15004" end="15024" title="Republic of Kalmykia" label="Republic of Kalmykia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="15038" end="15056" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34030" start="15125" end="15145" title="Kartvelian languages" label="Kartvelian languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8108" start="15221" end="15229" title="Georgian language" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13359" start="15259" end="15269" title="Mingrelian language" label="Mingrelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34067" start="15274" end="15278" title="Svan language" label="Svan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501921" start="15454" end="15474" title="French Sign Language family" label="Francosign languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="15519" end="15525" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="15533" end="15540" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="15549" end="15556" title="Baltics" label="Baltics"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="15743" end="15770" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language (BSL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33302" start="15775" end="15801" title="French Sign Language" label="French Sign Language (LSF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33282" start="15881" end="15907" title="German Sign Language" label="German Sign Language (DGS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14790" start="15921" end="15931" title="Ethnologue" label="Ethnologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410327" start="16231" end="16247" title="language contact" label="language contact"/>
<link wikidata="Q124802946" start="16252" end="16261" title="borrowing (linguistics)" label="borrowing"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="16585" end="16591" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q231" start="16593" end="16601" title="Wallonia" label="Wallonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q214086" start="16606" end="16613" title="Romandy" label="Romandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33302" start="16617" end="16637" title="French Sign Language" label="French Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33302" start="16641" end="16644" title="French Sign Language" label="LSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501921" start="17428" end="17438" title="French Sign Language family" label="Francosign"/>
<link wikidata="Q33302" start="17458" end="17461" title="French Sign Language" label="LSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="17463" end="17466" title="American Sign Language" label="ASL"/>
<link wikidata="Q2201099" start="17468" end="17487" title="Dutch Sign Language" label="Dutch Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107617" start="17489" end="17510" title="Flemish Sign Language" label="Flemish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q375619" start="17516" end="17537" title="Italian Sign Language" label="Italian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805523" start="17541" end="17547" title="BANZSL" label="BANZSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="17569" end="17596" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language (BSL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36239" start="17598" end="17630" title="New Zealand Sign Language" label="New Zealand Sign Language (NZSL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q29525" start="17632" end="17665" title="Auslan" label="Australian Sign Language (Auslan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36558" start="17671" end="17692" title="Swedish Sign Language" label="Swedish Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709168" start="17723" end="17745" title="Albanian Sign Language" label="Albanian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446604" start="17747" end="17769" title="Armenian Sign Language" label="Armenian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963717" start="17771" end="17794" title="Caucasian Sign Language" label="Caucasian Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100814" start="17796" end="17823" title="Spanish Sign Language" label="Spanish Sign Language (LSE)"/>
<link wikidata="Q36885" start="17825" end="17852" title="Turkish Sign Language" label="Turkish Sign Language (TİD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5555709" start="17866" end="17888" title="Ghardaia Sign Language" label="Ghardaia Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14183" start="17927" end="17952" title="Irish Sign Language" label="Irish Sign Language (ISL)"/>
<link wikidata="Q262300" start="18385" end="18393" title="Abrogans" label="Abrogans"/>
<link wikidata="Q184524" start="18435" end="18447" title="lexicography" label="lexicography"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="18622" end="18634" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308718" start="18658" end="18677" title="early modern period" label="early modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q319972" start="18831" end="18848" title="national language" label="national language"/>
<link wikidata="Q338489" start="18914" end="18936" title="Accademia della Crusca" label="Accademia della Crusca"/>
<link wikidata="Q559186" start="18967" end="18995" title="Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft" label="Fruchtbringende Gesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q161806" start="19024" end="19042" title="Académie française" label="Académie française"/>
<link wikidata="Q11993457" start="19070" end="19092" title="Real Academia Española" label="Real Academia Española"/>
<link wikidata="Q86860" start="19254" end="19272" title="Bible translations" label="Bible translations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217016" start="19405" end="19427" title="questione della lingua" label="questione della lingua"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="19989" end="20004" title="linguae francae" label="linguae francae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="20633" end="20648" title="Ancient Greek language" label="Classical Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="20658" end="20669" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="20677" end="20696" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193235" start="20706" end="20721" title="Athenian Empire" label="Athenian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="20729" end="20749" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="20769" end="20781" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q107358" start="20785" end="20796" title="Koine Greek" label="Koine Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="20801" end="20813" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="20822" end="20855" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Eastern Roman or Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q843264" start="20900" end="20912" title="Jireček Line" label="Jireček Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q37560" start="20916" end="20928" title="Vulgar Latin" label="Vulgar Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503113" start="20933" end="20943" title="Late Latin" label="Late Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="21010" end="21022" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163234" start="21095" end="21109" title="Medieval Latin" label="Medieval Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q499083" start="21114" end="21131" title="Renaissance Latin" label="Renaissance Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="21339" end="21348" title="Neo-Latin" label="Neo-Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247932" start="21489" end="21509" title="ecclesiastical Latin" label="ecclesiastical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="21607" end="21628" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779185" start="21632" end="21643" title="Old Occitan" label="Old Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q204920" start="21728" end="21743" title="crown of Aragon" label="crown of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q636479" start="21802" end="21815" title="Mediterranean Lingua Franca" label="Lingua Franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q33831" start="21881" end="21887" title="pidgin" label="pidgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="22020" end="22030" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q190967" start="22084" end="22099" title="Crusader states" label="Crusader states"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="22103" end="22108" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="22137" end="22155" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q155669" start="22156" end="22166" title="Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q505674" start="22262" end="22279" title="Middle Low German" label="Middle Low German"/>
<link wikidata="Q42908" start="22336" end="22352" title="Hanseatic League" label="Hanseatic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="22409" end="22416" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="22443" end="22452" title="New Spain" label="New Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q186851" start="22471" end="22492" title="the Catholic Monarchs" label="the Catholic Monarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="22497" end="22505" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79791" start="22535" end="22546" title="Reconquista" label="Reconquista"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="22605" end="22614" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="22689" end="22703" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="22707" end="22713" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="22726" end="22756" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="22782" end="22789" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="22801" end="22812" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344" start="22818" end="22823" title="opera" label="opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q926295" start="22829" end="22843" title="Italian Empire" label="Italian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859789" start="22849" end="22865" title="Italian fashion" label="fashion industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="22891" end="22912" title="Roman Catholic church" label="Roman Catholic church"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="22916" end="22922" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q26702" start="22949" end="22967" title="Cardinal Richelieu" label="Cardinal Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22972" end="22981" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="23007" end="23029" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="23049" end="23071" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="23127" end="23144" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="23229" end="23243" title="French colonial empire" label="French Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="23247" end="23253" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="23298" end="23305" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="23309" end="23322" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="23377" end="23388" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649537" start="23405" end="23419" title="Modern English" label="Modern English"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="23497" end="23511" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="23591" end="23604" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="23606" end="23620" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="23622" end="23628" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="23630" end="23639" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="23641" end="23652" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23721" end="23732" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23744" end="23756" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="23808" end="23818" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23829" end="23847" title="United States#Culture" label="cultural influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="23851" end="23858" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="23873" end="23885" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="23890" end="23904" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27329" start="23915" end="23923" title="Northern Asia" label="Northern"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="23928" end="23940" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118068" start="24063" end="24094" title="Ordinance of Villers-Cotterêts" label="Ordonnance de Villers-Cotterêts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456382" start="24214" end="24224" title="Toubon Law" label="Loi Toubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="24484" end="24501" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="24725" end="24731" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q228" start="24733" end="24740" title="Andorra" label="Andorra"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="24745" end="24751" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q506020" start="24768" end="24830" title="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities" label="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="24838" end="24844" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="24846" end="24853" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="24858" end="24868" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="24983" end="25034" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="25082" end="25099" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="25182" end="25188" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="25190" end="25197" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="25199" end="25204" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="25206" end="25221" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="25223" end="25230" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="25235" end="25241" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="25360" end="25365" title="Latin script" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="25370" end="25378" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8216" start="25385" end="25399" title="Greek alphabet" label="Greek alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q26752" start="25421" end="25440" title="Phoenician alphabet" label="Phoenician alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4891256" start="25487" end="25506" title="Old Italic alphabet" label="Old Italic alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q184661" start="25534" end="25539" title="Ogham" label="Ogham"/>
<link wikidata="Q82996" start="25564" end="25569" title="runes" label="runes"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="25852" end="25866" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q582732" start="25883" end="25890" title="Antiqua (typeface class)" label="Antiqua"/>
<link wikidata="Q148443" start="25895" end="25902" title="Fraktur" label="Fraktur"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="26127" end="26133" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q640799" start="26174" end="26185" title="Schwabacher" label="Schwabacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="26334" end="26354" title="Egyptian hieroglyphs" label="Egyptian hieroglyphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q446224" start="26526" end="26541" title="Old Hungarian alphabet" label="Hungarian rovás"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="26837" end="26851" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="27584" end="27601" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221385" start="27773" end="27825" title="Common European Framework of Reference for Languages" label="Common European Framework of Reference for Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280589" start="28109" end="28154" title="Directorate-General for Education and Culture (European Commission)" label="Directorate-General for Education and Culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4319" start="28784" end="28830" title="list of languages by number of native speakers" label="list of languages by number of native speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394450" start="28835" end="28880" title="list of languages by total number of speakers" label="list of languages by total number of speakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33547" start="28988" end="28995" title="ISO 639" label="ISO 639"/>
<link wikidata="Q29540" start="29207" end="29215" title="Bavarian language" label="Bavarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="29445" end="29478" title="Definition of Europe" label="are various definitions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394662" start="29822" end="29843" title="immigration to Europe" label="immigration to Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="29956" end="29962" title="Arabic language" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783487" start="29977" end="29992" title="Arabs in Europe" label="Arabs in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="29998" end="30005" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171323" start="30023" end="30038" title="European Turkey" label="European Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="30085" end="30099" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821600" start="30105" end="30120" title="Turks in Europe" label="Turks in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q550095" start="30123" end="30132" title="Armenian diaspora" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q45315" start="30134" end="30141" title="Berbers" label="Berbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="30147" end="30152" title="Kurds" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q207930" start="30212" end="30231" title="languages of Africa" label="languages of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q135595" start="30236" end="30254" title="languages of India" label="languages of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464982" start="30362" end="30385" title="Ethnic groups in Europe" label="Ethnic groups in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940965" start="30388" end="30403" title="Eurolinguistics" label="Eurolinguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q496423" start="30406" end="30431" title="European Day of Languages" label="European Day of Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601774" start="30434" end="30483" title="Greek East and Latin West" label="&amp;quot;Greek East&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Latin West&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618838" start="30486" end="30524" title="List of endangered languages in Europe" label="List of endangered languages in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q944929" start="30527" end="30579" title="Multilingual countries and regions of Europe" label="List of multilingual countries and regions of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q471271" start="30582" end="30607" title="Standard Average European" label="Standard Average European"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836085" start="30610" end="30622" title="Travellingua" label="Travellingua"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9706" wikidata="Q280824" url="?curid=9706" title="Eindhoven University of Technology">
<text>The Eindhoven University of Technology (), abbr. TU/e, is a public technical university in the Netherlands, situated in Eindhoven. In 2020–21, around 14,000 students were enrolled in its BSc and MSc programs and around 1350 students were enrolled in its PhD and EngD programs. In 2021, the TU/e employed around 3900 people.

TU/e is the Dutch member of the EuroTech Universities Alliance, a partnership of European universities of science &amp; technology. The other members are Technical University of Denmark (DTU), École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), École Polytechnique (L’X), The Technion, and Technical University of Munich (TUM).

==History==
The Eindhoven University of Technology was founded as the &quot;Technische Hogeschool Eindhoven&quot; (THE) on 23 June 1956 by the Dutch government. It was the second institute of its kind in the Netherlands, after the Delft University of Technology.

Undergraduate education was given in four- or five-year programs until 2002, styled along the lines of the German system of education; graduates of these programs were granted an engineering title and allowed to prefix their name with the title &quot;ir.&quot; (an abbreviation of ingenieur; not to be confused with graduates of technical &quot;hogescholen&quot;, who were engineers abbreviated &quot;ing.&quot;). Starting in 2002, following the entry into force of the Bologna Accords, the university switched to the bachelor/master structure (students graduating in 2002 were given both an old-style engineering title and a new master&#x27;s title). The undergraduate programs are now split into two parts, a three-year bachelor program and a two-year master program.

===2011-2020 Plans===

On 3 January 2011, the university&#x27;s plans for the period up to 2020, the &quot;Strategic Plan 2020&quot;, was presented. The plan included establishing a University College with relevance in engineering education; establishing a Graduate School to manage the graduate programs; increasing the student body and annual PhDs awarded by 50 percent; increasing knowledge &quot;valorisation&quot; (practical usage) to a campus-wide score of 4.2; increasing the international position of the university to the top 100; and improving the campus, including adding a costly science park.

==Organization==
As a public university of the Netherlands, TU/e&#x27;s general structure and management is determined by the (Law on Higher Education and Scientific Research). Between that law and the statutes of the university itself, the management of the university is organized according to the following chart:

===Executive board===
The day-to-day running of the university is in the hands of the executive board &quot;()&quot;. The executive board (EB) monitors the academic departments and service organizations, in addition to the local activities of the Stan Ackermans Institute. The EB consists of the president, the rector magnificus, and the vice president, in addition to a secretary for clerical tasks, who is usually the secretary of the entire university. The rector magnificus is the only member of the EB whose membership is mandated by law. The law allows anyone to be appointed rector, but in practice the university appoints a former department dean as rector. The rector represents the university&#x27;s academic staff and academic interests of the university. The current president is Robert-Jan Smits, the rector is Silvia Lenaerts, the vice president is Nicole Ummelen, and the secretary is Susanne van Weelden.

===Oversight of the executive board===
There are two bodies that supervise the Executive Board:

* The Supervisory Board is an external board of five people appointed by the Minister of Education (one member is appointed, based on a nomination by the University Council). This Board provides external oversight of the running of the university, including changing of the statutes, the budget, and other strategic decisions.
* The University Council is a council of 18 people, half of whom are elected from the university staff (academic and otherwise) and half from the student body. The University Council is informed of the running of the university by the executive board at least twice a year and may advise the EB as it sees fit. It guards against discrimination within the university, and the council must agree to any changes in the management structure. The Council membership is open to all students and personnel, except the University Secretary and anyone in the supervisory board or the executive board.

===Departments and service organizations===
Most of the work at the university is done in the departments and service organizations. In both the departments and the service organizations, the staff (and students) are involved with the running of the body. Both the bodies also have advisory councils.

The departments take care of most of the research and education at the university. Each department is run by its professors and headed by a dean. The deans are all members of the executive deliberation meeting, which is a regular meeting of the deans and the rector.

The service organizations are involved in further activities that are part of running the university.

The university has the following service organizations:

===TU/e Holding B.V.===
TU/e is involved in commercial interests and off-campus ties. These include commercial agreements between the university and external companies, in addition to interests in spinoff companies. In 1997 the TU/e Holding B.V., a limited company, was created to manage these commercial interests.

==Academics==

===Rankings===
&lt;/ref&gt;
|USNWR_W= =374| USNWR_W_year = 2025|USNWR_W_ref=}}

As of 2018, Eindhoven was ranked between 51 and 141 in the world (the university itself provides a survey), and a top ten technical university in Europe.

In a 2003 European Commission report, TU/e was ranked as third among European research universities (after Cambridge and Oxford, tied with TU Munich and thus tied for the highest ranked Technical University in Europe), based on the impact of its scientific research. In the 2011 ARWU (Academic Ranking of World Universities) rankings, TU/e was placed at the 52-75 bracket internationally in the Engineering/Technology and Computer Science (ENG) category and at 34th place internationally in the Computer Science subject field.

===Education===
The scientific departments (or faculties) are the main divisions involved in teaching and research in the university. They employ the majority of the academic staff, are responsible for teaching the students, and sponsor the research schools and institutions.

The departments also offer PhD programs () for qualified masters. Unlike in Anglo-Saxon countries, the PhD program is not educational, rather, the university employs those aiming for a PhD as researchers.

The TU/e has nine departments:
* Biomedical Engineering
* Built Environment
* Electrical engineering
* Industrial Design
* Chemical Engineering and Chemistry
* Industrial Engineering &amp; Innovation Sciences (formerly Technology Management)
* Applied Physics
* Mechanical Engineering
* Mathematics and Computer science

====Honors programs====
The university offers honors programs for both bachelor and master students. At the bachelor level it consists of intensive study within eight possible tracks. At the master level it consists of extra leadership and professional development work.

====Postgraduate doctorate of engineering (PDEng) ====
In 1986, the university, together with two other Dutch technological universities (TU Delft and University of Twente), started various programs for earning a postgraduate doctorate of engineering (PDEng). These programs are managed by the Stan Ackermans Institute on behalf of the 4TU Federation. Nationally, 3,500 students have earned the postgraduate PDEng degree through these programs. There are ten programs at TU/e, each two years long.

* Automotive Systems Design
* Clinical Informatics
* Data Science
* Healthcare Systems Design
* Information and Communication Technology
* Process and Product Design
* Qualified Medical Engineer
* Smart Buildings and Cities
* Software Technology
* User-System Interaction

====Other educational programs====
The university hosts a number of other educational programs that are in some way related to the main educational programs. These include the teacher&#x27;s program and an MBA program.

*Eindhoven School of Education: Teacher&#x27;s education for masters, to get a higher education teaching certificate. Also involves research into education.
*TIAS School for Business and Society: A shared MBA program with the University of Tilburg, for university graduates.
*HBO minor program: Bachelor programs for students of HBO universities (four-year bachelor programs), to gain access to the master programs.

===International connections===
The TU/e has connections with sister institutions in different countries, for example:

* National University of Singapore in Singapore
* Zhejiang University, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Fudan University, and Northeastern University in China
* Georgia Institute of Technology, Northwestern University, Carnegie Mellon University in the US
* RMIT University in Australia
* Middle East Technical University in Turkey
* Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in Belgium

The TU/e also provides education to foreign students and graduates. According to the 2009 annual report in the academic year 2008–2009 there were 490 exchange students, 103 foreign nationals registered in a bachelor program, 430 in a master program, 158 in a professional doctorate program (79% of the total). In 2009 the university employed 37 foreign professors (15.9% of the total) and 16 foreign associate professors (12.8%). Overall, 29.5% of the university staff was non-Dutch.

As of 2011/2012, the TU/e had Erasmus agreements with universities in 30 countries across Europe in a range of subjects for student exchanges.

==Regional effect==
The TU/e plays a role in the academic, economic and social life of Eindhoven and the surrounding region.

The TU/e is important to the economy of the Eindhoven region, as well as the wider areas of BrabantStad and the Samenwerkingsverband Regio Eindhoven. It provides skilled labor for local businesses and partners with technology companies in the area.

===Regional history===
The university&#x27;s role in the economy started with the interaction with the Philips company. The university was founded primarily to address Philips&#x27;s need for local employees with higher levels of education in electronics, physics, chemistry and later computer science. Later that interest spread to DAF and Royal Dutch Shell. Often, senior personnel from these companies were hired to form the academic staff of the university (an Eindhoven joke was said that the university trains the engineers and Philips trains the professors).

The relationship changed during the 1980s and 1990s as Philips moved away from the region. The university was forced to seek closer ties with the city of Eindhoven, resulting in the Brainport initiative, a move to draw high tech industry to the region. The university started expending more effort in making practical use of its research and providing support for local companies and startups.

===Current effect===
The TU/e is host (and in some cases also commissioner) of a number of research schools, including the ESI and the DPI. These research schools are a source of knowledge for tech companies in the area such as ASML, NXP and FEI. As of summer 2010, the TU/e was also host to the Eindhoven Energy Institute (EEI), a co-location of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology&#x27;s KIC on Sustainable Energy (InnoEnergy). The university also plays a large role in providing knowledge and personnel to other companies in the High Tech Campus Eindhoven and helps support startups through the Eindhoven Twinning Center and The Gate. The valorisation of TU/e has led to various spin-offs, including Lusoco, NC Biomatrix, Taylor, SMART Photonics, EFFECT Photonics and MicroAlign.

In the extended region, the TU/e is a part of the Eindhoven-Leuven-Aachen triangle. The agreement between these three cities from three different countries formed a region that is among the highest in the European Union in terms of investment in technology and knowledge economy. The agreement includes cooperation between the three technical universities in the cities.

== Student life ==

=== Community ===
The TU/e has over 110 community bodies for its members. They are related to sports, culture, faith, staff, international students and hobbies, as well as university political parties, student teams, and study associations for each faculty.

===Technological sports===
In addition to the regular sports played by the students and staff, the university has some &quot;technology sporting efforts&quot;. Some examples include:

;Robot football: In 2010, TechUnited, the university&#x27;s robot football team, won the European Championship, came second for the third time in a row at the world championship in Singapore and won the world championship in 2012. The team is part of the Mid-Size league of RoboCup.

;Auto racing:The TU/e&#x27;s race team, University Racing Eindhoven (URE) competes annually in the Formula Student and other races with self-built racers. Starting in 2010 the team switched from a petrol engine to an electric car; this car came third at Silverstone, second at Hockenheim and won the Formula Student in its first year.

:The university also has another race team, Solar Team Eindhoven (STE), that has entered cars named &quot;Stella&quot; into the biannual World Solar Challenge since 2013, winning the &quot;Cruiser class&quot; competition both in 2013 and 2015.

Another student racing program is the Automotive Technology InMotion team, a collaboration between the TU/e and Fontys University of Applied Sciences. The team has the aim to compete in the 2020 24 Hours of Le Mans.

=== Student teams ===
TU/e has various student teams which work on problems in the fields of sustainability, AI, health and mobility.

==Notable people==

=== Notable alumni ===
* Wil van der Aalst, Dutch computer scientist
* Stefan Bon, chemical engineer at the University of Warwick
* Jo Coenen, Dutch architect and former Chief Architect of the Netherlands
* Martijn van Dam, member of the House of Representatives (2006–10, 2010–12)
* Marijn Dekkers, Chairman of Unilever
* Jan Dietz, Dutch computer scientist
* Teun van Dijck, member of the House of Representatives (2006–10, 2010–12)
* Camiel Eurlings, Dutch Minister of Transport, Public Works and Water Management (2006–2010)
* Gerard Kleisterlee, Chairman of Vodafone and a former president and chief executive officer of Royal Philips Electronics
* Arno Kuijlaars, mathematician, professor at the Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
* G.M. Nijssen, Dutch computer scientist
* Itay Noy, Israeli watchmaker
* Ralf Mackenbach, Singer
* Kees Schouhamer Immink, president Turing Machines Inc, digital pioneer, winner Emmy Award, recipient IEEE Medal of Honor
* Sjoerd Soeters, architect
* René van Zuuk, Dutch architect

===Notable faculty===


* Jacques Benders, mathematician
*Andries Brouwer, mathematician and computer programmer
* Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn, mathematician
* Henk Buck, professor of chemistry
* Jo Coenen, Dutch architect and former Chief Architect of the Netherlands
* Henk Dorgelo, physicist and first rector magnificus
* Edsger W. Dijkstra, mathematician and computer scientist, Turing Award winner 1972
* Hugo Christiaan Hamaker, physicist
* Hubert-Jan Henket, architect
* Alexandre Horowitz, mechanical engineer; inventor of the Philishave
* Arie Andries Kruithof, physicist, discovered the Kruithofeffect and Kruithofcurve
* Piet Lemstra, inventor of the Dyneema fibre
* Jack van Lint, mathematician
* Harry Lintsen, historian in technology history, former chairman Foundation for the History of Technology
* Archer Martin, Fellow of the Royal Society, 1952 Nobel laureate in chemistry (professor TU/e 1964–1974)
* Bert Meijer, chemical engineer, pioneer in polymer research
* Jaime Gómez Rivas, Physicist 
* Sjoerd Romme, professor of Entrepreneurship &amp; Innovation
* Johan Schot, historian, professor of technology history
* Bettina Speckmann, computer scientist
* Piet Steenkamp, lawyer, co-founder of the CDA
* Martinus Tels, chemical engineer, rector magnificus, pioneer of waste management processes in the Netherlands
* Wietse Venema, programmer and physicist

===Notable honors for research done at the university===

* prof. dr. ir.René de Borst: Spinozapremie (1999)
* prof. dr. Bert Meijer: KNCV Gold Medal (1993), Arthur K. Doolittle Award (1995), Spinozapremie (2001), Wheland Medal 2010/2011
* prof.dr.ir. René Janssen: KIvI/NIRIA Speurwerkprijs 2010, Spinozapremie (2015)
* prof. dr.ir. Jaap Schouten: Simon Stevin Master 2006
* prof. dr. ir. Jan van Hest: Spinozapremie (2020)

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Official website in English</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q280824" start="4" end="38" title="Eindhoven University of Technology" label="Eindhoven University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="43" end="48" title="Abbreviation" label="abbr."/>
<link wikidata="Q280824" start="49" end="53" title="Eindhoven University of Technology" label="TU/e"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="60" end="66" title="public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371037" start="67" end="87" title="technical university" label="technical university"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="120" end="129" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="187" end="190" title="Bachelor of Science" label="BSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="195" end="198" title="Master of Science" label="MSc"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="254" end="257" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q11965851" start="262" end="266" title="EngD" label="EngD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269766" start="479" end="510" title="Technical University of Denmark" label="Technical University of Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q262760" start="518" end="558" title="École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne" label="École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q273626" start="567" end="586" title="École Polytechnique" label="École Polytechnique"/>
<link wikidata="Q333705" start="594" end="606" title="The Technion" label="The Technion"/>
<link wikidata="Q157808" start="612" end="642" title="Technical University of Munich" label="Technical University of Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="859" end="870" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q752663" start="882" end="912" title="Delft University of Technology" label="Delft University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q187073" start="1385" end="1400" title="Bologna Process" label="Bologna Accords"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407703" start="2858" end="2882" title="Stan Ackermans Institute" label="Stan Ackermans Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="2922" end="2939" title="rector magnificus" label="rector magnificus"/>
<link wikidata="Q19299206" start="3403" end="3419" title="Robert-Jan Smits" label="Robert-Jan Smits"/>
<link wikidata="Q43368644" start="3435" end="3450" title="Silvia Lenaerts" label="Silvia Lenaerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q759969" start="3636" end="3653" title="Supervisory board" label="Supervisory Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q723682" start="4992" end="4996" title="dean (education)" label="dean"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5477" end="5494" title="#Spinoffs" label="spinoff companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q33685" start="5529" end="5544" title="limited company" label="limited company"/>
<link wikidata="Q180958" start="6422" end="6431" title="faculty (division)" label="faculties"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="6728" end="6739" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q327092" start="6891" end="6913" title="Biomedical engineering" label="Biomedical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q150737" start="6916" end="6933" title="Architectural engineering" label="Built Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="6936" end="6958" title="Electrical engineering" label="Electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q243606" start="6961" end="6978" title="Industrial design" label="Industrial Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="6981" end="7001" title="Chemical engineering" label="Chemical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="7006" end="7015" title="Chemistry" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489420" start="7018" end="7040" title="Industrial engineering" label="Industrial Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445082" start="7047" end="7066" title="Innovation studies" label="Innovation Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417293" start="7077" end="7098" title="Technology management" label="Technology Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q373065" start="7102" end="7117" title="Applied physics" label="Applied Physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="7120" end="7142" title="Mechanical engineering" label="Mechanical Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="7145" end="7156" title="Mathematics" label="Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="7161" end="7177" title="Computer science" label="Computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407703" start="7745" end="7769" title="Stan Ackermans Institute" label="Stan Ackermans Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407703" start="7787" end="7801" title="4TU" label="4TU Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q80993" start="8176" end="8195" title="Software engineering" label="Software Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7901832" start="8198" end="8221" title="User System Interaction (USI)" label="User-System Interaction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8444" end="8473" title="Eindhoven School of Education" label="Eindhoven School of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223270" start="8601" end="8637" title="TIAS School for Business and Society" label="TIAS School for Business and Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="8648" end="8651" title="MBA" label="MBA"/>
<link wikidata="Q595668" start="8669" end="8690" title="University of Tilburg" label="University of Tilburg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8719" end="8722" title="Education in the Netherlands#HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q738236" start="8982" end="9014" title="National University of Singapore" label="National University of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q197543" start="9030" end="9049" title="Zhejiang University" label="Zhejiang University"/>
<link wikidata="Q525169" start="9051" end="9080" title="Shanghai Jiao Tong University" label="Shanghai Jiao Tong University"/>
<link wikidata="Q495015" start="9082" end="9098" title="Fudan University" label="Fudan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363559" start="9104" end="9127" title="Northeastern University (China)" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q864855" start="9139" end="9170" title="Georgia Institute of Technology" label="Georgia Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="9172" end="9195" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190080" start="9197" end="9223" title="Carnegie Mellon University" label="Carnegie Mellon University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057890" start="9236" end="9251" title="RMIT University" label="RMIT University"/>
<link wikidata="Q756126" start="9267" end="9299" title="Middle East Technical University" label="Middle East Technical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q833670" start="9312" end="9342" title="Katholieke Universiteit Leuven" label="Katholieke Universiteit Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q375471" start="9505" end="9522" title="Student exchange program" label="exchange students"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="10043" end="10051" title="economy" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8425" start="10056" end="10062" title="society" label="social"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="10154" end="10163" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101" start="10202" end="10213" title="BrabantStad" label="BrabantStad"/>
<link wikidata="Q18286289" start="10222" end="10258" title="Samenwerkingsverband Regio Eindhoven" label="Samenwerkingsverband Regio Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="10463" end="10470" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q11650" start="10603" end="10614" title="electronics" label="electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="10616" end="10623" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="10625" end="10634" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="10645" end="10661" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q27489" start="10693" end="10696" title="DAF Trucks" label="DAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q154950" start="10701" end="10718" title="Royal Dutch Shell" label="Royal Dutch Shell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11109" end="11118" title="Brainport (Eindhoven)" label="Brainport"/>
<link wikidata="Q297879" start="11550" end="11554" title="ASML Holding" label="ASML"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155668" start="11556" end="11559" title="NXP Semiconductors" label="NXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004423" start="11564" end="11567" title="FEI Company" label="FEI"/>
<link wikidata="Q993120" start="11673" end="11720" title="European Institute of Innovation and Technology" label="European Institute of Innovation and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045584" start="11870" end="11896" title="High Tech Campus Eindhoven" label="High Tech Campus Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11946" end="11961" title="Twinning Center" label="Twinning Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q65311735" start="11980" end="11992" title="valorisation" label="valorisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="12327" end="12341" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q830170" start="12383" end="12400" title="knowledge economy" label="knowledge economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7353345" start="12958" end="12972" title="Robot football" label="Robot football"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12983" end="12993" title="TechUnited" label="TechUnited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137707" start="13231" end="13238" title="RoboCup" label="RoboCup"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386" start="13242" end="13253" title="Auto racing" label="Auto racing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13281" end="13308" title="University Racing Eindhoven" label="University Racing Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151598" start="13340" end="13355" title="Formula Student" label="Formula Student"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="13495" end="13506" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q8336" start="13518" end="13528" title="Hockenheim" label="Hockenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q42105669" start="13621" end="13641" title="Solar Team Eindhoven" label="Solar Team Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q42105669" start="13677" end="13695" title="Stella (solar vehicles)" label="&amp;quot;Stella&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064133" start="13714" end="13735" title="World Solar Challenge" label="World Solar Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q48740021" start="13860" end="13890" title="Automotive Technology InMotion" label="Automotive Technology InMotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435898" start="13934" end="13971" title="Fontys University of Applied Sciences" label="Fontys University of Applied Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q63556945" start="14012" end="14036" title="2020 24 Hours of Le Mans" label="2020 24 Hours of Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="14148" end="14150" title="AI" label="AI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524086" start="14219" end="14236" title="Wil van der Aalst" label="Wil van der Aalst"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="14244" end="14262" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80549217" start="14265" end="14275" title="Stefan Bon" label="Stefan Bon"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="14302" end="14323" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q829991" start="14326" end="14335" title="Jo Coenen" label="Jo Coenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886549" start="14364" end="14398" title="Chief Architect of the Netherlands" label="Chief Architect of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2010479" start="14401" end="14416" title="Martijn van Dam" label="Martijn van Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q233262" start="14432" end="14456" title="House of Representatives (Netherlands)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233012" start="14458" end="14465" title="List of members of the House of Representatives of the Netherlands, 2006–10" label="2006–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628124" start="14467" end="14474" title="List of members of the House of Representatives of the Netherlands, 2010–12" label="2010–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898117" start="14478" end="14492" title="Marijn Dekkers" label="Marijn Dekkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="14506" end="14514" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673208" start="14517" end="14526" title="Jan Dietz" label="Jan Dietz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797379" start="14555" end="14569" title="Teun van Dijck" label="Teun van Dijck"/>
<link wikidata="Q233262" start="14585" end="14609" title="House of Representatives (Netherlands)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233012" start="14611" end="14618" title="List of members of the House of Representatives of the Netherlands, 2006–10" label="2006–10"/>
<link wikidata="Q6628124" start="14620" end="14627" title="List of members of the House of Representatives of the Netherlands, 2010–12" label="2010–12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028887" start="14631" end="14646" title="Camiel Eurlings" label="Camiel Eurlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2433166" start="14666" end="14710" title="Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management (Netherlands)" label="Transport, Public Works and Water Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q69185" start="14725" end="14743" title="Gerard Kleisterlee" label="Gerard Kleisterlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q122141" start="14757" end="14765" title="Vodafone" label="Vodafone"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="14826" end="14833" title="Philips" label="Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336994" start="14848" end="14862" title="Arno Kuijlaars" label="Arno Kuijlaars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="14864" end="14877" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q833670" start="14896" end="14926" title="Katholieke Universiteit Leuven" label="Katholieke Universiteit Leuven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610339" start="14929" end="14941" title="G.M. Nijssen" label="G.M. Nijssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16131611" start="14970" end="14978" title="Itay Noy" label="Itay Noy"/>
<link wikidata="Q276360" start="15001" end="15016" title="Ralf Mackenbach" label="Ralf Mackenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q738978" start="15027" end="15049" title="Kees A. Schouhamer Immink" label="Kees Schouhamer Immink"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="15106" end="15116" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q678414" start="15128" end="15147" title="IEEE Medal of Honor" label="IEEE Medal of Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642174" start="15150" end="15164" title="Sjoerd Soeters" label="Sjoerd Soeters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1952863" start="15178" end="15191" title="René van Zuuk" label="René van Zuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358222" start="15236" end="15251" title="Jacques F. Benders" label="Jacques Benders"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="15253" end="15266" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846875" start="15268" end="15283" title="Andries Brouwer" label="Andries Brouwer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="15285" end="15298" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="15303" end="15322" title="computer programmer" label="computer programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078285" start="15325" end="15350" title="Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn" label="Nicolaas Govert de Bruijn"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="15352" end="15365" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628191" start="15368" end="15377" title="Henk Buck" label="Henk Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329" start="15392" end="15401" title="chemistry" label="chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q829991" start="15404" end="15413" title="Jo Coenen" label="Jo Coenen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886549" start="15442" end="15476" title="Chief Architect of the Netherlands" label="Chief Architect of the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438016" start="15479" end="15491" title="Henk Dorgelo" label="Henk Dorgelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="15493" end="15502" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="15513" end="15530" title="rector magnificus" label="rector magnificus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8556" start="15533" end="15551" title="Edsger W. Dijkstra" label="Edsger W. Dijkstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="15553" end="15566" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="15571" end="15589" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q185667" start="15591" end="15603" title="Turing Award" label="Turing Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032000" start="15618" end="15641" title="Hugo Christiaan Hamaker" label="Hugo Christiaan Hamaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="15643" end="15652" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597266" start="15655" end="15672" title="Hubert-Jan Henket" label="Hubert-Jan Henket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2780731" start="15686" end="15704" title="Alexandre Horowitz" label="Alexandre Horowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="15706" end="15725" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356716" start="15743" end="15753" title="Philishave" label="Philishave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2434754" start="15756" end="15777" title="Arie Andries Kruithof" label="Arie Andries Kruithof"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="15779" end="15788" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15805" end="15819" title="Kruithofeffect" label="Kruithofeffect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15824" end="15837" title="Kruithofcurve" label="Kruithofcurve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633774" start="15840" end="15852" title="Piet Lemstra" label="Piet Lemstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q575823" start="15870" end="15877" title="Dyneema" label="Dyneema"/>
<link wikidata="Q581677" start="15886" end="15899" title="Jack van Lint" label="Jack van Lint"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="15901" end="15914" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550379" start="15917" end="15930" title="Harry Lintsen" label="Harry Lintsen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15981" end="16021" title="Foundation for the History of Technology" label="Foundation for the History of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q48977" start="16024" end="16037" title="Archer Martin" label="Archer Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44585" start="16073" end="16100" title="Nobel Prize in Chemistry" label="Nobel laureate in chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182596" start="16130" end="16141" title="Bert Meijer" label="Bert Meijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="16143" end="16160" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q53338065" start="16192" end="16209" title="Jaime Gómez Rivas" label="Jaime Gómez Rivas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546887" start="16224" end="16236" title="Sjoerd Romme" label="Sjoerd Romme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2765285" start="16287" end="16298" title="Johan Schot" label="Johan Schot"/>
<link wikidata="Q47702893" start="16345" end="16362" title="Bettina Speckmann" label="Bettina Speckmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q82594" start="16364" end="16382" title="computer scientist" label="computer scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q325090" start="16385" end="16399" title="Piet Steenkamp" label="Piet Steenkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="16427" end="16430" title="Christen-Democratisch Appèl" label="CDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921026" start="16433" end="16446" title="Martinus Tels" label="Martinus Tels"/>
<link wikidata="Q83588" start="16448" end="16465" title="chemical engineering" label="chemical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q212071" start="16467" end="16484" title="rector magnificus" label="rector magnificus"/>
<link wikidata="Q92973" start="16545" end="16558" title="Wietse Venema" label="Wietse Venema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="16560" end="16570" title="programmer" label="programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="16575" end="16584" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144896" start="16659" end="16672" title="René de Borst" label="René de Borst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131142" start="16674" end="16687" title="Spinozapremie" label="Spinozapremie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2182596" start="16707" end="16718" title="Bert Meijer" label="Bert Meijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066202" start="16720" end="16724" title="KNCV" label="KNCV"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16744" end="16769" title="Arthur K. Doolittle Award" label="Arthur K. Doolittle Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131142" start="16778" end="16791" title="Spinozapremie" label="Spinozapremie"/>
<link wikidata="Q20091025" start="16838" end="16850" title="René Janssen" label="René Janssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131142" start="16884" end="16897" title="Spinoza Prize" label="Spinozapremie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052495" start="16920" end="16933" title="Jaap Schouten" label="Jaap Schouten"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16935" end="16959" title="Simon Stevin Master" label="Simon Stevin Master 2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317427" start="16976" end="16988" title="Jan van Hest" label="Jan van Hest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131142" start="16990" end="17003" title="Spinoza Prize" label="Spinozapremie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9707" wikidata="Q78974" url="?curid=9707" title="Electronegativity">
<text>Electronegativity, symbolized as &quot;χ&quot;, is the tendency for an atom of a given chemical element to attract shared electrons (or electron density) when forming a chemical bond. An atom&#x27;s electronegativity is affected by both its atomic number and the distance at which its valence electrons reside from the charged nucleus. The higher the associated electronegativity, the more an atom or a substituent group attracts electrons. Electronegativity serves as a simple way to quantitatively estimate the bond energy, and the sign and magnitude of a bond&#x27;s chemical polarity, which characterizes a bond along the continuous scale from covalent to ionic bonding. The loosely defined term electropositivity is the opposite of electronegativity: it characterizes an element&#x27;s tendency to donate valence electrons.

On the most basic level, electronegativity is determined by factors like the nuclear charge (the more protons an atom has, the more &quot;pull&quot; it will have on electrons) and the number and location of other electrons in the atomic shells (the more electrons an atom has, the farther from the nucleus the valence electrons will be, and as a result, the less positive charge they will experience—both because of their increased distance from the nucleus and because the other electrons in the lower energy core orbitals will act to shield the valence electrons from the positively charged nucleus).

The term &quot;electronegativity&quot; was introduced by Jöns Jacob Berzelius in 1811,
though the concept was known before that and was studied by many chemists including Avogadro.
In spite of its long history, an accurate scale of electronegativity was not developed until 1932, when Linus Pauling proposed an electronegativity scale which depends on bond energies, as a development of valence bond theory. It has been shown to correlate with a number of other chemical properties. Electronegativity cannot be directly measured and must be calculated from other atomic or molecular properties. Several methods of calculation have been proposed, and although there may be small differences in the numerical values of the electronegativity, all methods show the same periodic trends between elements.

The most commonly used method of calculation is that originally proposed by Linus Pauling. This gives a dimensionless quantity, commonly referred to as the Pauling scale (&quot;χ&quot;r), on a relative scale running from 0.79 to 3.98 (hydrogen = 2.20). When other methods of calculation are used, it is conventional (although not obligatory) to quote the results on a scale that covers the same range of numerical values: this is known as an electronegativity in &quot;Pauling units&quot;.

As it is usually calculated, electronegativity is not a property of an atom alone, but rather a property of an atom in a molecule. Even so, the electronegativity of an atom is strongly correlated with the first ionization energy. The electronegativity is slightly negatively correlated (for smaller electronegativity values) and rather strongly positively correlated (for most and larger electronegativity values) with the electron affinity. It is to be expected that the electronegativity of an element will vary with its chemical environment, but it is usually considered to be a transferable property, that is to say that similar values will be valid in a variety of situations.

Caesium is the least electronegative element (0.79); fluorine is the most (3.98).

==Methods of calculation==

===Pauling electronegativity===
Pauling first proposed the concept of electronegativity in 1932 to explain why the covalent bond between two different atoms (A–B) is stronger than the average of the A–A and the B–B bonds. According to valence bond theory, of which Pauling was a notable proponent, this &quot;additional stabilization&quot; of the heteronuclear bond is due to the contribution of ionic canonical forms to the bonding.

The difference in electronegativity between atoms A and B is given by:
formula_1
where the dissociation energies, &quot;E&quot;d, of the A–B, A–A and B–B bonds are expressed in electronvolts, the factor (eV)− being included to ensure a dimensionless result. Hence, the difference in Pauling electronegativity between hydrogen and bromine is 0.73 (dissociation energies: H–Br, 3.79 eV; H–H, 4.52 eV; Br–Br 2.00 eV)

As only differences in electronegativity are defined, it is necessary to choose an arbitrary reference point in order to construct a scale. Hydrogen was chosen as the reference, as it forms covalent bonds with a large variety of elements: its electronegativity was fixed first at 2.1, later revised to 2.20. It is also necessary to decide which of the two elements is the more electronegative (equivalent to choosing one of the two possible signs for the square root). This is usually done using &quot;chemical intuition&quot;: in the above example, hydrogen bromide dissolves in water to form H+ and Br− ions, so it may be assumed that bromine is more electronegative than hydrogen. However, in principle, since the same electronegativities should be obtained for any two bonding compounds, the data are in fact overdetermined, and the signs are unique once a reference point has been fixed (usually, for H or F).

To calculate Pauling electronegativity for an element, it is necessary to have data on the dissociation energies of at least two types of covalent bonds formed by that element. A. L. Allred updated Pauling&#x27;s original values in 1961 to take account of the greater availability of thermodynamic data, and it is these &quot;revised Pauling&quot; values of the electronegativity that are most often used.

The essential point of Pauling electronegativity is that there is an underlying, quite accurate, semi-empirical formula for dissociation energies, namely:
formula_2
or sometimes, a more accurate fit
formula_3

These are approximate equations but they hold with good accuracy. Pauling obtained the first equation by noting that a bond can be approximately represented as a quantum mechanical superposition of a covalent bond and two ionic bond-states. The covalent energy of a bond is approximate, by quantum mechanical calculations, the geometric mean of the two energies of covalent bonds of the same molecules, and there is additional energy that comes from ionic factors, i.e. polar character of the bond.

The geometric mean is approximately equal to the arithmetic mean—which is applied in the first formula above—when the energies are of a similar value, e.g., except for the highly electropositive elements, where there is a larger difference of two dissociation energies; the geometric mean is more accurate and almost always gives positive excess energy, due to ionic bonding. The square root of this excess energy, Pauling notes, is approximately additive, and hence one can introduce the electronegativity. Thus, it is these semi-empirical formulas for bond energy that underlie the concept of Pauling electronegativity.

The formulas are approximate, but this rough approximation is in fact relatively good and gives the right intuition, with the notion of the polarity of the bond and some theoretical grounding in quantum mechanics. The electronegativities are then determined to best fit the data.

In more complex compounds, there is an additional error since electronegativity depends on the molecular environment of an atom. Also, the energy estimate can be only used for single, not for multiple bonds. The enthalpy of formation of a molecule containing only single bonds can subsequently be estimated based on an electronegativity table, and it depends on the constituents and the sum of squares of differences of electronegativities of all pairs of bonded atoms. Such a formula for estimating energy typically has a relative error on the order of 10% but can be used to get a rough qualitative idea and understanding of a molecule.

===Mulliken electronegativity===

Robert S. Mulliken proposed that the arithmetic mean of the first ionization energy (Ei) and the electron affinity (Eea) should be a measure of the tendency of an atom to attract electrons:
formula_4

As this definition is not dependent on an arbitrary relative scale, it has also been termed absolute electronegativity, with the units of kilojoules per mole or electronvolts. However, it is more usual to use a linear transformation to transform these absolute values into values that resemble the more familiar Pauling values. For ionization energies and electron affinities in electronvolts,
formula_5
and for energies in kilojoules per mole,
formula_6

The Mulliken electronegativity can only be calculated for an element whose electron affinity is known. Measured values are available for 72 elements, while approximate values have been estimated or calculated for the remaining elements.

The Mulliken electronegativity of an atom is sometimes said to be the negative of the chemical potential. By inserting the energetic definitions of the ionization potential and electron affinity into the Mulliken electronegativity, it is possible to show that the Mulliken chemical potential is a finite difference approximation of the electronic energy with respect to the number of electrons., i.e.,
formula_7

===Allred–Rochow electronegativity===

A. Louis Allred and Eugene G. Rochow considered that electronegativity should be related to the charge experienced by an electron on the &quot;surface&quot; of an atom: The higher the charge per unit area of atomic surface the greater the tendency of that atom to attract electrons. The effective nuclear charge, &quot;Z&quot;eff, experienced by valence electrons can be estimated using Slater&#x27;s rules, while the surface area of an atom in a molecule can be taken to be proportional to the square of the covalent radius, &quot;r&quot;cov. When &quot;r&quot;cov is expressed in picometres,
formula_8

===Sanderson electronegativity equalization===

R.T. Sanderson has also noted the relationship between Mulliken electronegativity and atomic size, and has proposed a method of calculation based on the reciprocal of the atomic volume. With a knowledge of bond lengths, Sanderson&#x27;s model allows the estimation of bond energies in a wide range of compounds. Sanderson&#x27;s model has also been used to calculate molecular geometry, &quot;s&quot;-electron energy, NMR spin-spin coupling constants and other parameters for organic compounds. This work underlies the concept of electronegativity equalization, which suggests that electrons distribute themselves around a molecule to minimize or to equalize the Mulliken electronegativity. This behavior is analogous to the equalization of chemical potential in macroscopic thermodynamics.

===Allen electronegativity===

Perhaps the simplest definition of electronegativity is that of Leland C. Allen, who has proposed that it is related to the average energy of the valence electrons in a free atom,

formula_9

where &quot;ε&quot;s,p are the one-electron energies of s- and p-electrons in the free atom and &quot;n&quot;s,p are the number of s- and p-electrons in the valence shell.

The one-electron energies can be determined directly from spectroscopic data, and so electronegativities calculated by this method are sometimes referred to as spectroscopic electronegativities. The necessary data are available for almost all elements, and this method allows the estimation of electronegativities for elements that cannot be treated by the other methods, e.g. francium, which has an Allen electronegativity of 0.67. However, it is not clear what should be considered to be valence electrons for the d- and f-block elements, which leads to an ambiguity for their electronegativities calculated by the Allen method.

On this scale, neon has the highest electronegativity of all elements, followed by fluorine, helium, and oxygen.

==Correlation of electronegativity with other properties==

The wide variety of methods of calculation of electronegativities, which all give results that correlate well with one another, is one indication of the number of chemical properties that might be affected by electronegativity. The most obvious application of electronegativities is in the discussion of bond polarity, for which the concept was introduced by Pauling. In general, the greater the difference in electronegativity between two atoms the more polar the bond that will be formed between them, with the atom having the higher electronegativity being at the negative end of the dipole. Pauling proposed an equation to relate the &quot;ionic character&quot; of a bond to the difference in electronegativity of the two atoms, although this has fallen somewhat into disuse.

Several correlations have been shown between infrared stretching frequencies of certain bonds and the electronegativities of the atoms involved: however, this is not surprising as such stretching frequencies depend in part on bond strength, which enters into the calculation of Pauling electronegativities. More convincing are the correlations between electronegativity and chemical shifts in NMR spectroscopy or isomer shifts in Mössbauer spectroscopy (see figure). Both these measurements depend on the s-electron density at the nucleus, and so are a good indication that the different measures of electronegativity really are describing &quot;the ability of an atom in a molecule to attract electrons to itself&quot;.

==Trends in electronegativity==

===Periodic trends===

In general, electronegativity increases on passing from left to right along a period and decreases on descending a group. Hence, fluorine is the most electronegative of the elements (not counting noble gases), whereas caesium is the least electronegative, at least of those elements for which substantial data is available.

There are some exceptions to this general rule. Gallium and germanium have higher electronegativities than aluminium and silicon, respectively, because of the d-block contraction. Elements of the fourth period immediately after the first row of the transition metals have unusually small atomic radii because the 3d-electrons are not effective at shielding the increased nuclear charge, and smaller atomic size correlates with higher electronegativity (see Allred-Rochow electronegativity and Sanderson electronegativity above). The anomalously high electronegativity of lead, in particular when compared to thallium and bismuth, is an artifact of electronegativity varying with oxidation state: its electronegativity conforms better to trends if it is quoted for the +2 state with a Pauling value of 1.87 instead of the +4 state.

===Variation of electronegativity with oxidation number===
In inorganic chemistry, it is common to consider a single value of electronegativity to be valid for most &quot;normal&quot; situations. While this approach has the advantage of simplicity, it is clear that the electronegativity of an element is &quot;not&quot; an invariable atomic property and, in particular, increases with the oxidation state of the element.

Allred used the Pauling method to calculate separate electronegativities for different oxidation states of the handful of elements (including tin and lead) for which sufficient data were available. However, for most elements, there are not enough different covalent compounds for which bond dissociation energies are known to make this approach feasible.

The chemical effects of this increase in electronegativity can be seen both in the structures of oxides and halides and in the acidity of oxides and oxoacids. Hence CrO3 and Mn2O7 are acidic oxides with low melting points, while Cr2O3 is amphoteric and Mn2O3 is a completely basic oxide.

The effect can also be clearly seen in the dissociation constants p&quot;K&quot;a of the oxoacids of chlorine. The effect is much larger than could be explained by the negative charge being shared among a larger number of oxygen atoms, which would lead to a difference in p&quot;K&quot;a of log10() = –0.6 between hypochlorous acid and perchloric acid. As the oxidation state of the central chlorine atom increases, more electron density is drawn from the oxygen atoms onto the chlorine, diminishing the partial negative charge of individual oxygen atoms. At the same time, the positive partial charge on the hydrogen increases with a higher oxidation state. This explains the observed increased acidity with an increasing oxidation state in the oxoacids of chlorine.

=== Electronegativity and hybridization scheme ===
The electronegativity of an atom changes depending on the hybridization of the orbital employed in bonding. Electrons in s orbitals are held more tightly than electrons in p orbitals. Hence, a bond to an atom that employs an sp&quot;x&quot; hybrid orbital for bonding will be more heavily polarized to that atom when the hybrid orbital has more s character. That is, when electronegativities are compared for different hybridization schemes of a given element, the order holds (the trend should apply to non-integer hybridization indices as well). 
==Group electronegativity==
In organic chemistry, electronegativity is associated more with different functional groups than with individual atoms. The terms group electronegativity and substituent electronegativity are used synonymously. However, it is common to distinguish between the inductive effect and the resonance effect, which might be described as σ- and π-electronegativities, respectively. There are a number of linear free-energy relationships that have been used to quantify these effects, of which the Hammett equation is the best known. Kabachnik Parameters are group electronegativities for use in organophosphorus chemistry.

==Electropositivity==
Electropositivity is a measure of an element&#x27;s ability to donate electrons, and therefore form positive ions; thus, it is antipode to electronegativity.

Mainly, this is an attribute of metals, meaning that, in general, the greater the metallic character of an element the greater the electropositivity. Therefore, the alkali metals are the most electropositive of all. This is because they have a single electron in their outer shell and, as this is relatively far from the nucleus of the atom, it is easily lost; in other words, these metals have low ionization energies.

While electronegativity increases along periods in the periodic table, and decreases down groups, electropositivity &quot;decreases&quot; along periods (from left to right) and &quot;increases&quot; down groups. This means that elements in the upper right of the periodic table of elements (oxygen, sulfur, chlorine, etc.) will have the greatest electronegativity, and those in the lower-left (rubidium, caesium, and francium) the greatest electropositivity.

==See also==
* Chemical polarity
* Electron affinity
* Electronegativities of the elements (data page)
* Ionization energy
* Metallic bonding
* Miedema&#x27;s model
* Orbital hybridization
* Oxidation state
* Periodic table

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 

==External links==
* WebElements, lists values of electronegativities by a number of different methods of calculation
* Video explaining electronegativity
* Electronegativity Chart, a summary listing of the electronegativity of each element along with an interactive periodic table</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="0" end="17" title="Electronegativity" label="Electronegativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q14425" start="39" end="40" title="Chi (letter)" label="χ"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="71" end="75" title="atom" label="atom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="87" end="103" title="chemical element" label="chemical element"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="122" end="130" title="electron" label="electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q905186" start="136" end="152" title="electron density" label="electron density"/>
<link wikidata="Q44424" start="169" end="182" title="chemical bond" label="chemical bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q23809" start="241" end="254" title="atomic number" label="atomic number"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="285" end="302" title="valence electrons" label="valence electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914535" start="513" end="524" title="bond energy" label="bond energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="570" end="587" title="chemical polarity" label="chemical polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="648" end="656" title="Covalent bonding" label="covalent"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="660" end="673" title="ionic bonding" label="ionic bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="700" end="717" title="Electronegativity" label="electropositivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q909960" start="907" end="921" title="effective nuclear charge" label="nuclear charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294" start="932" end="939" title="protons" label="protons"/>
<link wikidata="Q193793" start="1060" end="1073" title="Electron shell" label="atomic shells"/>
<link wikidata="Q37147" start="1128" end="1135" title="Atomic nucleus" label="nucleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q53860" start="1345" end="1353" title="atomic orbital" label="orbitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699481" start="1366" end="1372" title="Shielding effect" label="shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q151911" start="1491" end="1511" title="Jöns Jacob Berzelius" label="Jöns Jacob Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43476" start="1605" end="1613" title="Amadeo Avogadro" label="Avogadro"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="1719" end="1732" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q517973" start="1821" end="1840" title="valence bond theory" label="valence bond theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622089" start="2200" end="2215" title="periodic trends" label="periodic trends"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="2224" end="2232" title="Chemical element" label="elements"/>
<link wikidata="Q126818" start="2339" end="2361" title="dimensionless quantity" label="dimensionless quantity"/>
<link wikidata="Q78974" start="2391" end="2404" title="Electronegativity" label="Pauling scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="2470" end="2478" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="2847" end="2855" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="2931" end="2954" title="Ionization energy" label="first ionization energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271580" start="3149" end="3166" title="electron affinity" label="electron affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834031" start="3308" end="3329" title="Transferability (chemistry)" label="transferable property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="3409" end="3416" title="Caesium" label="Caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="3462" end="3470" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="3552" end="3559" title="Linus Pauling" label="Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q127920" start="3635" end="3648" title="covalent bond" label="covalent bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q517973" start="3755" end="3774" title="valence bond theory" label="valence bond theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5747409" start="3867" end="3880" title="heteronuclear" label="heteronuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q62500" start="3916" end="3921" title="Ionic bond" label="ionic"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="3922" end="3936" title="Resonance (chemistry)" label="canonical form"/>
<link wikidata="Q863696" start="4046" end="4067" title="Bond dissociation energy" label="dissociation energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="4132" end="4144" title="electronvolt" label="electronvolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q879" start="4285" end="4292" title="bromine" label="bromine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447" start="4920" end="4936" title="hydrogen bromide" label="hydrogen bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q185049" start="6230" end="6244" title="geometric mean" label="geometric mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="6452" end="6467" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q233355" start="7981" end="7999" title="Robert S. Mulliken" label="Robert S. Mulliken"/>
<link wikidata="Q19033" start="8018" end="8033" title="arithmetic mean" label="arithmetic mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="8047" end="8064" title="ionization energy" label="ionization energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271580" start="8078" end="8095" title="electron affinity" label="electron affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q13035094" start="8320" end="8339" title="Joule per mole" label="kilojoules per mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="8343" end="8355" title="electronvolt" label="electronvolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358151" start="8741" end="8770" title="Electron affinity (data page)" label="Measured values are available"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358151" start="8823" end="8846" title="Electron affinity (data page)" label="estimated or calculated"/>
<link wikidata="Q737004" start="8962" end="8980" title="chemical potential" label="chemical potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q64358422" start="9328" end="9343" title="Albert L. Allred" label="A. Louis Allred"/>
<link wikidata="Q907045" start="9348" end="9364" title="Eugene G. Rochow" label="Eugene G. Rochow"/>
<link wikidata="Q909960" start="9615" end="9639" title="effective nuclear charge" label="effective nuclear charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="9674" end="9690" title="valence electron" label="valence electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q528456" start="9715" end="9734" title="Slater&amp;#x27;s rules" label="Slater&amp;#x27;s rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q485360" start="9837" end="9852" title="covalent radius" label="covalent radius"/>
<link wikidata="Q192274" start="9910" end="9919" title="picometre" label="picometre"/>
<link wikidata="Q18738851" start="9981" end="9995" title="Robert Thomas Sanderson" label="R.T. Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q209402" start="10399" end="10402" title="NMR" label="NMR"/>
<link wikidata="Q107414" start="10950" end="10966" title="valence electron" label="valence electron"/>
<link wikidata="Q483666" start="11227" end="11245" title="Spectroscopy" label="spectroscopic data"/>
<link wikidata="Q671" start="11546" end="11554" title="francium" label="francium"/>
<link wikidata="Q654" start="11816" end="11820" title="neon" label="neon"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="11884" end="11892" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q560" start="11894" end="11900" title="helium" label="helium"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="11906" end="11912" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="12279" end="12292" title="bond polarity" label="bond polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q70906" start="12801" end="12832" title="Infrared spectroscopy" label="infrared stretching frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10359898" start="13149" end="13165" title="NMR spectroscopy" label="NMR spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q899927" start="13186" end="13208" title="Mössbauer spectroscopy" label="Mössbauer spectroscopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q650" start="13663" end="13671" title="fluorine" label="fluorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19609" start="13730" end="13739" title="noble gas" label="noble gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108" start="13752" end="13759" title="caesium" label="caesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q861" start="13907" end="13914" title="Gallium" label="Gallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q867" start="13919" end="13928" title="germanium" label="germanium"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="13966" end="13975" title="aluminium" label="aluminium"/>
<link wikidata="Q670" start="13980" end="13987" title="silicon" label="silicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203310" start="14018" end="14037" title="d-block contraction" label="d-block contraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q239825" start="14055" end="14068" title="Period 4 element" label="fourth period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14316" end="14347" title="#Allred–Rochow electronegativity" label="Allred-Rochow electronegativity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14352" end="14379" title="#Sanderson electronegativity equalization" label="Sanderson electronegativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q708" start="14430" end="14434" title="lead" label="lead"/>
<link wikidata="Q932" start="14467" end="14475" title="thallium" label="thallium"/>
<link wikidata="Q942" start="14480" end="14487" title="bismuth" label="bismuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="15081" end="15096" title="oxidation state" label="oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q931335" start="15635" end="15639" title="Chromium trioxide" label="CrO3"/>
<link wikidata="Q27506" start="15644" end="15649" title="Dimanganese heptoxide" label="Mn2O7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366137" start="15654" end="15666" title="acidic oxide" label="acidic oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q15318" start="15677" end="15690" title="melting point" label="melting point"/>
<link wikidata="Q407905" start="15699" end="15704" title="Chromium(III) oxide" label="Cr2O3"/>
<link wikidata="Q182677" start="15708" end="15718" title="amphoteric oxide" label="amphoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q419605" start="15723" end="15728" title="Manganese(III) oxide" label="Mn2O3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364871" start="15745" end="15756" title="basic oxide" label="basic oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q325519" start="15802" end="15824" title="Acid dissociation constant" label="dissociation constants"/>
<link wikidata="Q497173" start="15848" end="15855" title="oxoacid" label="oxoacid"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="15860" end="15868" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q407318" start="16073" end="16090" title="hypochlorous acid" label="hypochlorous acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q193956" start="16095" end="16110" title="perchloric acid" label="perchloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088433" start="17083" end="17116" title="Isovalent hybridization" label="non-integer hybridization indices"/>
<link wikidata="Q898645" start="17416" end="17432" title="inductive effect" label="inductive effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q911365" start="17441" end="17457" title="resonance effect" label="resonance effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119007" start="17553" end="17584" title="linear free-energy relationship" label="linear free-energy relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q901637" start="17646" end="17662" title="Hammett equation" label="Hammett equation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17682" end="17701" title="Kabachnik Parameter" label="Kabachnik Parameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131760213" start="17744" end="17770" title="organophosphorus chemistry" label="organophosphorus chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225" start="17865" end="17874" title="electrons" label="electrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="17895" end="17903" title="cations" label="positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q36496" start="17904" end="17908" title="ions" label="ions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="17986" end="17992" title="metals" label="metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q11344" start="18061" end="18068" title="chemical element" label="element"/>
<link wikidata="Q19557" start="18119" end="18132" title="alkali metals" label="alkali metals"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="18353" end="18372" title="ionization energy" label="ionization energies"/>
<link wikidata="Q101843" start="18415" end="18422" title="Period (periodic table)" label="periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="18430" end="18444" title="periodic table" label="periodic table"/>
<link wikidata="Q83306" start="18465" end="18471" title="Periodic table group" label="groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q506623" start="18850" end="18867" title="Chemical polarity" label="Chemical polarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q271580" start="18870" end="18887" title="Electron affinity" label="Electron affinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919318" start="18890" end="18937" title="Electronegativities of the elements (data page)" label="Electronegativities of the elements (data page)"/>
<link wikidata="Q483769" start="18940" end="18957" title="Ionization energy" label="Ionization energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q191390" start="18960" end="18976" title="Metallic bonding" label="Metallic bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592917" start="18979" end="18999" title="Miedema&amp;#x27;s model" label="Miedema&amp;#x27;s model"/>
<link wikidata="Q274511" start="19002" end="19023" title="Orbital hybridization" label="Orbital hybridization"/>
<link wikidata="Q484152" start="19026" end="19041" title="Oxidation state" label="Oxidation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q10693" start="19044" end="19058" title="Periodic table" label="Periodic table"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9708" wikidata="Q106308" url="?curid=9708" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages">
<text>The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (ECRML) is a European treaty (CETS 148) adopted in 1992 under the auspices of the Council of Europe to protect and promote historical regional and minority languages in Europe. However, the charter does not provide any criterion or definition for an idiom to be a minority or a regional language, and the classification stays in the hands of the national state.

The preparation for the charter was undertaken by the predecessor to the current Congress of Local and Regional Authorities, the Standing Conference of Local and Regional Authorities of Europe because involvement of local and regional government was essential. The actual charter was written in the Parliamentary Assembly based on the Congress&#x27; Recommendations. It only applies to languages traditionally used by the nationals of the State Parties (thus excluding languages used by recent immigrants from other states, see immigrant languages), which significantly differ from the majority or official language (thus excluding what the state party wishes to consider as mere local dialects of the official or majority language) and that either have a territorial basis (and are therefore traditionally spoken by populations of regions or areas within the State) or are used by linguistic minorities within the State as a whole (thereby including such languages as Yiddish, Romani and Lemko, which are used over a wide geographic area).

Some states, such as Ukraine and Sweden, have tied the status of minority language to the recognized national minorities, which are defined by ethnic, cultural and/or religious criteria, thereby circumventing the Charter&#x27;s notion of linguistic minority.

Languages that are official within regions, provinces or federal units within a State (for example Catalan in Spain) are not classified as official languages of the State and may therefore benefit from the Charter. On the other hand, Ireland has been unable to sign the Charter on behalf of the Irish language (although a minority language) as it is defined as the first official language of the state. The United Kingdom has ratified the Charter in respect to (among other languages) Welsh in Wales, Scots and Gaelic in Scotland, and Irish in Northern Ireland. France, although a signatory, has been constitutionally blocked from ratifying the Charter in respect to the languages of France.

The charter provides many actions state parties can take to protect and promote historical regional and minority languages. There are two levels of protection—all signatories must apply the lower level of protection to qualifying languages. Signatories may further declare that a qualifying language or languages will benefit from the higher level of protection, which lists a range of actions from which states must agree to undertake at least 35.

The Charter does not provide procedures for reactive judicial processing in case of lack of compliance but rather an elaborate proactive regular monitoring process in which the Committee of Experts drafts formal feedback and recommendations in regard to the situation in countries parties to the charter.

==Protections==
Countries can ratify the charter in respect of its minority languages based on Part II or Part III of the charter, which contain varying principles. Countries can treat languages differently under the charter, for example, in the United Kingdom, the Welsh language is ratified under the general Part II principles as well as the more specific Part III commitments, while the Cornish language is ratified only under Part II.

===Part II===
Part II of the Charter details eight main principles and objectives upon which States must base their policies and legislation. They are seen as a framework for the preservation of the languages concerned.
*Recognition of regional or minority languages as an expression of cultural wealth.
*Respect for the geographical area of each regional or minority language.
*The need for resolute action to promote such languages.
*The facilitation and/or encouragement of the use of such languages, in speech and writing, in public and private life.
*The provision of appropriate forms and means for the teaching and study of such languages at all appropriate stages.
*The promotion of relevant transnational exchanges.
*The prohibition of all forms of unjustified distinction, exclusion, restriction or preference relating to the use of a regional or minority language and intended to discourage or endanger its maintenance or development.
*The promotion by states of mutual understanding between all the country&#x27;s linguistic groups.

===Part III===
Part III details comprehensive rules, across a number of sectors, by which states agree to abide. Each language to which Part III of the Charter is applied must be named specifically by the government. States must select at least thirty-five of the undertakings in respect to each language. Many provisions contain several options, of varying degrees of stringency, one of which has to be chosen &quot;according to the situation of each language&quot;. The areas from which these specific undertakings must be chosen are as follows:
*Education
*Judicial authorities
*Administrative authorities and public services
*Media
*Cultural activities and facilities
*Economic and social life
*Transfrontier exchanges

==Languages protected under the Charter==


==See also==

* Euromosaic
* European languages
* Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities
* Languages of the European Union
* Linguistic rights
* List of Linguistic Rights in Constitutions (Europe)
* Universal Declaration of Linguistic Rights

==Notes and references==
==External links==

*European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages text
*More information on the treaty
*Charter website
*Eurolang (News agency about minority languages in Europe)
*Explanatory Report on the Charter
*lexpress.fr 
*Application of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages, Doc. 12881</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="4" end="55" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q106308" start="57" end="62" title="European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" label="ECRML"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="69" end="75" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="78" end="84" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8908" start="138" end="155" title="Council of Europe" label="Council of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q770220" start="190" end="198" title="regional language" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q61566" start="203" end="220" title="minority language" label="minority language"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="225" end="231" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251615" start="500" end="542" title="Congress of Local and Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe" label="Congress of Local and Regional Authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q939743" start="718" end="740" title="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe" label="Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q315" start="805" end="813" title="language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="913" end="922" title="immigrant" label="immigrant"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="947" end="965" title="immigrant language" label="immigrant language"/>
<link wikidata="Q23492" start="1017" end="1034" title="official language" label="official language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="1388" end="1395" title="Yiddish language" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13201" start="1397" end="1403" title="Romani language" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q837881" start="1408" end="1413" title="Lemko language" label="Lemko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="1820" end="1827" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1831" end="1836" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="1955" end="1962" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="2016" end="2030" title="Irish language" label="Irish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2128" end="2142" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="2206" end="2211" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2215" end="2220" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="2222" end="2227" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="2232" end="2238" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071608" start="2256" end="2261" title="Irish language in Northern Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="2265" end="2281" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2283" end="2289" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q496250" start="2392" end="2411" title="languages of France" label="languages of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3416" end="3430" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="3436" end="3450" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="3561" end="3577" title="Cornish language" label="Cornish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q25379294" start="5441" end="5451" title="Euromosaic" label="Euromosaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48366" start="5454" end="5472" title="European languages" label="European languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q506020" start="5475" end="5537" title="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities" label="Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q11150" start="5540" end="5571" title="Languages of the European Union" label="Languages of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667964" start="5574" end="5591" title="Linguistic rights" label="Linguistic rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625468" start="5594" end="5645" title="List of Linguistic Rights in Constitutions (Europe)" label="List of Linguistic Rights in Constitutions (Europe)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042763" start="5648" end="5690" title="Universal Declaration of Linguistic Rights" label="Universal Declaration of Linguistic Rights"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9709" wikidata="Q80330" url="?curid=9709" title="English Civil War">
<text>The English Civil War was a series of civil wars and political machinations between Royalists and Parliamentarians in the Kingdom of England from 1642 to 1651. Part of the wider 1639 to 1653 Wars of the Three Kingdoms, the struggle consisted of the First English Civil War and the Second English Civil War. The Anglo-Scottish War of 1650 to 1652 is sometimes referred to as the &quot;Third English Civil War.&quot;

While the conflicts in the three kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland had similarities, each had their own specific issues and objectives. The First English Civil War was fought primarily over the correct balance of power between Parliament and Charles I. It ended in June 1646 with Royalist defeat and the king in custody.

However, victory exposed Parliamentarian divisions over the nature of the political settlement. The vast majority went to war in 1642 to assert Parliament&#x27;s right to participate in government, not abolish the monarchy, which meant Charles&#x27; refusal to make concessions led to a stalemate. Concern over the political influence of radicals within the New Model Army like Oliver Cromwell led to an alliance between moderate Parliamentarians and Royalists, supported by the Covenanter Scots. Royalist defeat in the 1648 Second English Civil War resulted in the execution of Charles I in January 1649, and establishment of the Commonwealth of England.

In 1650, Charles II was crowned King of Scotland, in return for agreeing to create a Presbyterian church in both England and Scotland. The subsequent Anglo-Scottish war ended with Parliamentarian victory at Worcester on 3 September 1651. Both Ireland and Scotland were incorporated into the Commonwealth, and Britain became a unitary state until the Stuart Restoration in 1660.

==Terminology==
The term &quot;English Civil War&quot; appears most often in the singular, but historians often divide the conflict into two or three separate wars. These were not restricted to England alone, as Wales (having been annexed into the Kingdom of England) was affected by the same political instabilities. The conflicts also involved wars with Scotland and Ireland and civil wars within them. Some historians have favoured the term &quot;The British Civil Wars&quot;. From the Restoration to the 19th century, the common phrase for the civil wars was &quot;the rebellion&quot; or &quot;the great rebellion&quot;.

The wars spanning all four countries are known as the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. In the early 19th century, Sir Walter Scott referred to it as &quot;The Great Civil War&quot;. The 1911 &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; called the series of conflicts the &quot;Great Rebellion&quot;. Some historians, notably Marxists such as Christopher Hill (1912–2003), favoured the term &quot;English Revolution&quot;.

==Geography==
Each side had a geographical stronghold, such that minority elements were silenced or fled. The Royalist areas included the countryside, the shires, the cathedral city of Oxford, and the less economically developed areas of northern and western England and Wales. Parliament&#x27;s strengths spanned the industrial centres, ports, and economically advanced regions of southern and eastern England, including the remaining cathedral cities (except York, Chester, Worcester). Lacey Baldwin Smith says, &quot;the words &quot;populous, rich, and rebellious&quot; seemed to go hand in hand&quot;.

==Strategy and tactics==
Many officers and veteran soldiers had fought in European wars, notably the Eighty Years&#x27; War between the Spanish and the Dutch, which began in 1568, as well as earlier phases of the Thirty Years&#x27; War which began in 1618 and concluded in 1648.

The war was of unprecedented scale for the English. During the campaign seasons, 120,000 to 150,000 soldiers would be in the field, a higher proportion of the population than were fighting in Germany in the Thirty Years&#x27; War.

The main battle tactic came to be known as pike and shot infantry. The two sides would line up opposite one another, with infantry brigades of musketeers in the centre. These carried matchlock muskets, an inaccurate weapon which nevertheless could be lethal at a range of up to 300 yards. Musketeers would assemble three rows deep, the first kneeling, second crouching, and third standing. At times, troops divided into two groups, allowing one to reload while the other fired. Among the musketeers were pike men, carrying pikes of to long, whose main purpose was to protect the musketeers from cavalry charges. Positioned on each side of the infantry were cavalry, with a right wing led by the lieutenant-general and left by the commissary general. Its main aim was to rout the opponents&#x27; cavalry, then turn and overpower their infantry.

The Royalist cavaliers&#x27; skill and speed on horseback led to many early victories. Prince Rupert, commanding the king&#x27;s cavalry, used a tactic learned while fighting in the Dutch army, where cavalry would charge at full speed into the opponent&#x27;s infantry, firing their pistols just before impact.

However, with Oliver Cromwell and the introduction of the more disciplined New Model Army, a group of disciplined pike men would stand its ground, which could have a devastating effect. The Royalist cavalry had a tendency to chase down individual targets after the initial charge, leaving their forces scattered and tired, whereas Cromwell&#x27;s cavalry was slower but better disciplined. Trained to operate as a single unit, it went on to win many decisive victories.

==Background==
===The King&#x27;s rule===
The English Civil War broke out in 1642, less than 40 years after the death of Queen Elizabeth I. Elizabeth had been succeeded by her first cousin twice-removed, King James VI of Scotland, as James I of England, creating the first personal union of the Scottish and English kingdoms. As King of Scots, James had become accustomed to Scotland&#x27;s weak parliamentary tradition since assuming control of the Scottish government in 1583, so that upon assuming power south of the border, the new King of England was affronted by the constraints the English Parliament attempted to place on him in exchange for money. Consequently, James&#x27;s personal extravagance, which resulted in him being perennially short of money, meant that he had to resort to extra-parliamentary sources of income. Moreover, increasing inflation during this period meant that even though Parliament was granting the King the same nominal value of subsidy, the income was actually worth less.

This extravagance was tempered by James&#x27;s peaceful disposition, so that by the succession of his son Charles I in 1625 the two kingdoms had both experienced relative peace, internally and in their relations with each other. Charles followed his father&#x27;s dream in hoping to unite the kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland into a single kingdom. Many English Parliamentarians were suspicious of such a move, fearing that such a new kingdom might destroy old English traditions that had bound the English monarchy. Because James had described kings as &quot;little gods on Earth&quot;, chosen by God to rule in accordance with the doctrine of the Divine Right of Kings, and Charles shared his father&#x27;s position, the suspicions of the Parliamentarians had some justification.

===Parliament in an English constitutional framework===
At the time, the Parliament of England did not have a large permanent role in the English system of government. Instead, it functioned as a temporary advisory committee and was summoned only if and when the monarch saw fit. Once summoned, a Parliament&#x27;s continued existence was at the King&#x27;s pleasure since it was subject to dissolution by him at any time.

Yet in spite of this limited role, Parliament had acquired over the centuries &quot;de facto&quot; powers of enough significance that monarchs could not simply ignore them indefinitely. For a monarch, Parliament&#x27;s most indispensable power was its ability to raise tax revenues far in excess of all other sources of revenue at the Crown&#x27;s disposal. By the 17th century, Parliament&#x27;s tax-raising powers had come to be derived from the fact that the gentry was the only stratum of society with the ability and authority to collect and remit the most meaningful forms of taxation then available at the local level. So, if the king wanted to ensure smooth revenue collection, he needed the gentry&#x27;s cooperation. For all of the Crown&#x27;s legal authority, its resources were limited by any modern standard to the extent that if the gentry refused to collect the king&#x27;s taxes on a national scale, the Crown lacked a practical means of compelling them.

From the thirteenth century, monarchs ordered the election of representatives to sit in the House of Commons, with most voters being the owners of property, although in some potwalloper boroughs every male householder could vote. When assembled along with the House of Lords, these elected representatives formed a Parliament. So the concept of Parliaments allowed representatives of the property-owning class to meet, primarily, at least from the point of view of the monarch, to sanction whatever taxes the monarch wished to collect. In the process, the representatives could debate and enact statutes, or acts. However, Parliament lacked the power to force its will upon the monarch; its only leverage was the threat of withholding the financial means required to implement his plans.

===Parliamentary concerns and the Petition of Right===

Many concerns were raised over Charles&#x27;s marriage in 1625 to a Roman Catholic French princess, Henrietta Maria. Parliament refused to assign him the traditional right to collect customs duties for his entire reign, deciding instead to grant it only on a provisional basis and negotiate with him.

Charles, meanwhile, decided to send an expeditionary force to relieve the French Huguenots, whom French royal troops held besieged in La Rochelle. Such military support for Protestants on the Continent potentially alleviated concerns about the King&#x27;s marriage to a Catholic. However, Charles&#x27;s insistence on giving command of the English force to his unpopular royal favourite George Villiers, the Duke of Buckingham, undermined that support. Unfortunately for Charles and Buckingham, the relief expedition proved a fiasco (1627), and Parliament, already hostile to Buckingham for his monopoly on royal patronage, opened impeachment proceedings against him. Charles responded by dissolving Parliament. This saved Buckingham but confirmed the impression that Charles wanted to avoid Parliamentary scrutiny of his ministers.

Having dissolved Parliament and unable to raise money without it, the king assembled a new one in 1628. (The elected members included Oliver Cromwell, John Hampden, and Edward Coke.) The new Parliament drew up a Petition of Right, which Charles accepted as a concession to obtain his subsidy. The Petition made reference to Magna Carta, but did not grant him the right of tonnage and poundage, which Charles had been collecting without Parliamentary authorisation since 1625. Several more active members of the opposition were imprisoned, which caused outrage; one, John Eliot, subsequently died in prison and came to be seen as a martyr for the rights of Parliament.

===Personal rule===
Charles avoided calling a Parliament for the next decade, a period known as the &quot;personal rule of Charles I&quot;, or by its critics as the &quot;Eleven Years&#x27; Tyranny&quot;. During this period, Charles&#x27;s policies were determined by his lack of money. First and foremost, to avoid Parliament, the King needed to avoid war. Charles made peace with France and Spain, effectively ending England&#x27;s involvement in the Thirty Years&#x27; War. However, that in itself was far from enough to balance the Crown&#x27;s finances.

Unable to raise revenue without Parliament and unwilling to convene it, Charles resorted to other means. One was to revive conventions, often outdated. For example, a failure to attend and receive knighthood at Charles&#x27;s coronation became a finable offence with the fine paid to the Crown. The King also tried to raise revenue through ship money, demanding in 1634–1636 that the inland English counties pay a tax for the Royal Navy to counter the threat of privateers and pirates in the English Channel. Established law supported the policy of coastal counties and inland ports such as London paying ship money in times of need, but it had not been applied to inland counties before.

Authorities had ignored it for centuries, and many saw it as yet another extra-Parliamentary, illegal tax, which prompted some prominent men to refuse to pay it. Charles issued a writ against John Hampden for his failure to pay, and although five judges including Sir George Croke supported Hampden, seven judges found in favour of the King in 1638. The fines imposed on people who refused to pay ship money and standing out against its illegality aroused widespread indignation.

During his &quot;Personal Rule&quot;, Charles aroused most antagonism through his religious measures. He believed in High Anglicanism, a sacramental version of the Church of England, theologically based upon Arminianism, a creed shared with his main political adviser, Archbishop William Laud. In 1633, Charles appointed Laud Archbishop of Canterbury and started making the Church more ceremonial, replacing the wooden communion tables with stone altars. Puritans accused Laud of reintroducing Catholicism, and when they complained he had them arrested. In 1637, John Bastwick, Henry Burton, and William Prynne had their ears cut off for writing pamphlets attacking Laud&#x27;s views – a rare penalty for gentlemen, and one that aroused anger. Moreover, the Church authorities revived statutes from the time of Elizabeth I about church attendance and fined Puritans for not attending Anglican services.

===Rebellion in Scotland===
The end of Charles&#x27;s independent governance came when he attempted to apply the same religious policies in Scotland. The Church of Scotland, reluctantly episcopal in structure, had independent traditions. Charles wanted one uniform Church throughout Britain and introduced a new, High Anglican version of the English Book of Common Prayer to Scotland in the middle of 1637. This was violently resisted. A riot broke out in Edinburgh, which may have been started in St Giles&#x27; Cathedral, according to legend, by Jenny Geddes. In February 1638, the Scots formulated their objections to royal policy in the National Covenant. This document took the form of a &quot;loyal protest&quot;, rejecting all innovations not first tested by free Parliaments and General Assemblies of the Church.

In the spring of 1639, King Charles I accompanied his forces to the Scottish border to end the rebellion known as the Bishops&#x27; War, but after an inconclusive campaign, he accepted the offered Scottish truce: the Pacification of Berwick. This truce proved temporary, and a second war followed in mid-1640. A Scots army defeated Charles&#x27;s forces in the north, then captured Newcastle. Charles eventually agreed not to interfere in Scotland&#x27;s religion.

===Recall of the English Parliament===

Charles needed to suppress the rebellion in Scotland but had insufficient funds to do so. He needed to seek money from a newly elected English Parliament in 1640. Its majority faction, led by John Pym, used this appeal for money as a chance to discuss grievances against the Crown and oppose the idea of an English invasion of Scotland. Charles took exception to this &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; (offense against the ruler) and, after negotiations went nowhere, dissolved the Parliament after only a few weeks; hence its name, &quot;the Short Parliament&quot;.

Without Parliament&#x27;s support, Charles attacked Scotland again, breaking the truce at Berwick, and suffered comprehensive defeat. The Scots went on to invade England, occupying Northumberland and Durham. Meanwhile, another of Charles&#x27;s chief advisers, Thomas Wentworth, 1st Viscount Wentworth, had risen to the role of Lord Deputy of Ireland in 1632, and brought in much-needed revenue for Charles by persuading the Irish Catholic gentry to pay new taxes in return for promised religious concessions.

In 1639, Charles had recalled Wentworth to England and in 1640 made him Earl of Strafford, attempting to have him achieve similar results in Scotland. This time he proved less successful and the English forces fled the field at their second encounter with the Scots in 1640. Almost the whole of Northern England was occupied and Charles forced to pay £850 per day to keep the Scots from advancing. Had he not done so they would have pillaged and burnt the cities and towns of Northern England.

All this put Charles in a desperate financial state. As King of Scots, he had to find money to pay the Scottish army in England; as King of England, he had to find money to pay and equip an English army to defend England. His means of raising English revenue without an English Parliament fell critically short of achieving this. Against this backdrop, and according to advice from the Magnum Concilium (the House of Lords, but without the Commons, so not a Parliament), Charles finally bowed to pressure and summoned another English Parliament in November 1640.

===The Long Parliament===

The new Parliament proved even more hostile to Charles than its predecessor. It immediately began to discuss grievances against him and his government, with Pym and Hampden (of ship money fame) in the lead. They took the opportunity presented by the King&#x27;s troubles to force various reforming measures – including many with strong &quot;anti-Papist&quot; themes – upon him. The members passed a law stating that a new Parliament would convene at least once every three years – without the King&#x27;s summons if need be. Other laws passed making it illegal for the king to impose taxes without Parliamentary consent and later gave Parliament control over the King&#x27;s ministers.

Finally, the Parliament passed a law forbidding the King to dissolve it without its consent, even if the three years were up. These laws equated to a tremendous increase in Parliamentary power. Ever since, this Parliament has been known as the Long Parliament. However, Parliament did attempt to avert conflict by requiring all adults to sign The Protestation, an oath of allegiance to Charles.

Early in the Long Parliament, the house overwhelmingly accused Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, of high treason and other crimes and misdemeanors. Henry Vane the Younger supplied evidence of Strafford&#x27;s claimed improper use of the army in Ireland, alleging that he had encouraged the King to use his Ireland-raised forces to threaten England into compliance. This evidence was obtained from Vane&#x27;s father, Henry Vane the Elder, a member of the King&#x27;s Privy Council, who refused to confirm it in Parliament out of loyalty to Charles. On 10 April 1641, Pym&#x27;s case collapsed, but Pym made a direct appeal to the Younger Vane to produce a copy of the notes from the King&#x27;s Privy Council, discovered by the Younger Vane and secretly turned over to Pym, to the great anguish of the Elder Vane. These notes contained evidence that Strafford had told the King, &quot;Sir, you have done your duty, and your subjects have failed in theirs; and therefore you are absolved from the rules of government, and may supply yourself by extraordinary ways; you have an army in Ireland, with which you may reduce the kingdom.&quot;

Pym immediately launched a Bill of Attainder stating Strafford&#x27;s guilt and demanding that he be put to death. Unlike a guilty verdict in a court case, attainder did not require a legal burden of proof to be met, but it did require the king&#x27;s approval. Charles, however, guaranteed Strafford that he would not sign the attainder, without which the bill could not be passed. Furthermore, the Lords opposed the severity of a death sentence on Strafford. Yet increased tensions and a plot in the army to support Strafford began to sway the issue.

On 21 April, the Commons passed the Bill (204 in favour, 59 opposed, and 250 abstained), and the Lords acquiesced. Charles, still incensed over the Commons&#x27; handling of Buckingham, refused his assent. Strafford himself, hoping to head off the war he saw looming, wrote to the king and asked him to reconsider. Charles, fearing for the safety of his family, signed on 10 May. Strafford was beheaded two days later. In the meantime, both Parliament and the King agreed to an independent investigation into the king&#x27;s involvement in Strafford&#x27;s plot.

The Long Parliament then passed the Triennial Act 1640, also known as the Dissolution Act, in May 1641, to which royal assent was readily granted. The Triennial Act required Parliament to be summoned at least once in three years. When the king failed to issue a proper summons, the members could assemble on their own. This act also forbade ship money without Parliament&#x27;s consent, fines in distraint of knighthood, and forced loans. Monopolies were cut back sharply, the courts of the Star Chamber and High Commission abolished by the Habeas Corpus Act 1640, and the Triennial Act respectively.

All remaining forms of taxation were legalised and regulated by the Tonnage and Poundage Act 1640. On 3 May, Parliament decreed The Protestation, attacking the &#x27;wicked counsels&#x27; of Charles&#x27;s government, whereby those who signed the petition undertook to defend &#x27;the true reformed religion&#x27;, Parliament, and the king&#x27;s person, honour and estate. Throughout May, the House of Commons launched several bills attacking bishops and Episcopalianism in general, each time defeated in the Lords.

Charles and his Parliament hoped that the execution of Strafford and the Protestation would end the drift towards war, but in fact, they encouraged it. Charles and his supporters continued to resent Parliament&#x27;s demands, and Parliamentarians continued to suspect Charles of wanting to impose episcopalianism and unfettered royal rule by military force. Within months, the Irish Catholics, fearing a resurgence of Protestant power, struck first, and all Ireland soon descended into chaos. Rumours circulated that the King supported the Irish, and Puritan members of the Commons soon started murmuring that this exemplified the fate that Charles had in store for them all.

On 4 January 1642, Charles, followed by 400 soldiers, entered the House of Commons and attempted to arrest five members on a charge of treason. The members had learned that he was coming and escaped. Charles not only failed to arrest them but turned more people against him.

===Local grievances===
In the summer of 1642, these national troubles helped to polarise opinion, ending indecision about which side to support or what action to take. Opposition to Charles also arose from many local grievances. For example, imposed drainage schemes in The Fens disrupted the livelihood of thousands after the King awarded a number of drainage contracts. Many saw the King as indifferent to public welfare, and this played a role in bringing much of eastern England into the Parliamentarian camp. This sentiment brought with it such people as the Earl of Manchester and Oliver Cromwell, each a notable wartime adversary of the King. Conversely, one of the leading drainage contractors, the Earl of Lindsey, was to die fighting for the King at the Battle of Edgehill.

==First English Civil War (1642–1646)==
In early January 1642, a few days after failing to capture five members of the House of Commons, Charles feared for the safety of his family and retinue and left the London area for the north country.

Further frequent negotiations by letter between the King and the Long Parliament, through to early summer, proved fruitless. On 1 June 1642 the English Lords and Commons approved a list of proposals known as the Nineteen Propositions. In these demands, the Parliament sought a larger share of power in the governance of the kingdom. Before the end of the month the King rejected the Propositions.

As the summer progressed, cities and towns declared their sympathies for one faction or the other: for example, the garrison of Portsmouth commanded by Sir George Goring declared for the King, but when Charles tried to acquire arms from Kingston upon Hull, the weaponry depository used in the previous Scottish campaigns, Sir John Hotham, the military governor appointed by Parliament in January, refused to let Charles enter the town, and when Charles returned with more men later, Hotham drove them off. Charles issued a warrant for Hotham&#x27;s arrest as a traitor but was powerless to enforce it. Throughout the summer, tensions rose and there was brawling in several places, the first death from the conflict taking place in Manchester.
At the outset of the conflict, much of the country remained neutral, though the Royal Navy and most English cities favoured Parliament, while the King found marked support in rural communities. The war quickly spread and eventually involved every level of society. Many areas attempted to remain neutral. Some formed bands of Clubmen to protect their localities from the worst excesses of the armies of both sides, but most found it impossible to withstand both King and Parliament.

On one side, the King and his supporters fought for what they saw as traditional government in church and state. On the other, most Parliamentarians initially took up arms to defend what they viewed as a traditional balance of government in church and state, and which they felt had been undermined by bad advice the King received from his advisers — such as George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham — and during his Personal Rule (the &quot;Eleven Years&#x27; Tyranny&quot;). The views of the members of Parliament ranged from unquestioning support of the King – at one point during the First Civil War, more members of the Commons and Lords gathered in the King&#x27;s Oxford Parliament than at Westminster — through to radicals who sought major reforms in religious independence and redistribution of power at a national level.

After the debacle at Hull, Charles moved on to Nottingham, raising the royal standard there on 22 August 1642. At the time, Charles had with him about 2,000 cavalry and a small number of Yorkshire infantrymen, and using the archaic system of a Commission of Array, his supporters started to build a larger army around the standard. Charles moved in a westerly direction, first to Stafford, then on to Shrewsbury, as support for his cause seemed particularly strong in the Severn valley area and in North Wales. While passing through Wellington, he declared in what became known as the &quot;Wellington Declaration&quot; that he would uphold the &quot;Protestant religion, the laws of England, and the liberty of Parliament&quot;.

The Parliamentarians who opposed the King did not remain passive in this pre-war period. As in Hull, they took measures to secure strategic towns and cities by appointing to office men sympathetic to their cause. On 9 June they voted to raise an army of 10,000 volunteers and appointed Robert Devereux, 3rd Earl of Essex its commander three days later. He received orders &quot;to rescue His Majesty&#x27;s person, and the persons of the Prince [of Wales] and the Duke of York [James II] out of the hands of those desperate persons who were about them.&quot; The Lords Lieutenant whom Parliament appointed used the Militia Ordinance to order the militia to join Essex&#x27;s army.
Two weeks after the King had raised his standard at Nottingham, Essex led his army north towards Northampton, picking up support along the way (including a detachment of Huntingdonshire cavalry raised and commanded by Oliver Cromwell). By mid-September Essex&#x27;s forces had grown to 21,000 infantry and 4,200 cavalry and dragoons. On 14 September he moved his army to Coventry and then to the north of the Cotswolds, a strategy that placed it between the Royalists and London. With the size of both armies now in the tens of thousands and only Worcestershire between them, it was inevitable that cavalry reconnaissance units would meet sooner or later. This happened in the first major skirmish of the Civil War, when a troop of about 1,000 Royalist cavalry under Prince Rupert, a German nephew of the King and one of the outstanding cavalry commanders of the war, defeated a Parliamentary cavalry detachment under Colonel John Brown at the Battle of Powick Bridge, which crossed the River Teme close to Worcester.

Rupert withdrew to Shrewsbury, where a council-of-war discussed two courses of action: whether to advance towards Essex&#x27;s new position near Worcester, or march down the now open road towards London. The Council decided on the London route, but not to avoid a battle, for the Royalist generals wanted to fight Essex before he grew too strong, and the temper of both sides made it impossible to postpone the decision. In the Earl of Clarendon&#x27;s words, &quot;it was considered more counsellable to march towards London, it being morally sure that the earl of Essex would put himself in their way.&quot; Hence, the army left Shrewsbury on 12 October, gaining two days&#x27; start on the enemy, and moved south-east. This had the desired effect of forcing Essex to move to intercept them.

The first pitched battle of the war, at Edgehill on 23 October 1642, proved inconclusive, both Royalists and Parliamentarians claiming victory. The second field action, the stand-off at Turnham Green, saw Charles forced to withdraw to Oxford, which would serve as his base for the rest of the war.

In 1643, Royalist forces won at Adwalton Moor, gaining control of most of Yorkshire. In the Midlands, a Parliamentary force under Sir John Gell besieged and captured the cathedral city of Lichfield, after the death of the original commander, Lord Brooke. This group then joined forces with Sir William Brereton at the inconclusive Battle of Hopton Heath (19 March 1643), where the Royalist commander, the Earl of Northampton, was killed. John Hampden died after being wounded in the Battle of Chalgrove Field (18 June 1643). Subsequent battles in the west of England at Lansdowne and Roundway Down also went to the Royalists. Prince Rupert could then take Bristol. In the same year, however, Cromwell formed his troop of &quot;Ironsides&quot;, a disciplined unit that demonstrated his military leadership ability. With their assistance he won a victory at the Battle of Gainsborough in July.
At this stage, from 7 to 9 August 1643, there were some popular demonstrations in London – both for and against war. They were protesting at Westminster. A peace demonstration by London women, which turned violent, was suppressed; the women were beaten and fired upon with live ammunition, leaving several dead. Many were arrested and incarcerated in Bridewell and other prisons. After these August events, the Venetian ambassador in England reported to the doge that the London government took considerable measures to stifle dissent.

In general, the early part of the war went well for the Royalists. The turning point came in the late summer and early autumn of 1643, when the Earl of Essex&#x27;s army forced the king to raise the Siege of Gloucester and then brushed the Royalists aside at the First Battle of Newbury (20 September 1643), to return triumphantly to London. Parliamentarian forces led by the Earl of Manchester besieged the port of King&#x27;s Lynn, Norfolk, which under Sir Hamon L&#x27;Estrange held out until September. Other forces won the Battle of Winceby, giving them control of Lincoln. Political manoeuvring to gain an advantage in numbers led Charles to negotiate a ceasefire in Ireland, freeing up English troops to fight on the Royalist side in England, while Parliament offered concessions to the Scots in return for aid and assistance.

Helped by the Scots, Parliament won at Marston Moor (2 July 1644), gaining York and the north of England. Cromwell&#x27;s conduct in the battle proved decisive, and showed his potential as a political and as an important military leader. The defeat at the Battle of Lostwithiel in Cornwall, however, marked a serious reverse for Parliament in the south-west of England. Subsequent fighting around Newbury (27 October 1644), though tactically indecisive, strategically gave another check to Parliament.

In 1645, Parliament reaffirmed its determination to fight the war to a finish. It passed the Self-denying Ordinance, by which all members of either House of Parliament laid down their commands and re-organised its main forces into the New Model Army, under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, with Cromwell as his second-in-command and Lieutenant-General of Horse. In two decisive engagements – the Battle of Naseby on 14 June and the Battle of Langport on 10 July – the Parliamentarians effectively destroyed Charles&#x27;s armies.

In the remains of his English realm, Charles tried to recover a stable base of support by consolidating the Midlands. He began to form an axis between Oxford and Newark-on-Trent in Nottinghamshire. These towns had become fortresses and showed more reliable loyalty to him than others. He took Leicester, which lies between them, but found his resources exhausted. Having little opportunity to replenish them, in May 1646 he sought shelter with a Presbyterian Scottish army at Southwell in Nottinghamshire. Charles was eventually handed over to the English Parliament by the Scots and imprisoned. This marked the end of the First English Civil War.

==Interbellum==

The end of the First Civil War, in 1646, left a partial power vacuum in which any combination of the three English factions, Royalists, Independents of the New Model Army (&quot;the Army&quot;), and Presbyterians of the English Parliament, as well as the Scottish Parliament allied with the Scottish Presbyterians (the &quot;Kirk&quot;), could prove strong enough to dominate the rest. Armed political Royalism was at an end, but despite being a prisoner, Charles I was considered by himself and his opponents (almost to the last) as necessary to ensure the success of whichever group could come to terms with him. Thus, he passed successively into the hands of the Scots, the Parliament and the Army.

The King attempted to reverse the verdict of arms by &quot;coquetting&quot; with each in turn. On 3 June 1647, Cornet George Joyce of Sir Thomas Fairfax&#x27;s cavalry seized the King for the New Model Army; following the seizure, the English Presbyterians and the Scots began to prepare for a fresh civil war, less than two years after the conclusion of the first, this time against &quot;Independency&quot; as embodied in the Army. After making use of the Army, its opponents attempted to disband it, send it onward to foreign service, and to cut off its arrears of pay.

The result was that the Army leadership was exasperated beyond control, and, remembering not merely its grievances but also the principle for which the Army had fought, it soon became the most powerful political force in the realm. From 1646 to 1648 the breach between Army and Parliament widened day by day, until finally the Presbyterian party, combined with the Scots and the remaining Royalists, felt itself strong enough to begin a Second Civil War.

==Second English Civil War (1648–1649)==

Charles I took advantage of the deflection of attention away from himself to negotiate on 28 December 1647 a secret treaty with the Scots, again promising church reform. Under the agreement, called the &quot;Engagement&quot;, the Scots undertook to invade England on Charles&#x27;s behalf and restore him to the throne.

A series of Royalist uprisings throughout England and a Scottish invasion occurred in the summer of 1648. Forces loyal to Parliament put down most of those in England after little more than a skirmish, but uprisings in Kent, Essex and Cumberland, the rebellion in Wales, and the Scottish invasion involved pitched battles and prolonged sieges.

In the spring of 1649, unpaid Parliamentarian troops in Wales changed sides. Colonel Thomas Horton defeated the Royalist rebels at the Battle of St Fagans (8 May) and the rebel leaders surrendered to Cromwell on 11 July after a protracted two-month siege of Pembroke. Sir Thomas Fairfax defeated a Royalist uprising in Kent at the Battle of Maidstone on 1 June. Fairfax, after his success at Maidstone and the pacification of Kent, turned north to reduce Essex, where, under an ardent, experienced and popular leader, Sir Charles Lucas, the Royalists had taken up arms in great numbers. Fairfax soon drove the enemy into Colchester, but his first attack on the town met with a repulse and he had to settle down to a long siege.

In the North of England, Major-General John Lambert fought a successful campaign against several Royalist uprisings, the largest being that of Sir Marmaduke Langdale in Cumberland. Thanks to Lambert&#x27;s successes, the Scottish commander, the Duke of Hamilton, had to take a western route through Carlisle in his pro-Royalist Scottish invasion of England. The Parliamentarians under Cromwell engaged the Scots at the Battle of Preston (17–19 August). The battle took place largely at Walton-le-Dale near Preston, Lancashire, and resulted in a victory for Cromwell&#x27;s troops over the Royalists and Scots commanded by Hamilton. This victory marked the end of the Second English Civil War.

Nearly all the Royalists who had fought in the First Civil War had given their word not to bear arms against Parliament, and many, like Lord Astley, were therefore bound by oath not to take any part in the second conflict. So, the victors in the Second Civil War showed little mercy to those who had brought war into the land again. On the evening of the surrender of Colchester, Parliamentarians had Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George Lisle shot. Parliamentary authorities sentenced the leaders of the Welsh rebels, Major-General Rowland Laugharne, Colonel John Poyer and Colonel Rice Powel to death, but executed only Poyer (25 April 1649), having selected him by lot. Of five prominent Royalist peers who had fallen into Parliamentary hands, three – the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl of Holland, and Lord Capel, one of the Colchester prisoners and a man of high character – were beheaded at Westminster on 9 March.

==Trial of Charles I for treason==

Charles&#x27;s secret pacts and encouragement of supporters to break their parole caused Parliament to debate whether to return the King to power at all. Those who still supported Charles&#x27;s place on the throne, such as the army leader and moderate Fairfax, tried again to negotiate with him. The Army, furious that Parliament continued to countenance Charles as a ruler, then marched on Parliament and conducted &quot;Pride&#x27;s Purge&quot;, named after the commanding officer of the operation, Thomas Pride, in December 1648.

Troops arrested 45 members and kept 146 out of the chamber. They allowed only 75 members in, and then only at the Army&#x27;s bidding. This Rump Parliament received orders to set up, in the name of the people of England, a High Court of Justice for the trial of Charles I for treason. Fairfax, a constitutional monarchist, declined to have anything to do with the trial. He resigned as head of the army, so clearing Cromwell&#x27;s road to power.

At the end of the trial the 59 Commissioners (judges) found Charles I guilty of high treason as a &quot;tyrant, traitor, murderer and public enemy&quot;. His beheading took place on a scaffold in front of the Banqueting House of the Palace of Whitehall on 30 January 1649. After the Restoration in 1660, nine of the surviving regicides not living in exile were executed and most others sentenced to life imprisonment.

After the regicide, Charles, Prince of Wales as the eldest son was publicly proclaimed King Charles II in the Royal Square of St. Helier, Jersey, on 17 February 1649 (after a first such proclamation in Edinburgh on 5 February 1649). It took longer for the news to reach the trans-Atlantic colonies, with the Somers Isles (also known as Bermuda) becoming the first to proclaim Charles II King on 5 July 1649.

==Third English Civil War (1649–1651)==

===Ireland===

Ireland had undergone continual war since the rebellion of 1641, with most of the island controlled by the Irish Confederates. Increasingly threatened by the armies of the English Parliament after Charles I&#x27;s arrest in 1648, the Confederates signed a treaty of alliance with the English Royalists. The joint Royalist and Confederate forces under the Duke of Ormonde tried to eliminate the Parliamentary army holding Dublin by laying siege in 1649, but their opponents routed them at the Battle of Rathmines (2 August 1649). Admiral Robert Blake, a former Member of Parliament, had blockaded Prince Rupert&#x27;s fleet in Kinsale, enabling Oliver Cromwell to land at Dublin on 15 August 1649 with an army to quell the Royalist alliance.

Cromwell&#x27;s suppression of the Royalists in Ireland in 1649 is still remembered by many Irish people. After the Siege of Drogheda, the massacre of nearly 3,500 people – around 2,700 Royalist soldiers and 700 others, including civilians, prisoners, and Catholic priests (all of whom Cromwell claimed had carried arms) – became one of the historical memories that has driven Irish-English and Catholic-Protestant strife during the last three centuries. The Parliamentarian conquest of Ireland ground on for another four years until 1653, when the last Irish Confederate and Royalist troops surrendered. In the wake of the conquest, the victors confiscated almost all Irish Catholic-owned land and distributed it to Parliament&#x27;s creditors, to Parliamentary soldiers who served in Ireland, and to English who had settled there before the war.

===Scotland===

The execution of Charles I altered the dynamics of the Civil War in Scotland, which had raged between Royalists and Covenanters since 1644. By 1649, the struggle had left the Royalists there in disarray and their erstwhile leader, the Marquess of Montrose, had gone into exile. At first, Charles II encouraged Montrose to raise a Highland army to fight on the Royalist side. When the Scottish Covenanters, who did not agree with the execution of Charles I and who feared for the future of Presbyterianism under the new Commonwealth, offered him the crown of Scotland, Charles abandoned Montrose to his enemies.

Montrose, who had raised a mercenary force in Norway, had already landed and could not abandon the fight. He did not succeed in raising many Highland clans and the Covenanters defeated his army at the Battle of Carbisdale in Ross-shire on 27 April 1650. The victors captured Montrose shortly afterwards and took him to Edinburgh. On 20 May the Scottish Parliament sentenced him to death and had him hanged the next day.
Charles II landed in Scotland at Garmouth in Morayshire on 23 June 1650 and signed the 1638 National Covenant and the 1643 Solemn League and Covenant shortly after coming ashore. With his original Scottish Royalist followers and his new Covenanter allies, Charles II became the greatest threat facing the new English republic. In response to the threat, Cromwell left some of his lieutenants in Ireland to continue the suppression of the Irish Royalists and returned to England.

He arrived in Scotland on 22 July 1650 and proceeded to lay siege to Edinburgh. By the end of August, disease and a shortage of supplies had reduced his army, and he had to order a retreat towards his base at Dunbar. A Scottish army under the command of David Leslie tried to block the retreat, but Cromwell defeated them at the Battle of Dunbar on 3 September. Cromwell&#x27;s army then took Edinburgh, and by the end of the year his army had occupied much of southern Scotland.

In July 1651, Cromwell&#x27;s forces crossed the Firth of Forth into Fife and defeated the Scots at the Battle of Inverkeithing (20 July 1651). The New Model Army advanced towards Perth, which allowed Charles, at the head of the Scottish army, to move south into England. Cromwell followed Charles into England, leaving George Monck to finish the campaign in Scotland. Monck took Stirling on 14 August and Dundee on 1 September. The next year, 1652, saw a mopping up of the remnants of Royalist resistance, and under the terms of the &quot;Tender of Union&quot;, the Scots received 30 seats in a united Parliament in London, with General Monck as the military governor of Scotland.

===England===
Although Cromwell&#x27;s New Model Army had defeated a Scottish army at Dunbar, Cromwell could not prevent Charles II from marching from Scotland deep into England at the head of another Royalist army. They marched to the west of England where English Royalist sympathies were strongest, but although some English Royalists joined the army, they were far fewer in number than Charles and his Scottish supporters had hoped. Cromwell finally engaged and defeated the new Scottish king at Worcester on 3 September 1651.

===Wales===
For several reasons most of Wales was not as engaged in the English Civil Wars to the same degree as other parts of the British Isles. Wales was isolated from England, both physically and linguistically, so the Welsh were not as much engaged as England in the issues between the king and Parliament.  The English considered Wales a remote land, with Welsh, not English, as the primary language. Since England had formally assimilated Wales into the kingdom, starting in 1536 formal agreements had been put in place under Henry VIII and continued under Charles I that allowed for Welsh local administrative authority and economic control, which allowed the Welsh to function to some degree independently.  Another factor was the Puritan religion, which played a major role in the English Civil Wars but was not widely practised throughout Wales.  Welsh Puritan religious dominance was found in northeast Wales near Wrexham, Denbighshire, and an indirect Puritan influence found along the southwestern coast near Haverfordwest, Pembroke, and Tenby due to a combination of a strong influence by the third earl of Essex and their strong trade relations with Bristol, England, a fervent Puritan stronghold. In addition, Wales comparatively more rural in character than England at this time, and thereby lacking the large number of urban settlements home to mercantile, trade, and manufacturing interests who were a bulwark of support for both Puritanism and eventually the Parliamentarian cause.

Many of the key Welsh Civil Wars leaders were from the gentry class holding Royalist sympathies, or from the Church. Those Welsh who did participate in the Civil Wars battles were underequipped, underfed, and not properly trained for warfare.  The majority of Welsh followed the Protestant faith with a religious perspective that differed from the English puritan zeal. They were also leery of the Irish Catholics invading Wales.  The Welsh also did not want to lose what they had, for the gentry were aware of the destruction the Thirty Years&#x27; War caused in Europe.

Most of those English Civil War battles where Wales was impacted occurred near the border with England and in south Wales. Some of the more significant engagements were:

*  In Gloucester, England (not far from Wales) Lord Herbert of Raglan (Wales) had Welsh troops assisting the royalists trying to take Gloucester in March, August, and September 1643, but without success;
*    In November 1643 Sir Thomas Myddelton had secured the north Wales Royalist stronghold of Flintshire and the area east of Denbighshire, depriving Royalists based in Chester, England of their supplies.  In response to this attack Archbishop John Williams, on behalf of the Royalists, responded to this attack by taking Wrexham from the Parliamentarians;  
*      Initially in the summer of 1643, Royalist forces under Richard Vaughan of Golden Grove, 2nd Earl of Carbery, who had been appointed lieutenant-general by the King, was successful in securing three of the southwestern Welsh counties; but in early 1644 Parliamentarians conducted a successful sea and land assault campaign on Pembroke, Haverfordwest, Milford Pil; and continuing on to Swansea and Cardiff. As a result of these Royalist failures the King replaced Carbery with Colonel Charles Gerard, 1st Earl of Macclesfield who was able to regain many of these lost territories in Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire;
*    On 18 September 1644 the first pitched battle on Welsh soil at Montgomery was a successful win for Myddelton;
*   On 1 August 1645 the Royalist forces were once again defeated at Colby Moor;
*      During the Second Civil War the Royalists were decisively defeated at the battle of St. Fagans near Cardiff, which was one of the last more significant battles.

In addition to the Civil Wars&#x27; impact on the monarchy and the changes in national leadership, unexpected outcomes of the English Civil Wars to Wales included a significant degradation of the country&#x27;s road system, a deterioration of government administrative functions to the general population, destruction of castles with only the remnants of them remaining, and the desecration of churches.

===Immediate aftermath===
After the Royalist defeat at Worcester, Charles II escaped to France via safe houses and an oak tree. Parliament was left in &quot;de facto&quot; control of England. Resistance continued for a time in Ireland and Scotland, but with the pacification of England, resistance elsewhere did not threaten the military supremacy of the New Model Army and its Parliamentary paymasters.

==Political control==
During the Wars, the Parliamentarians established a number of successive committees to oversee the war effort. The first, the Committee of Safety set up in July 1642, comprised 15 members of Parliament. After the Anglo-Scottish alliance against the Royalists, the Committee of Both Kingdoms replaced the Committee of Safety between 1644 and 1648. Parliament dissolved the Committee of Both Kingdoms when the alliance ended, but its English members continued to meet as the Derby House Committee. A second Committee of Safety then replaced it.

===Episcopacy===
During the English Civil War, the role of bishops as wielders of political power and upholders of the established church became a matter of heated political controversy. John Calvin of Geneva had formulated a doctrine of Presbyterianism, which held that the offices of &quot;presbyter&quot; and &quot;episkopos&quot; in the New Testament were identical; he rejected the doctrine of apostolic succession. Calvin&#x27;s follower John Knox brought Presbyterianism to Scotland when the Scottish church was reformed in 1560. In practice, Presbyterianism meant that committees of lay elders had a substantial voice in church government, as opposed to merely being subjects to a ruling hierarchy.

This vision of at least partial democracy in ecclesiology paralleled the struggles between Parliament and the King. A body within the Puritan movement in the Church of England sought to abolish the office of bishop and remake the Church of England along Presbyterian lines. The Martin Marprelate tracts (1588–1589), applying the pejorative name of &quot;prelacy&quot; to the church hierarchy, attacked the office of bishop with satire that deeply offended Elizabeth I and her Archbishop of Canterbury John Whitgift. The vestments controversy also related to this movement, seeking further reductions in church ceremony, and labelling the use of elaborate vestments as &quot;unedifying&quot; and even idolatrous.

King James I, reacting against the perceived contumacy of his Presbyterian Scottish subjects, adopted &quot;No Bishop, no King&quot; as a slogan. He tied the hierarchical authority of the bishop to the absolute authority he sought as King and viewed attacks on the authority of the bishops as attacks on his authority. Matters came to a head when Charles I appointed William Laud as Archbishop of Canterbury. Laud aggressively attacked the Presbyterian movement and sought to impose the full Book of Common Prayer. The controversy eventually led to Laud&#x27;s impeachment for treason by a bill of attainder in 1645 and subsequent execution. Charles also attempted to impose episcopacy on Scotland. The Scots&#x27; violent rejection of bishops and liturgical worship sparked the Bishops&#x27; Wars in 1639–1640.

During the height of Puritan power under the Commonwealth and the Protectorate, episcopacy was formally abolished in the Church of England on 9 October 1646. The Church of England remained Presbyterian until the Restoration of the monarchy.

==English overseas possessions==
During the English Civil War, the English overseas possessions became highly involved. In the Channel Islands, the island of Jersey and Castle Cornet in Guernsey supported the King until a surrender with honour in December 1651.

Although the newer, Puritan settlements in North America, notably Massachusetts, were dominated by Parliamentarians, the older colonies sided with the Crown. Friction between Royalists and Puritans in Maryland came to a head in the Battle of the Severn. The Virginia Company&#x27;s settlements, Bermuda and Virginia, as well as Antigua and Barbados, were conspicuous in their loyalty to the Crown. Bermuda&#x27;s Independent Puritans were expelled, settling the Bahamas under William Sayle as the Eleutheran Adventurers. Parliament passed An Act for prohibiting Trade with the Barbadoes, Virginia, Bermuda and Antego in October 1650, which stated that:
The Act also authorised Parliamentary privateers to act against English vessels trading with the rebellious colonies:
Far to the North, Bermuda&#x27;s regiment of Militia and its coastal batteries prepared to resist an invasion that never came. Built-up inside the natural defence of a nearly impassable barrier reef, to fend off the might of Spain, these defences would have been a formidable obstacle for the Parliamentary fleet sent in 1651 under the command of Admiral Sir George Ayscue to subdue the trans-Atlantic colonies, but after the fall of Barbados, the Bermudians made a separate peace that respected the internal status quo. The Parliament of Bermuda avoided the Parliament of England&#x27;s fate during The Protectorate, becoming one of the oldest continuous legislatures in the world.

Virginia&#x27;s population swelled with Cavaliers during and after the English Civil War. Even so, Virginia Puritan Richard Bennett was made Governor answering to Cromwell in 1652, followed by two more nominal &quot;Commonwealth Governors&quot;. The loyalty of Virginia&#x27;s Cavaliers to the Crown was rewarded after the 1660 Restoration of the Monarchy when Charles II dubbed it the &quot;Old Dominion&quot;.

==Casualties==
Figures for casualties during this period are unreliable. Some attempt has been made to provide rough estimates.

In England, a conservative estimate is that roughly 100,000 people died from war-related disease during the three civil wars. Historical records count 84,830 combat dead from the wars themselves. Counting in accidents and the two Bishops&#x27; wars, an estimate of 190,000 dead is achieved, out of a total population of about five million. It is estimated that from 1638 to 1651, 15%–20% of all adult males in England and Wales served in the military. Around 4% of the total population died from war-related causes, compared to 2.23% in the First World War.

As was typical for the era, most combat deaths occurred in minor skirmishes rather than large, pitched battles. There were a total of 645 engagements throughout the wars: 588 of these involved fewer than 250 casualties in total, with these 588 accounting for 39,838 fatalities (average count of less than 68) or nearly half of the conflict&#x27;s combat deaths. There were only 9 major pitched battles (at least 1,000 fatalities) which in total accounted for 15% of casualties.

An anecdotal example of how high casualties in England may have been perceived is to be found in the posthumously published writing (generally titled &quot;The History of Myddle&quot;), by a Shropshire man, Richard Gough (lived 1635–1723) of Myddle near Shrewsbury, who, writing in about 1701, commented of men from his rural home parish who joined the Royalist forces: &quot;And out of these three townes [&quot;sic&quot; - ie townships], Myddle, Marton and Newton, there went noe less than twenty men, of which number thirteen were kill&#x27;d in the warrs&quot;. After listing those he recalled did not return home, four of whose exact fates were unknown, he concluded: &quot;And if soe many dyed out of these 3 townes [townships] wee may reasonably guess that many thousands dyed in England in that warre.&quot;

Figures for Scotland are less reliable and should be treated with caution. Casualties include the deaths of prisoners-of-war in conditions that accelerated their deaths, with estimates of 10,000 prisoners not surviving or not returning home (8,000 captured during and immediately after the Battle of Worcester were deported to New England, Bermuda and the West Indies to work for landowners as indentured labourers). There are no figures to calculate how many died from war-related diseases, but if the same ratio of disease to battle deaths from English figures is applied to the Scottish figures, a not unreasonable estimate of 60,000 people is achieved, from a population of about one million.

Figures for Ireland are described as &quot;miracles of conjecture&quot;. Certainly, the devastation inflicted on Ireland was massive, with the best estimate provided by Sir William Petty, the father of English demography. Petty estimated that 112,000 Protestants and 504,000 Catholics were killed through plague, war and famine, giving an estimated total of 616,000 dead, out of a pre-war population of about one and a half million. Although Petty&#x27;s figures are the best available, they are still acknowledged as tentative; they do not include an estimated 40,000 driven into exile, some of whom served as soldiers in European continental armies, while others were sold as indentured servants to New England and the West Indies. Many of those sold to landowners in New England eventually prospered, but many sold to landowners in the West Indies were worked to death.

These estimates indicate that England suffered a 4 per cent loss of population, Scotland a loss of 6 per cent, while Ireland suffered a loss of 41 per cent of its population. Putting these numbers into the context of other catastrophes helps to understand the devastation of Ireland in particular. The Great Famine of 1845–1852 resulted in a loss of 16 per cent of the population, while during the Soviet famine and Holodomor of 1932–33 the population of the Soviet Ukraine fell by 14 per cent.

==Popular gains==
Ordinary people took advantage of the dislocation of civil society in the 1640s to gain personal advantages. The contemporary guild democracy movement won its greatest successes among London&#x27;s transport workers. Rural communities seized timber and other resources on the sequestrated estates of Royalists and Catholics, and on the estates of the royal family and church hierarchy. Some communities improved their conditions of tenure on such estates.

The old &quot;status quo&quot; began a retrenchment after the end of the First Civil War in 1646, and more especially after the Restoration in 1660, but some gains were long-term. The democratic element introduced into the watermen&#x27;s company in 1642, for example, survived with vicissitudes until 1827.

==Aftermath==
The wars left England, Scotland, and Ireland among the few countries in Europe without a monarch. In the wake of victory, many of the ideals (and many idealists) became sidelined. The republican government of the Commonwealth of England ruled England (and later all of Scotland and Ireland) from 1649 to 1653 and from 1659 to 1660. Between the two periods, and due to in-fighting among various factions in Parliament, Oliver Cromwell ruled over the Protectorate as Lord Protector (effectively a military dictator) until his death in 1658.

On Oliver Cromwell&#x27;s death, his son Richard became Lord Protector, but the Army had little confidence in him. After seven months the Army removed Richard. In May 1659 it re-installed the Rump. Military force shortly afterward dissolved this as well. After the second dissolution of the Rump, in October 1659, the prospect of a total descent into anarchy loomed, as the Army&#x27;s pretense of unity dissolved into factions.
Into this atmosphere General George Monck, Governor of Scotland under the Cromwells, marched south with his army from Scotland. On 4 April 1660, in the Declaration of Breda, Charles II made known the conditions of his acceptance of the Crown of England. Monck organised the Convention Parliament, which met for the first time on 25 April 1660.

On 8 May 1660, it declared that Charles II had reigned as the lawful monarch since the execution of Charles I in January 1649. Charles returned from exile on 23 May 1660. On 29 May 1660, the populace in London acclaimed him as king. His coronation took place at Westminster Abbey on 23 April 1661. These events became known as the &quot;Restoration&quot;.

Although the monarchy was restored, it was still with the consent of Parliament. So the civil wars effectively set England and Scotland on course towards a parliamentary monarchy form of government. The outcome of this system was that the future Kingdom of Great Britain, formed in 1707 under the Acts of Union, managed to forestall the kind of revolution typical of European republican movements which generally resulted in total abolition of their monarchies. Thus, the United Kingdom was spared the wave of revolutions that occurred in Europe in the 1840s. Specifically, future monarchs became wary of pushing Parliament too hard, and Parliament effectively chose the line of royal succession in 1688 with the Glorious Revolution.

==Historical interpretations==
===Hobbes&#x27; &quot;Behemoth&quot;===
Thomas Hobbes gave an early historical account of the English Civil War in his &quot;Behemoth&quot;, written in 1668 and published in 1681. He assessed the causes of the war to be the conflicting political doctrines of the time. &quot;Behemoth&quot; offered a uniquely historical and philosophical approach to naming the catalysts for the war. It also attempted to explain why Charles I could not hold his throne and maintain peace in his kingdom.

Hobbes analysed the following aspects of English thought during the war: the opinions of divinity and politics that spurred rebellion; rhetoric and doctrine used by the rebels against the king; and how opinions about &quot;taxation, the conscription of soldiers, and military strategy&quot; affected the outcomes of battles and shifts of sovereignty.

Hobbes attributed the war to the novel theories of intellectuals and divines spread for their own pride of reputation. He held that clerical pretensions had contributed significantly to the troubles — &quot;whether those of puritan fundamentalists, papal supremacists or divine right Episcopalians&quot;. Hobbes wanted to abolish the independence of the clergy and bring it under the control of the civil state.

Some scholars suggest that Hobbes&#x27;s &quot;Behemoth&quot; has not received its due as an academic work, being comparatively overlooked and under-rated in the shadow of the same author&#x27;s &quot;Leviathan&quot;. Its scholarly reputation may have suffered because it takes the form of a dialogue, which, while common in philosophy, is rarely adopted by historians. Other factors that hindered its success include Charles II&#x27;s refusing its publication and Hobbes&#x27; lack of empathy with views different from his own.

===Whig and Marxist views===
In the early decades of the 20th century, the Whig school was the dominant theoretical view. It explained the Civil War as resulting from centuries of struggle between Parliament (notably the House of Commons) and the Monarchy, with Parliament defending the traditional rights of Englishmen, while the Stuart monarchy continually attempted to expand its right to dictate law arbitrarily. The major Whig historian, S. R. Gardiner, popularised the idea that the English Civil War was a &quot;Puritan Revolution&quot; that challenged the repressive Stuart Church and prepared the way for religious toleration. Thus, Puritanism was seen as the natural ally of a people preserving their traditional rights against arbitrary monarchical power.

The Whig view was challenged and largely superseded by the Marxist school, which became popular in the 1940s, and saw the English Civil War as a bourgeois revolution. According to Marxist historian Christopher Hill:

===Later views===
In the 1970s, revisionist historians challenged both the Whig and the Marxist theories, notably in the 1973 anthology &quot;The Origins of the English Civil War&quot; (Conrad Russell ed.). These historians focused on the minutiae of the years immediately before the civil war, returning to the contingency-based historiography of Clarendon&#x27;s &quot;History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England&quot;. This, it was claimed, demonstrated that patterns of war allegiance did not fit either Whig or Marxist theories. Parliament was not inherently progressive, nor the events of 1640 a precursor for the Glorious Revolution. Many members of the bourgeoisie fought for the King, while many landed aristocrats supported Parliament.

From the 1990s, a number of historians replaced the historical title &quot;English Civil War&quot; with &quot;Wars of the Three Kingdoms&quot; and &quot;British Civil Wars&quot;, positing that the civil war in England cannot be understood apart from events in other parts of Britain and Ireland. King Charles I remains crucial, not just as King of England, but through his relationship with the peoples of his other realms. For example, the wars began when Charles forced an Anglican Prayer Book upon Scotland, and when this was met with resistance from the Covenanters, he needed an army to impose his will. However, this need of military funds forced Charles I to call an English Parliament, which was not willing to grant the needed revenue unless he addressed their grievances.

By the early 1640s, Charles was left in a state of near-permanent crisis management, confounded by the demands of the various factions. For example, Charles finally made terms with the Covenanters in August 1641, but although this might have weakened the position of the English Parliament, the Irish Rebellion of 1641 broke out in October 1641, largely negating the political advantage he had obtained by relieving himself of the cost of the Scottish invasion.

A number of revisionist historians such as William M. Lamont regarded the conflict as a religious war, with John Morrill (1993) stating: &#x27;The English Civil War was not the first European revolution: it was the last of the Wars of Religion.&#x27; This view has been criticised by various pre-, post- and anti-revisionist historians. Glen Burgess (1998) examined political propaganda written by the Parliamentarian politicians and clerics at the time, noting that many were or may have been motivated by their Puritan religious beliefs to support the war against the &#x27;Catholic&#x27; king Charles I, but tried to express and legitimise their opposition and rebellion in terms of a legal revolt against a monarch who had violated crucial constitutional principles and thus had to be overthrown. They even warned their Parliamentarian allies to not make overt use of religious arguments in making their case for war against the king.

However, in some cases it may be argued that they hid their pro-Anglican and anti-Catholic motives behind legal parliance, for example by emphasising that the Church of England was the &quot;legally established&quot; religion: &#x27;Seen in this light, the defences of Parliament&#x27;s war, with their apparent legal-constitutional thrust, are not at all ways of saying that the struggle was not religious. On the contrary, they are ways of saying that it was.&#x27; Burgess concluded: &#x27;[T]he Civil War left behind it just the sort of evidence that we could reasonably expect a war of religion to leave.&#x27;

==Re-enactments==

Two large historical societies exist, The Sealed Knot and The English Civil War Society, which regularly re-enact events and battles of the Civil War in full period costume.

==See also==
*Chronology of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms
*Cromwell&#x27;s Soldiers&#x27; Pocket Bible, booklet Cromwell issued to his army in 1643.
*Diggers
*English Dissenters
*English Revolution
*First English Civil War, 1642
*First English Civil War, 1643
*First English Civil War, 1644
*First English Civil War, 1645
*First English Civil War, 1646
*Gunpowder Plot
*The Levellers, a movement for political reform.
*Thirty Years&#x27; War, a defining event in European history during the reign of Charles I
*Timeline of the English Civil War, showing events leading up to, culminating in, and resulting from the English Civil Wars.
*William Hiseland, the last Royalist veteran of the Civil War

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
* &quot;Journal of British Studies&quot;
*
*
*
*
Attribution:


==Further reading==
*
*
* – excerpts from primary and secondary sources.
*: Volume I, Part 1, Volume I, Part 2, Volume II, Part 1, Volume II, Part 2, Volume III, Part 1, Volume III, Part 2
**: Volume I, Volume II, Volume III
* – emphasis on historiography. 
*: Volume I (1642–1644); Volume II (1644–1647); Volume III (1645–1647); Volume IV (1647–1649), The basic narrative history used by all other scholars.
* – 20 essays by Morrill. 
* 
* – 14 scholars discuss the argument of John Morrill that the English Civil War was the last war of religion, rather than the first modern revolution. excerpt; historiography pp. 1–25.
*
**
* 
* 

==External links==

*Englishcivilwar.org News, comment and discussion about the English Civil War
*Official website of the English Civil War Society
*The Revolution Over the Revolution
* by Brandon W Duke
*This page has links to some transcriptions of contemporary documents concerning eastern England
*A national Civil War chronology
*Civil War chronology for Lincolnshire and its environs
*Connected Histories</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="4" end="21" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="38" end="47" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="84" end="93" title="Cavaliers" label="Royalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="98" end="114" title="Roundhead" label="Parliamentarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="122" end="140" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="191" end="217" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="249" end="272" title="First English Civil War" label="First English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025332" start="281" end="305" title="Second English Civil War" label="Second English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540197" start="311" end="329" title="Anglo-Scottish war (1650–1652)" label="Anglo-Scottish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q230791" start="470" end="478" title="Kingdom of Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215530" start="483" end="490" title="Kingdom of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="651" end="661" title="Parliament of England" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="666" end="675" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="1104" end="1118" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="1124" end="1139" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="1225" end="1241" title="Covenanters" label="Covenanter Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q65088700" start="1312" end="1334" title="execution of Charles I" label="execution of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="1377" end="1400" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="1412" end="1422" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="1488" end="1500" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116626" start="1610" end="1619" title="Battle of Worcester" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="1753" end="1771" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Stuart Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1976" end="1983" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="1994" end="1999" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q988326" start="2013" end="2020" title="Laws in Wales Acts 1535 and 1542" label="annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="2030" end="2048" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2138" end="2146" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="2151" end="2158" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="2462" end="2488" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="2521" end="2533" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q867541" start="2589" end="2629" title="Encyclopædia Britannica Eleventh Edition" label="1911 &amp;quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="2719" end="2727" title="Marxists" label="Marxists"/>
<link wikidata="Q719787" start="2736" end="2752" title="Christopher Hill (historian)" label="Christopher Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378358" start="2790" end="2808" title="English Revolution" label="English Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q164432" start="3525" end="3547" title="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Eighty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="3637" end="3659" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="3911" end="3933" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193626" start="3979" end="3992" title="pike and shot" label="pike and shot"/>
<link wikidata="Q721960" start="4079" end="4088" title="musketeer" label="musketeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q220016" start="4459" end="4464" title="Pike (weapon)" label="pikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="4631" end="4649" title="Lieutenant general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152616" start="4666" end="4684" title="commissary general" label="commissary general"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="4868" end="4881" title="Prince Rupert of the Rhine" label="Prince Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="5168" end="5182" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673164" start="5424" end="5447" title="Ironside (cavalry)" label="Cromwell&amp;#x27;s cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="5691" end="5702" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q774347" start="5740" end="5766" title="Cousin chart" label="first cousin twice-removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="5768" end="5793" title="James VI and I" label="King James VI of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2732400" start="5837" end="5888" title="Union of the Crowns" label="personal union of the Scottish and English kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130737" start="6153" end="6171" title="Parliament of England" label="English Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="7233" end="7254" title="Divine Right of Kings" label="Divine Right of Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="8253" end="8259" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="8856" end="8872" title="House of Commons of England" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235440" start="8938" end="8949" title="potwalloper" label="potwalloper"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="9024" end="9038" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q820655" start="9359" end="9366" title="statute" label="statute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="9372" end="9376" title="act of parliament" label="acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="9677" end="9691" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q848615" start="9709" end="9724" title="Henrietta Maria of France" label="Henrietta Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="9992" end="10001" title="Huguenots" label="Huguenots"/>
<link wikidata="Q815170" start="10033" end="10056" title="Siege of La Rochelle" label="besieged in La Rochelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q313817" start="10298" end="10337" title="George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham" label="George Villiers, the Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q265939" start="10518" end="10533" title="Patronage" label="royal patronage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149408" start="10542" end="10553" title="Impeachment in the United Kingdom" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="10879" end="10894" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q329843" start="10896" end="10908" title="John Hampden" label="John Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q332435" start="10914" end="10925" title="Edward Coke" label="Edward Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q584063" start="10957" end="10974" title="Petition of Right" label="Petition of Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q12519" start="11069" end="11080" title="Magna Carta" label="Magna Carta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583726" start="11117" end="11137" title="tonnage and poundage" label="tonnage and poundage"/>
<link wikidata="Q325666" start="11311" end="11321" title="John Eliot (statesman)" label="John Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302736" start="11520" end="11546" title="personal rule of Charles I" label="personal rule of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="11867" end="11889" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="12171" end="12181" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405064" start="12314" end="12324" title="ship money" label="ship money"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="12400" end="12410" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070069" start="13262" end="13278" title="High church" label="High Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="13309" end="13326" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793580" start="13353" end="13364" title="Arminianism in the Church of England" label="Arminianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q325408" start="13425" end="13437" title="William Laud" label="William Laud"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="13471" end="13495" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13564" end="13573" title="Mass (liturgy)#Communion rite" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="13600" end="13608" title="Puritans" label="Puritans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221052" start="13708" end="13721" title="John Bastwick" label="John Bastwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5718926" start="13723" end="13735" title="Henry Burton (Puritan)" label="Henry Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020129" start="13741" end="13755" title="William Prynne" label="William Prynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q749212" start="13850" end="13859" title="Gentleman" label="gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="14203" end="14221" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="14235" end="14244" title="Episcopal polity" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="14399" end="14420" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547466" start="14547" end="14571" title="St Giles&amp;#x27; Cathedral" label="St Giles&amp;#x27; Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179279" start="14597" end="14609" title="Jenny Geddes" label="Jenny Geddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315013" start="14690" end="14707" title="National Covenant" label="National Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q807843" start="14989" end="15006" title="Bishops&amp;#x27; War" label="Bishops&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836987" start="15088" end="15111" title="Pacification of Berwick" label="Pacification of Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425428" start="15253" end="15262" title="Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153299" start="15512" end="15530" title="Short Parliament" label="English Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q337437" start="15569" end="15577" title="John Pym" label="John Pym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="15751" end="15763" title="lese majesty" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153299" start="15911" end="15927" title="Short Parliament" label="Short Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="16117" end="16131" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23082" start="16136" end="16142" title="County Durham" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q336091" start="16197" end="16237" title="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford" label="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Viscount Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3843370" start="17328" end="17344" title="Magnum Concilium" label="Magnum Concilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="17350" end="17364" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="17382" end="17389" title="House of Commons of England" label="Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q329843" start="17698" end="17705" title="John Hampden" label="Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405064" start="17710" end="17720" title="ship money" label="ship money"/>
<link wikidata="Q212452" start="17880" end="17886" title="Popery" label="Papist"/>
<link wikidata="Q535158" start="18465" end="18480" title="Long Parliament" label="Long Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251682" start="18564" end="18580" title="Protestation of 1641" label="The Protestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q336091" start="18680" end="18715" title="Thomas Wentworth, 1st Earl of Strafford" label="Thomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424943" start="18768" end="18790" title="Henry Vane the Younger" label="Henry Vane the Younger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729478" start="19037" end="19057" title="Henry Vane the Elder" label="Henry Vane the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q862685" start="19786" end="19803" title="Bill of attainder" label="Bill of Attainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="19943" end="19964" title="legal burden of proof" label="legal burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238713" start="20247" end="20253" title="First Army Plot" label="a plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152610" start="20913" end="20931" title="Triennial Act 1640" label="Triennial Act 1640"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="20990" end="21002" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329062" start="21368" end="21380" title="Star Chamber" label="Star Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445297" start="21385" end="21400" title="Court of High Commission" label="High Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636666" start="21418" end="21440" title="Habeas Corpus Act 1640" label="Habeas Corpus Act 1640"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235654" start="21547" end="21576" title="Tonnage and Poundage Act 1640" label="Tonnage and Poundage Act 1640"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251682" start="21607" end="21623" title="Protestation of 1641" label="The Protestation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="22295" end="22310" title="Episcopal polity" label="episcopalianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="22434" end="22446" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="struck first"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149574" start="22782" end="22794" title="five members" label="five members"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404827" start="23221" end="23229" title="The Fens" label="The Fens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702018" start="23515" end="23533" title="Edward Montagu, 2nd Earl of Manchester" label="Earl of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="23538" end="23553" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342073" start="23658" end="23673" title="Robert Bertie, 1st Earl of Lindsey" label="Earl of Lindsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478525" start="23715" end="23733" title="Battle of Edgehill" label="Battle of Edgehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="24122" end="24135" title="House of Lords" label="English Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5914849" start="24140" end="24147" title="House of Commons of England" label="Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038537" start="24190" end="24211" title="Nineteen Propositions" label="Nineteen Propositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="24504" end="24514" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539827" start="24532" end="24545" title="George Goring, Lord Goring" label="George Goring"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="24613" end="24631" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Kingston upon Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540245" start="24698" end="24713" title="Sir John Hotham, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Hotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510090" start="24859" end="24880" title="Siege of Hull (1642)" label="Hotham drove them off"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="25107" end="25117" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="25199" end="25209" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4224012" start="25445" end="25452" title="Clubmen" label="Clubmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q313817" start="25962" end="25997" title="George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham" label="George Villiers, Duke of Buckingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2302736" start="26015" end="26028" title="Personal Rule" label="Personal Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365494" start="26269" end="26286" title="Oxford Parliament (1644)" label="Oxford Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q62408" start="26295" end="26306" title="Palace of Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="26357" end="26379" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="religious independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="26477" end="26487" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152676" start="26674" end="26693" title="Commission of Array" label="Commission of Array"/>
<link wikidata="Q826782" start="26810" end="26818" title="Stafford" label="Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q201970" start="26831" end="26841" title="Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="26902" end="26908" title="River Severn" label="Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898698" start="26963" end="26973" title="Wellington, Shropshire" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981379" start="27021" end="27043" title="Wellington Declaration" label="Wellington Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701696" start="27447" end="27481" title="Robert Devereux, 3rd Earl of Essex" label="Robert Devereux, 3rd Earl of Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q914752" start="27724" end="27740" title="Lord Lieutenant" label="Lords Lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6478175" start="27776" end="27793" title="Militia Ordinance" label="Militia Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q192240" start="27939" end="27950" title="Northampton" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23330" start="28012" end="28027" title="Huntingdonshire" label="Huntingdonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="28166" end="28173" title="dragoon" label="dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="28213" end="28221" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q301833" start="28251" end="28260" title="Cotswolds" label="Cotswolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q23135" start="28389" end="28403" title="Worcestershire" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q76930" start="28609" end="28622" title="Prince Rupert" label="Prince Rupert"/>
<link wikidata="Q586189" start="28786" end="28809" title="Battle of Powick Bridge" label="Battle of Powick Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q19684" start="28829" end="28839" title="River Teme" label="River Teme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646181" start="28849" end="28858" title="Worcester, England" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q335173" start="29289" end="29313" title="Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon" label="Earl of Clarendon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q743488" start="29666" end="29680" title="pitched battle" label="pitched battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478525" start="29696" end="29704" title="Battle of Edgehill" label="Edgehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872612" start="29842" end="29855" title="Turnham Green (Battle)" label="Turnham Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="29891" end="29897" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2475657" start="29987" end="30000" title="Battle of Adwalton Moor" label="Adwalton Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="30029" end="30038" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700185" start="30085" end="30098" title="Sir John Gell, 1st Baronet" label="Sir John Gell"/>
<link wikidata="Q207371" start="30143" end="30152" title="Lichfield" label="Lichfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344964" start="30197" end="30208" title="Robert Greville, 2nd Baron Brooke" label="Lord Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955282" start="30245" end="30265" title="Sir William Brereton, 1st Baronet" label="Sir William Brereton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164151" start="30286" end="30308" title="Battle of Hopton Heath" label="Battle of Hopton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q337036" start="30360" end="30379" title="Spencer Compton, 2nd Earl of Northampton" label="Earl of Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q329843" start="30393" end="30405" title="John Hampden" label="John Hampden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636383" start="30438" end="30463" title="Battle of Chalgrove Field" label="Battle of Chalgrove Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406921" start="30525" end="30534" title="Battle of Lansdowne" label="Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406897" start="30539" end="30552" title="Battle of Roundway Down" label="Roundway Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="30611" end="30618" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673164" start="30682" end="30691" title="Ironside (cavalry)" label="Ironsides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871072" start="30815" end="30837" title="Battle of Gainsborough" label="Battle of Gainsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q913573" start="31198" end="31207" title="Bridewell" label="Bridewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="31258" end="31266" title="Republic of Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q858316" start="31305" end="31309" title="Doge of Venice" label="doge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510051" start="31583" end="31602" title="Siege of Gloucester" label="Siege of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058454" start="31647" end="31670" title="First Battle of Newbury" label="First Battle of Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q157341" start="31800" end="31816" title="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn" label="King&amp;#x27;s Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645926" start="31843" end="31864" title="Hamon L&amp;#x27;Estrange" label="Hamon L&amp;#x27;Estrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q742260" start="31912" end="31929" title="Battle of Winceby" label="Battle of Winceby"/>
<link wikidata="Q180057" start="31954" end="31961" title="Lincoln, England" label="Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q326417" start="32258" end="32270" title="Battle of Marston Moor" label="Marston Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42462" start="32294" end="32298" title="York" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871603" start="32475" end="32496" title="Battle of Lostwithiel" label="Battle of Lostwithiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031282" start="32616" end="32623" title="Second Battle of Newbury" label="Newbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3478113" start="32815" end="32837" title="Self-denying Ordinance" label="Self-denying Ordinance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="32957" end="32971" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q550612" start="32998" end="33012" title="Thomas Fairfax" label="Thomas Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="33057" end="33075" title="Lieutenant general" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q949724" start="33120" end="33136" title="Battle of Naseby" label="Battle of Naseby"/>
<link wikidata="Q689433" start="33156" end="33174" title="Battle of Langport" label="Battle of Langport"/>
<link wikidata="Q49940" start="33417" end="33432" title="Newark-on-Trent" label="Newark-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q83065" start="33548" end="33557" title="Leicester" label="Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q42376606" start="33676" end="33693" title="Charles I&amp;#x27;s journey from Oxford to the Scottish army camp near Newark" label="he sought shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433341" start="33731" end="33740" title="Southwell, Nottinghamshire" label="Southwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142505" start="33936" end="33951" title="First English Civil War" label="First Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188651" start="34057" end="34069" title="Independents (religion)" label="Independents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="34077" end="34091" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="34120" end="34132" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380778" start="34246" end="34250" title="Kirk" label="Kirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284765" start="34323" end="34331" title="Cavalier" label="Royalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208704" start="34683" end="34693" title="Flirting" label="coquetting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541180" start="34742" end="34754" title="George Joyce" label="George Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341726" start="35904" end="35914" title="Engagers" label="Engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="36236" end="36240" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="36242" end="36247" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q23360" start="36252" end="36262" title="Cumberland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790829" start="36447" end="36460" title="Thomas Horton (soldier)" label="Thomas Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399475" start="36497" end="36516" title="Battle of St Fagans" label="Battle of St Fagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7510300" start="36611" end="36628" title="siege of Pembroke" label="siege of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871639" start="36693" end="36712" title="Battle of Maidstone" label="Battle of Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213180" start="36754" end="36763" title="Maidstone" label="Maidstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080361" start="36884" end="36897" title="Charles Lucas" label="Charles Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q184163" start="36983" end="36993" title="Colchester" label="Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924393" start="37076" end="37088" title="siege of Colchester" label="a long siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395992" start="37130" end="37142" title="John Lambert (General)" label="John Lambert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584070" start="37238" end="37256" title="Marmaduke Langdale, 1st Baron Langdale of Holme" label="Marmaduke Langdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q336106" start="37336" end="37352" title="James Hamilton, 3rd Marquess and 1st Duke of Hamilton" label="Duke of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192896" start="37390" end="37398" title="Carlisle, Cumbria" label="Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q510943" start="37510" end="37527" title="Battle of Preston (1648)" label="Battle of Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951889" start="37577" end="37591" title="Walton-le-Dale" label="Walton-le-Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q184090" start="37597" end="37616" title="Preston, Lancashire" label="Preston, Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118314" start="37921" end="37932" title="Jacob Astley, 1st Baron Astley of Reading" label="Lord Astley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080361" start="38190" end="38203" title="Charles Lucas" label="Charles Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541756" start="38208" end="38224" title="George Lisle (Royalist)" label="Sir George Lisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372156" start="38314" end="38331" title="Rowland Laugharne" label="Rowland Laugharne"/>
<link wikidata="Q13129349" start="38341" end="38351" title="John Poyer" label="John Poyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131912" start="38562" end="38577" title="Henry Rich, 1st Earl of Holland" label="Earl of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960974" start="38583" end="38593" title="Arthur Capell, 1st Baron Capell of Hadham" label="Lord Capel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787448" start="39158" end="39176" title="Pride&amp;#x27;s Purge" label="Pride&amp;#x27;s Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525493" start="39237" end="39249" title="Thomas Pride" label="Thomas Pride"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477668" start="39410" end="39425" title="Rump Parliament" label="Rump Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631941" start="39493" end="39541" title="High Court of Justice for the trial of Charles I" label="High Court of Justice for the trial of Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439921" start="39746" end="39762" title="List of regicides of Charles I" label="59 Commissioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="39798" end="39810" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="39876" end="39885" title="beheading" label="beheading"/>
<link wikidata="Q642039" start="39927" end="39943" title="Banqueting House" label="Banqueting House"/>
<link wikidata="Q391620" start="39951" end="39970" title="Palace of Whitehall" label="Palace of Whitehall"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="40001" end="40012" title="Stuart Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439921" start="40044" end="40053" title="List of regicides of Charles I" label="regicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="40157" end="40181" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="40263" end="40273" title="Saint Helier" label="St. Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="40275" end="40281" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="40473" end="40480" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="40648" end="40665" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="rebellion of 1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407718" start="40709" end="40727" title="Confederate Ireland" label="Irish Confederates"/>
<link wikidata="Q948569" start="40953" end="40972" title="James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormonde" label="the Duke of Ormonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="41023" end="41029" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48784997" start="41033" end="41053" title="Siege of Dublin (1649)" label="laying siege in 1649"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461766" start="41094" end="41113" title="Battle of Rathmines" label="Battle of Rathmines"/>
<link wikidata="Q320959" start="41131" end="41151" title="Admiral Robert Blake" label="Admiral Robert Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q840681" start="41228" end="41235" title="Kinsale" label="Kinsale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="41273" end="41279" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q815234" start="41460" end="41477" title="Siege of Drogheda" label="Siege of Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407718" start="41898" end="41915" title="Confederate Ireland" label="Irish Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="42226" end="42235" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508780" start="42260" end="42285" title="Scotland in the Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="the Civil War in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="42325" end="42335" title="Covenanter" label="Covenanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q979180" start="42444" end="42464" title="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose" label="Marquess of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="42497" end="42507" title="Charles II of England" label="Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="42698" end="42713" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="42728" end="42740" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178197" start="42848" end="42857" title="mercenary" label="mercenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087431" start="43022" end="43042" title="Battle of Carbisdale 1650" label="Battle of Carbisdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q978599" start="43046" end="43056" title="Ross-shire" label="Ross-shire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523570" start="43274" end="43282" title="Garmouth" label="Garmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247435" start="43286" end="43296" title="Morayshire" label="Morayshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4315013" start="43333" end="43350" title="National Covenant" label="National Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500894" start="43364" end="43390" title="Solemn League and Covenant" label="Solemn League and Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="43930" end="43936" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259456" start="43975" end="43987" title="David Leslie (Scottish general)" label="David Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605977" start="44050" end="44066" title="Battle of Dunbar (1650)" label="Battle of Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q202083" start="44251" end="44265" title="Firth of Forth" label="Firth of Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="44271" end="44275" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887993" start="44306" end="44329" title="Battle of Inverkeithing" label="Battle of Inverkeithing"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="44382" end="44387" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335106" start="44522" end="44534" title="George Monck" label="George Monck"/>
<link wikidata="Q182923" start="44582" end="44590" title="Stirling" label="Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="44608" end="44614" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699619" start="44742" end="44757" title="Tender of Union" label="Tender of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116626" start="45385" end="45394" title="Battle of Worcester" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="45457" end="45462" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="46343" end="46350" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q650682" start="46352" end="46364" title="Denbighshire" label="Denbighshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q990103" start="46440" end="46453" title="Haverfordwest" label="Haverfordwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q558878" start="46469" end="46474" title="Tenby" label="Tenby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529219" start="47891" end="47911" title="Sir Thomas Myddelton, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Thomas Myddelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329640" start="48290" end="48342" title="Richard Vaughan, 2nd Earl of Carbery" label="Richard Vaughan of Golden Grove, 2nd Earl of Carbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078011" start="48717" end="48757" title="Charles Gerard, 1st Earl of Macclesfield" label="Charles Gerard, 1st Earl of Macclesfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399475" start="49141" end="49147" title="Battle of St Fagans" label="Fagans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397065" start="49686" end="49704" title="Escape of Charles II" label="Charles II escaped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124292" start="49735" end="49746" title="Royal Oak (tree)" label="an oak tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378217" start="50173" end="50192" title="English Committee of Safety" label="Committee of Safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986805" start="50311" end="50337" title="Committee of Both Kingdoms" label="Committee of Both Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986805" start="50520" end="50541" title="Derby House Committee" label="Derby House Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="50710" end="50728" title="established church" label="established church"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="50778" end="50789" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="50829" end="50844" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="50990" end="51010" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q189937" start="51035" end="51044" title="John Knox" label="John Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q223693" start="51344" end="51356" title="ecclesiology" label="ecclesiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295536" start="51577" end="51594" title="Martin Marprelate" label="Martin Marprelate"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="51628" end="51638" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q725440" start="51653" end="51660" title="prelacy" label="prelacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="51755" end="51766" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="51775" end="51799" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q473302" start="51800" end="51813" title="John Whitgift" label="John Whitgift"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575712" start="51819" end="51840" title="vestments controversy" label="vestments controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7311363" start="51999" end="52009" title="idolatry and Christianity" label="idolatrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="52012" end="52024" title="James I of England" label="King James I"/>
<link wikidata="Q5166035" start="52057" end="52066" title="contumacy" label="contumacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q325408" start="52379" end="52391" title="William Laud" label="William Laud"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="52395" end="52419" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="52504" end="52525" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="52589" end="52596" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q862685" start="52602" end="52619" title="bill of attainder" label="bill of attainder"/>
<link wikidata="Q807843" start="52791" end="52809" title="Bishops&amp;#x27; Wars" label="Bishops&amp;#x27; Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="52866" end="52882" title="Commonwealth of England" label="the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="52887" end="52903" title="the Protectorate" label="the Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="53037" end="53048" title="English Restoration" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q155252" start="53236" end="53249" title="Castle Cornet" label="Castle Cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="53396" end="53409" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873012" start="53562" end="53582" title="Battle of the Severn" label="Battle of the Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061207" start="53588" end="53611" title="Virginia Company of London" label="Virginia Company&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="53625" end="53632" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="53637" end="53645" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q316390" start="53658" end="53665" title="Antigua" label="Antigua"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="53670" end="53678" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="53792" end="53799" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568934" start="53806" end="53819" title="William Sayle" label="William Sayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359490" start="53827" end="53849" title="Eleutheran Adventurers" label="Eleutheran Adventurers"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196970" start="53869" end="53946" title="An Act for prohibiting Trade with the Barbadoes, Virginia, Bermuda and Antego" label="An Act for prohibiting Trade with the Barbadoes, Virginia, Bermuda and Antego"/>
<link wikidata="Q201559" start="54021" end="54030" title="privateer" label="privateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q599171" start="54460" end="54473" title="George Ayscue" label="George Ayscue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138929" start="54626" end="54647" title="Parliament of Bermuda" label="Parliament of Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="54701" end="54717" title="The Protectorate" label="The Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324104" start="54901" end="54916" title="Richard Bennett (Governor)" label="Richard Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934171" start="55062" end="55071" title="Virginia Cavaliers (historical)" label="Cavaliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="55868" end="55883" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="56556" end="56566" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878168" start="56607" end="56613" title="Myddle" label="Myddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q201970" start="56619" end="56629" title="Shrewsbury" label="Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830212" start="56793" end="56802" title="Township (England)" label="townships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116626" start="57472" end="57491" title="Battle of Worcester" label="Battle of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="57509" end="57520" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="57522" end="57529" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="57538" end="57549" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122364" start="57576" end="57593" title="indentured labour" label="indentured labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q278699" start="58053" end="58066" title="William Petty" label="William Petty"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="58185" end="58191" title="Black Death" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="58201" end="58207" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188371" start="59056" end="59068" title="Great Famine (Ireland)" label="Great Famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q165058" start="59170" end="59179" title="Holodomor" label="Holodomor"/>
<link wikidata="Q330362" start="60261" end="60284" title="Commonwealth of England" label="Commonwealth of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="60466" end="60481" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987351" start="60493" end="60509" title="the Protectorate" label="the Protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q512196" start="60513" end="60527" title="Lord Protector" label="Lord Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q203980" start="60629" end="60636" title="Richard Cromwell" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q31895" start="60939" end="60946" title="anarchy" label="anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335106" start="61046" end="61058" title="George Monck, 1st Duke of Albemarle" label="George Monck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196069" start="61169" end="61189" title="Declaration of Breda" label="Declaration of Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q48767672" start="61291" end="61312" title="Convention Parliament (1660)" label="Convention Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="61624" end="61641" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q846848" start="61699" end="61710" title="Restoration (England)" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="61875" end="61897" title="parliamentary monarchy" label="parliamentary monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="61965" end="61989" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="62016" end="62029" title="Act of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="62432" end="62451" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="62525" end="62538" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q814466" start="62610" end="62618" title="Behemoth (Hobbes book)" label="Behemoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q193034" start="63940" end="63949" title="Leviathan (Hobbes book)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2660437" start="64344" end="64355" title="Whig history" label="Whig school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770846" start="64712" end="64726" title="Samuel Rawson Gardiner" label="S. R. Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="64883" end="64903" title="religious toleration" label="religious toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="65096" end="65103" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="65182" end="65191" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q719787" start="65235" end="65251" title="Christopher Hill (historian)" label="Christopher Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q874803" start="65286" end="65308" title="historical revisionism" label="revisionist historians"/>
<link wikidata="Q336220" start="65440" end="65454" title="Conrad Russell" label="Conrad Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q335173" start="65602" end="65618" title="Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon" label="Clarendon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="65881" end="65900" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577772" start="66118" end="66144" title="Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138040" start="66566" end="66576" title="Covenanter" label="Covenanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461147" start="67086" end="67109" title="Irish Rebellion of 1641" label="Irish Rebellion of 1641"/>
<link wikidata="Q130370411" start="67297" end="67314" title="William M. Lamont" label="William M. Lamont"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249467" start="67362" end="67374" title="John Morrill (historian)" label="John Morrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="68353" end="68370" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144699" start="68868" end="68883" title="The Sealed Knot (reenactment)" label="The Sealed Knot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378210" start="68888" end="68917" title="The English Civil War Society" label="The English Civil War Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7312472" start="68935" end="68943" title="English Civil War reenactment" label="re-enact"/>
<link wikidata="Q104792609" start="69019" end="69063" title="Chronology of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms" label="Chronology of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001913" start="69065" end="69108" title="Cromwell&amp;#x27;s Soldiers&amp;#x27; Pocket Bible" label="Cromwell&amp;#x27;s Soldiers&amp;#x27; Pocket Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224630" start="69156" end="69163" title="Diggers" label="Diggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="69165" end="69183" title="English Dissenters" label="English Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378358" start="69185" end="69203" title="English Revolution" label="English Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452958" start="69205" end="69234" title="First English Civil War, 1642" label="First English Civil War, 1642"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452959" start="69236" end="69265" title="First English Civil War, 1643" label="First English Civil War, 1643"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452960" start="69267" end="69296" title="First English Civil War, 1644" label="First English Civil War, 1644"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452961" start="69298" end="69327" title="First English Civil War, 1645" label="First English Civil War, 1645"/>
<link wikidata="Q5452962" start="69329" end="69358" title="First English Civil War, 1646" label="First English Civil War, 1646"/>
<link wikidata="Q45810" start="69360" end="69374" title="Gunpowder Plot" label="Gunpowder Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367657" start="69380" end="69389" title="Levellers" label="Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="69425" end="69447" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806344" start="69517" end="69550" title="Timeline of the English Civil War" label="Timeline of the English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012362" start="69642" end="69658" title="William Hiseland" label="William Hiseland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294876" start="69833" end="69859" title="Journal of British Studies" label="Journal of British Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9710" wikidata="Q211294" url="?curid=9710" title="Elementary algebra">
<text>Elementary algebra, also known as high school algebra or college algebra, encompasses the basic concepts of algebra. It is often contrasted with arithmetic: arithmetic deals with specified numbers, whilst algebra introduces variables (quantities without fixed values).

This use of variables entails use of algebraic notation and an understanding of the general rules of the operations introduced in arithmetic: addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, etc. Unlike abstract algebra, elementary algebra is not concerned with algebraic structures outside the realm of real and complex numbers.

It is typically taught to secondary school students and at introductory college level in the United States, and builds on their understanding of arithmetic. The use of variables to denote quantities allows general relationships between quantities to be formally and concisely expressed, and thus enables solving a broader scope of problems. Many quantitative relationships in science and mathematics are expressed as algebraic equations.

==Algebraic operations==
==Algebraic notation ==

Algebraic notation describes the rules and conventions for writing mathematical expressions, as well as the terminology used for talking about parts of expressions. For example, the expression formula_1 has the following components:

A &quot;coefficient&quot; is a numerical value, or letter representing a numerical constant, that multiplies a variable (the operator is omitted). A &quot;term&quot; is an addend or a summand, a group of coefficients, variables, constants and exponents that may be separated from the other terms by the plus and minus operators. Letters represent variables and constants. By convention, letters at the beginning of the alphabet (e.g. formula_2) are typically used to represent constants, and those toward the end of the alphabet (e.g. formula_3 and ) are used to represent variables. They are usually printed in italics.

Algebraic operations work in the same way as arithmetic operations, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation, and are applied to algebraic variables and terms. Multiplication symbols are usually omitted, and implied when there is no space between two variables or terms, or when a coefficient is used. For example, formula_4 is written as formula_5, and formula_6 may be written formula_7.

Usually terms with the highest power (exponent), are written on the left, for example, formula_8 is written to the left of . When a coefficient is one, it is usually omitted (e.g. formula_9 is written formula_8). Likewise when the exponent (power) is one, (e.g. formula_11 is written formula_12). When the exponent is zero, the result is always 1 (e.g. formula_13 is always rewritten to ). However formula_14, being undefined, should not appear in an expression, and care should be taken in simplifying expressions in which variables may appear in exponents.

===Alternative notation===
Other types of notation are used in algebraic expressions when the required formatting is not available, or can not be implied, such as where only letters and symbols are available. As an illustration of this, while exponents are usually formatted using superscripts, e.g., formula_8, in plain text, and in the TeX mark-up language, the caret symbol represents exponentiation, so formula_8 is written as &quot;x^2&quot;. This also applies to some programming languages such as Lua. In programming languages such as Ada, Fortran, Perl, Python and Ruby, a double asterisk is used, so formula_8 is written as &quot;x**2&quot;. Many programming languages and calculators use a single asterisk to represent the multiplication symbol, and it must be explicitly used, for example, formula_12 is written &quot;3*x&quot;.

==Concepts==

===Variables===
Elementary algebra builds on and extends arithmetic by introducing letters called variables to represent general (non-specified) numbers. This is useful for several reasons.

#Variables may represent numbers whose values are not yet known. For example, if the temperature of the current day, C, is 20 degrees higher than the temperature of the previous day, P, then the problem can be described algebraically as formula_19.
#Variables allow one to describe &quot;general&quot; problems, without specifying the values of the quantities that are involved. For example, it can be stated specifically that 5 minutes is equivalent to formula_20 seconds. A more general (algebraic) description may state that the number of seconds, formula_21, where m is the number of minutes.
#Variables allow one to describe mathematical relationships between quantities that may vary. For example, the relationship between the circumference, &quot;c&quot;, and diameter, &quot;d&quot;, of a circle is described by formula_22.
#Variables allow one to describe some mathematical properties. For example, a basic property of addition is commutativity which states that the order of numbers being added together does not matter. Commutativity is stated algebraically as formula_23.

=== Simplifying expressions ===

Algebraic expressions may be evaluated and simplified, based on the basic properties of arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation). For example,
*Added terms are simplified using coefficients. For example, formula_24 can be simplified as formula_25 (where 3 is a numerical coefficient).
*Multiplied terms are simplified using exponents. For example, formula_26 is represented as formula_27
*Like terms are added together, for example, formula_28 is written as formula_29, because the terms containing formula_30 are added together, and the terms containing formula_31 are added together.
*Brackets can be &quot;multiplied out&quot;, using the distributive property. For example, formula_32 can be written as formula_33 which can be written as formula_34
*Expressions can be factored. For example, formula_35, by dividing both terms by the common factor, formula_36 can be written as formula_37

=== Equations ===
An equation states that two expressions are equal using the symbol for equality, (the equals sign). One of the best-known equations describes Pythagoras&#x27; law relating the length of the sides of a right angle triangle:

:formula_38

This equation states that formula_39, representing the square of the length of the side that is the hypotenuse, the side opposite the right angle, is equal to the sum (addition) of the squares of the other two sides whose lengths are represented by and .

An equation is the claim that two expressions have the same value and are equal. Some equations are true for all values of the involved variables (such as formula_40); such equations are called identities. Conditional equations are true for only some values of the involved variables, e.g. formula_41 is true only for formula_42 and formula_43. The values of the variables which make the equation true are the solutions of the equation and can be found through equation solving.

Another type of equation is inequality. Inequalities are used to show that one side of the equation is greater, or less, than the other. The symbols used for this are: formula_44 where formula_45 represents &#x27;greater than&#x27;, and formula_46 where formula_47 represents &#x27;less than&#x27;. Just like standard equality equations, numbers can be added, subtracted, multiplied or divided. The only exception is that when multiplying or dividing by a negative number, the inequality symbol must be flipped.

==== Properties of equality ====

By definition, equality is an equivalence relation, meaning it is reflexive (i.e. formula_48), symmetric (i.e. if formula_49 then formula_50), and transitive (i.e. if formula_49 and formula_52 then formula_53). It also satisfies the important property that if two symbols are used for equal things, then one symbol can be substituted for the other in any true statement about the first and the statement will remain true. This implies the following properties:

* if formula_49 and formula_55 then formula_56 and formula_57;
* if formula_49 then formula_59 and formula_60;
* more generally, for any function , if formula_61 then formula_62.

==== Properties of inequality ====

The relations &quot;less than&quot; formula_47 and greater than formula_45 have the property of transitivity:
* If   formula_65   and   formula_66   then   formula_67;
* If   formula_65   and   formula_69   then   formula_70;
* If   formula_65   and   formula_72   then   formula_73;
* If   formula_65   and   formula_75   then   formula_76.
By reversing the inequation, formula_47 and formula_45 can be swapped, for example:
* formula_65 is equivalent to formula_80

=== Substitution ===

Substitution is replacing the terms in an expression to create a new expression. Substituting 3 for in the expression makes a new expression with meaning . Substituting the terms of a statement makes a new statement. When the original statement is true independently of the values of the terms, the statement created by substitutions is also true. Hence, definitions can be made in symbolic terms and interpreted through substitution: if formula_81 is meant as the definition of formula_82 as the product of with itself, substituting for informs the reader of this statement that formula_83 means . Often it&#x27;s not known whether the statement is true independently of the values of the terms. And, substitution allows one to derive restrictions on the possible values, or show what conditions the statement holds under. For example, taking the statement , if is substituted with , this implies , which is false, which implies that if then cannot be .

If and are integers, rationals, or real numbers, then implies or . Consider . Then, substituting for and for , we learn or . Then we can substitute again, letting and , to show that if then or . Therefore, if , then or ( or ), so implies or or .

If the original fact were stated as &quot; implies or &quot;, then when saying &quot;consider ,&quot; we would have a conflict of terms when substituting. Yet the above logic is still valid to show that if then or or if, instead of letting and , one substitutes for and for (and with , substituting for and for ). This shows that substituting for the terms in a statement isn&#x27;t always the same as letting the terms from the statement equal the substituted terms. In this situation it&#x27;s clear that if we substitute an expression into the term of the original equation, the substituted does not refer to the in the statement &quot; implies or .&quot;

== Solving algebraic equations ==

The following sections lay out examples of some of the types of algebraic equations that may be encountered.

=== Linear equations with one variable ===
Linear equations are so-called, because when they are plotted, they describe a straight line. The simplest equations to solve are linear equations that have only one variable. They contain only constant numbers and a single variable without an exponent. As an example, consider:

: Problem in words: If you double the age of a child and add 4, the resulting answer is 12. How old is the child?

:Equivalent equation: formula_84 where represent the child&#x27;s age

To solve this kind of equation, the technique is add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of the equation by the same number in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Once the variable is isolated, the other side of the equation is the value of the variable. This problem and its solution are as follows:
In words: the child is 4 years old.

The general form of a linear equation with one variable, can be written as: formula_85

Following the same procedure (i.e. subtract from both sides, and then divide by ), the general solution is given by formula_86

=== Linear equations with two variables ===

A linear equation with two variables has many (i.e. an infinite number of) solutions. For example:

:Problem in words: A father is 22 years older than his son. How old are they?
:Equivalent equation: formula_87 where is the father&#x27;s age, is the son&#x27;s age.

That cannot be worked out by itself. If the son&#x27;s age was made known, then there would no longer be two unknowns (variables). The problem then becomes a linear equation with just one variable, that can be solved as described above.

To solve a linear equation with two variables (unknowns), requires two related equations. For example, if it was also revealed that:
; Problem in words
: In 10 years, the father will be twice as old as his son.
;Equivalent equation
: formula_88

Now there are two related linear equations, each with two unknowns, which enables the production of a linear equation with just one variable, by subtracting one from the other (called the elimination method):
:formula_89
:formula_90

In other words, the son is aged 12, and since the father 22 years older, he must be 34. In 10 years, the son will be 22, and the father will be twice his age, 44. This problem is illustrated on the associated plot of the equations.

For other ways to solve this kind of equations, see below, System of linear equations.

=== Quadratic equations ===
A quadratic equation is one which includes a term with an exponent of 2, for example, formula_30, and no term with higher exponent. The name derives from the Latin &quot;quadrus&quot;, meaning square. In general, a quadratic equation can be expressed in the form formula_92, where is not zero (if it were zero, then the equation would not be quadratic but linear). Because of this a quadratic equation must contain the term formula_93, which is known as the quadratic term. Hence formula_94, and so we may divide by and rearrange the equation into the standard form

: formula_95

where formula_96 and formula_97. Solving this, by a process known as completing the square, leads to the quadratic formula

:formula_98

where the symbol &quot;±&quot; indicates that both

: formula_99

are solutions of the quadratic equation.

Quadratic equations can also be solved using factorization (the reverse process of which is expansion, but for two linear terms is sometimes denoted foiling). As an example of factoring:

: formula_100

which is the same thing as

: formula_101

It follows from the zero-product property that either formula_102 or formula_103 are the solutions, since precisely one of the factors must be equal to zero. All quadratic equations will have two solutions in the complex number system, but need not have any in the real number system. For example,

: formula_104

has no real number solution since no real number squared equals −1.
Sometimes a quadratic equation has a root of multiplicity 2, such as:

: formula_105

For this equation, −1 is a root of multiplicity 2. This means −1 appears twice, since the equation can be rewritten in factored form as

:formula_106

====Complex numbers====

All quadratic equations have exactly two solutions in complex numbers (but they may be equal to each other), a category that includes real numbers, imaginary numbers, and sums of real and imaginary numbers. Complex numbers first arise in the teaching of quadratic equations and the quadratic formula. For example, the quadratic equation

:formula_107

has solutions

:formula_108

Since formula_109 is not any real number, both of these solutions for &quot;x&quot; are complex numbers.

=== Exponential and logarithmic equations ===

An exponential equation is one which has the form formula_110 for formula_111, which has solution

: formula_112

when formula_113. Elementary algebraic techniques are used to rewrite a given equation in the above way before arriving at the solution. For example, if

: formula_114

then, by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation, and then dividing both sides by 3 we obtain

: formula_115

whence

: formula_116

or

: formula_117

A logarithmic equation is an equation of the form formula_118 for formula_111, which has solution

: formula_120

For example, if

: formula_121

then, by adding 2 to both sides of the equation, followed by dividing both sides by 4, we get

: formula_122

whence

: formula_123

from which we obtain

: formula_124

=== Radical equations ===

A radical equation is one that includes a radical sign, which includes square roots, formula_125 cube roots, formula_126, and &quot;n&quot;th roots, formula_127. Recall that an &quot;n&quot;th root can be rewritten in exponential format, so that formula_127 is equivalent to formula_129. Combined with regular exponents (powers), then formula_130 (the square root of cubed), can be rewritten as formula_131. So a common form of a radical equation is formula_132 (equivalent to formula_133) where and are integers. It has real solution(s):
For example, if:

:formula_134

then

: formula_135
and thus 
:formula_136

=== System of linear equations ===
There are different methods to solve a system of linear equations with two variables.

==== Elimination method ====
An example of solving a system of linear equations is by using the elimination method:

: formula_137

Multiplying the terms in the second equation by 2:

: formula_138
: formula_139

Adding the two equations together to get:

: formula_140

which simplifies to

: formula_141

Since the fact that formula_102 is known, it is then possible to deduce that formula_143 by either of the original two equations (by using &quot;2&quot; instead of ) The full solution to this problem is then

: formula_144

This is not the only way to solve this specific system; could have been resolved before .

==== Substitution method ====

Another way of solving the same system of linear equations is by substitution.

: formula_145

An equivalent for can be deduced by using one of the two equations. Using the second equation:

: formula_146

Subtracting formula_147 from each side of the equation:

: formula_148

and multiplying by −1:

: formula_149

Using this value in the first equation in the original system:

: formula_150

Adding &quot;2&quot; on each side of the equation:

: formula_151

which simplifies to

: formula_152

Using this value in one of the equations, the same solution as in the previous method is obtained.

: formula_144

This is not the only way to solve this specific system; in this case as well, could have been solved before .

=== Other types of systems of linear equations ===

==== Inconsistent systems ====

In the above example, a solution exists. However, there are also systems of equations which do not have any solution. Such a system is called inconsistent. An obvious example is

: formula_154

As 0≠2, the second equation in the system has no solution. Therefore, the system has no solution.
However, not all inconsistent systems are recognized at first sight. As an example, consider the system 
: formula_155

Multiplying by 2 both sides of the second equation, and adding it to the first one results in
: formula_156
which clearly has no solution.

==== Undetermined systems ====

There are also systems which have infinitely many solutions, in contrast to a system with a unique solution (meaning, a unique pair of values for and ) For example:

: formula_157

Isolating in the second equation:

: formula_158

And using this value in the first equation in the system:

: formula_159

The equality is true, but it does not provide a value for . Indeed, one can easily verify (by just filling in some values of ) that for any there is a solution as long as formula_160. There is an infinite number of solutions for this system.

==== Over- and underdetermined systems ====

Systems with more variables than the number of linear equations are called underdetermined. Such a system, if it has any solutions, does not have a unique one but rather an infinitude of them. An example of such a system is

: formula_161

When trying to solve it, one is led to express some variables as functions of the other ones if any solutions exist, but cannot express &quot;all&quot; solutions numerically because there are an infinite number of them if there are any.

A system with a higher number of equations than variables is called overdetermined. If an overdetermined system has any solutions, necessarily some equations are linear combinations of the others.

== See also ==
* History of algebra
* Binary operation
* Gaussian elimination
* Mathematics education
* Number line
* Polynomial
* Cancelling out
* Tarski&#x27;s high school algebra problem

== References ==
*Leonhard Euler, &quot; Elements of Algebra&quot;, 1770. English translation Tarquin Press, 2007, , also online digitized editions 2006, 1822.
*Charles Smith, &quot;A Treatise on Algebra&quot;, in Cornell University Library Historical Math Monographs.
*Redden, John. &quot;Elementary Algebra&quot; . Flat World Knowledge, 2011
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q211294" start="0" end="18" title="Elementary algebra" label="Elementary algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q211294" start="34" end="53" title="Elementary algebra" label="high school algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q211294" start="57" end="72" title="Elementary algebra" label="college algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968" start="108" end="115" title="algebra" label="algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="145" end="155" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="189" end="195" title="number" label="number"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="224" end="233" title="variable (mathematics)" label="variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884033" start="375" end="385" title="Operation (mathematics)" label="operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q159943" start="473" end="489" title="abstract algebra" label="abstract algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q205464" start="532" end="551" title="algebraic structure" label="algebraic structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="574" end="578" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="583" end="597" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="627" end="643" title="secondary school" label="secondary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="694" end="707" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="746" end="756" title="arithmetic" label="arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="977" end="984" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11345" start="1028" end="1036" title="equation" label="equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498784" start="1157" end="1181" title="Expression (mathematics)" label="mathematical expressions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1496" end="1515" title="Addend#Notation and terminology" label="addend or a summand"/>
<link wikidata="Q186509" start="1801" end="1809" title="Mathematical constant" label="constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q50701" start="1897" end="1905" title="Variable (mathematics)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854337" start="1946" end="1965" title="Algebraic operation" label="Algebraic operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11205" start="1991" end="2012" title="arithmetic operations" label="arithmetic operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="2022" end="2030" title="addition" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="2032" end="2043" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="2045" end="2059" title="multiplication" label="multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="2061" end="2069" title="Division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="2074" end="2088" title="exponentiation" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q50700" start="2261" end="2272" title="coefficient" label="coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="2409" end="2417" title="Exponentiation" label="exponent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145976" start="3246" end="3256" title="plain text" label="plain text"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301" start="3269" end="3272" title="TeX" label="TeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q12646412" start="3295" end="3300" title="caret" label="caret"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="3473" end="3476" title="Ada (programming language)" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q83303" start="3478" end="3485" title="Fortran" label="Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q42478" start="3487" end="3491" title="Perl" label="Perl"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="3493" end="3499" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q161053" start="3504" end="3508" title="Ruby (programming language)" label="Ruby"/>
<link wikidata="Q165474" start="4917" end="4930" title="commutativity" label="commutativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q32043" start="5206" end="5214" title="addition" label="addition"/>
<link wikidata="Q40754" start="5216" end="5227" title="subtraction" label="subtraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="5229" end="5243" title="multiplication" label="multiplication"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226939" start="5245" end="5253" title="Division (mathematics)" label="division"/>
<link wikidata="Q33456" start="5258" end="5272" title="exponentiation" label="exponentiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q187959" start="5782" end="5807" title="Distributive property" label="the distributive property"/>
<link wikidata="Q188804" start="5917" end="5925" title="Factorization" label="factored"/>
<link wikidata="Q40276" start="5989" end="5995" title="Factor (arithmetic)" label="factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q214796" start="6142" end="6153" title="equals sign" label="equals sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q210" start="6257" end="6268" title="right angle" label="right angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q609647" start="6743" end="6753" title="identity (mathematics)" label="identities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879820" start="7010" end="7026" title="equation solving" label="equation solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q130998" start="7606" end="7626" title="equivalence relation" label="equivalence relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q621850" start="7642" end="7651" title="reflexive relation" label="reflexive"/>
<link wikidata="Q621461" start="7671" end="7680" title="symmetric relation" label="symmetric"/>
<link wikidata="Q64861" start="7723" end="7733" title="transitive relation" label="transitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="9711" end="9719" title="integers" label="integers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="9721" end="9730" title="rationals" label="rationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="9735" end="9747" title="real numbers" label="real numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q484637" start="10925" end="10940" title="linear equation" label="linear equation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13166" end="13192" title="#System of linear equations" label="System of linear equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q50704" start="13873" end="13894" title="completing the square" label="completing the square"/>
<link wikidata="Q15909572" start="13909" end="13926" title="quadratic formula" label="quadratic formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q260387" start="13947" end="13971" title="plus–minus sign" label="the symbol &amp;quot;±&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q188804" start="14094" end="14107" title="factorization" label="factorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452866" start="14141" end="14150" title="polynomial expansion" label="expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="14164" end="14176" title="linear function" label="linear terms"/>
<link wikidata="Q5426847" start="14198" end="14205" title="FOIL rule" label="foiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248306" start="14315" end="14336" title="zero-product property" label="zero-product property"/>
<link wikidata="Q204" start="14447" end="14451" title="zero" label="zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="14508" end="14522" title="complex number" label="complex number"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="14560" end="14571" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228257" start="14722" end="14734" title="multiplicity (mathematics)" label="multiplicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="14993" end="15008" title="complex numbers" label="complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="15073" end="15084" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165172" start="15087" end="15103" title="imaginary number" label="imaginary number"/>
<link wikidata="Q134237" start="16328" end="16339" title="square root" label="square root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774143" start="16354" end="16363" title="cube root" label="cube root"/>
<link wikidata="Q601053" start="16383" end="16404" title="nth root" label="&amp;quot;n&amp;quot;th roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q12503" start="16761" end="16768" title="integer" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="16778" end="16782" title="real number" label="real"/>
<link wikidata="Q25303797" start="18598" end="18610" title="inconsistent system" label="inconsistent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4316110" start="19708" end="19723" title="underdetermined system" label="underdetermined"/>
<link wikidata="Q11563" start="20035" end="20046" title="Number" label="numerically"/>
<link wikidata="Q331348" start="20179" end="20193" title="overdetermined system" label="overdetermined"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628" start="20273" end="20291" title="linear combination" label="linear combination"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018842" start="20326" end="20344" title="History of algebra" label="History of algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q164307" start="20347" end="20363" title="Binary operation" label="Binary operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658" start="20366" end="20386" title="Gaussian elimination" label="Gaussian elimination"/>
<link wikidata="Q853077" start="20389" end="20410" title="Mathematics education" label="Mathematics education"/>
<link wikidata="Q35689" start="20413" end="20424" title="Number line" label="Number line"/>
<link wikidata="Q43260" start="20427" end="20437" title="Polynomial" label="Polynomial"/>
<link wikidata="Q48968959" start="20440" end="20454" title="Cancelling out" label="Cancelling out"/>
<link wikidata="Q7686759" start="20457" end="20498" title="Tarski&amp;#x27;s high school algebra problem" label="Tarski&amp;#x27;s high school algebra problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="20518" end="20532" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358925" start="20541" end="20560" title="Elements of Algebra" label="Elements of Algebra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20594" end="20607" title="Tarquin Press" label="Tarquin Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9712" wikidata="Q251616" url="?curid=9712" title="ERP">
<text>ERP or Erp may refer to:

==Economics==
* Effective rate of protection, of tariffs
* Equity risk premium, excess return on risky investments
* European Recovery Program or Marshall Plan

==Science and technology==
* Effective radiated power, of directional radio transmission
* Electronic Road Pricing, in Singapore
* Enterprise resource planning, a business process system

===Medicine===
* Effective refractory period, in a cardiac cycle
* Estrogen receptor positive, a cancer pathology test result
* Event-related potential, a measured brain response
* Exposure and response prevention, a treatment method in behavioral therapy
* OspE/F-like related protein, in Lyme disease microbiology

==Places==
* Erp, Ariège, a village in France
* Erp (Germany), a village
* Erp, Netherlands, a town

==Other uses==
* Erp (Pict), father of Drest I of the Picts
* &quot;Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo&quot; (disambiguation), (Spanish for People&#x27;s Revolutionary Army), several Latin American communist or socialist organizations
* Energy-related products, that use or affect energy consumption
* Erotic role-playing, the use of role-playing in sexual or romantic contexts

==See also==
* Van Erp, a Dutch surname
* D&#x27;Erp Castle, Baarlo, Limburg, Netherlands
* Ethernet Ring Protection Switching (ERPS), used in Ethernet networks
* Earp (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q251616" start="0" end="3" title="ERP" label="ERP"/>
<link wikidata="Q251616" start="7" end="10" title="ERP" label="Erp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347275" start="42" end="70" title="Effective rate of protection" label="Effective rate of protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q129096" start="85" end="104" title="Equity risk premium" label="Equity risk premium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576" start="143" end="168" title="European Recovery Program" label="European Recovery Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295986" start="216" end="240" title="Effective radiated power" label="Effective radiated power"/>
<link wikidata="Q942847" start="278" end="301" title="Electronic Road Pricing" label="Electronic Road Pricing"/>
<link wikidata="Q131508" start="318" end="346" title="Enterprise resource planning" label="Enterprise resource planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347276" start="392" end="419" title="Effective refractory period" label="Effective refractory period"/>
<link wikidata="Q416496" start="442" end="468" title="Estrogen receptor positive" label="Estrogen receptor positive"/>
<link wikidata="Q14026181" start="503" end="526" title="Event-related potential" label="Event-related potential"/>
<link wikidata="Q446198" start="556" end="588" title="Exposure and response prevention" label="Exposure and response prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q12352663" start="633" end="660" title="OspE/F-like related protein" label="OspE/F-like related protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340766" start="705" end="716" title="Erp, Ariège" label="Erp, Ariège"/>
<link wikidata="Q315660" start="740" end="753" title="Erp (Germany)" label="Erp (Germany)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057422" start="767" end="783" title="Erp, Netherlands" label="Erp, Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555490" start="810" end="820" title="Erp (Pict)" label="Erp (Pict)"/>
<link wikidata="Q750831" start="855" end="918" title="Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo (disambiguation)" label="&amp;quot;Ejército Revolucionario del Pueblo&amp;quot; (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376874" start="1030" end="1053" title="Energy-related products" label="Energy-related products"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361427" start="1095" end="1114" title="Erotic role-playing" label="Erotic role-playing"/>
<link wikidata="Q55636930" start="1187" end="1194" title="Van Erp" label="Van Erp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034347" start="1214" end="1231" title="D&amp;#x27;Erp Castle" label="D&amp;#x27;Erp Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4037821" start="1264" end="1298" title="Ethernet Ring Protection Switching" label="Ethernet Ring Protection Switching"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326966" start="1335" end="1356" title="Earp (disambiguation)" label="Earp (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9713" wikidata="Q288369" url="?curid=9713" title="Ernest Thayer">
<text>Ernest Lawrence Thayer (; August 14, 1863 – August 21, 1940) was an American writer and poet who wrote the poem &quot;Casey&quot; (or &quot;Casey at the Bat&quot;), which is &quot;the single most famous baseball poem ever written&quot; according to the Baseball Almanac, and &quot;the nation’s best-known piece of comic verse—a ballad that began a native legend as colorful and permanent as that of Johnny Appleseed or Paul Bunyan&quot;.

==Biography==
Thayer was born in Lawrence, Massachusetts, and raised in nearby Worcester. He graduated &quot;magna cum laude&quot; in philosophy from Harvard University in 1885, where he had been editor of the &quot;Harvard Lampoon&quot; and a member of the theatrical society Hasty Pudding. William Randolph Hearst, a friend from both activities, hired Thayer as humor columnist for &quot;The San Francisco Examiner&quot; 1886–88.

Thayer&#x27;s last piece for the &quot;Examiner&quot;, dated June 3, 1888, was a ballad entitled &quot;Casey&quot; (&quot;Casey at the Bat&quot;) which made him &quot;a prize specimen of the one-poem poet&quot; according to &quot;American Heritage&quot;.

It was not until several months after the publication of the poem that Thayer became famous for it, since he was hardly the boastful type and had signed the June 24 poem with the nickname &quot;Phin&quot; which he had used since his time as a writer for the &quot;Harvard Lampoon&quot;. Two mysteries remain about the poem: whether Casey and Mudville were based on a real person or place, and, if so, their actual identities. On March 31, 2007, Katie Zezima of &quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote an article called &quot;In &#x27;Casey&#x27; Rhubarb, 2 Cities Cry &#x27;Foul!&#x27;&quot; on the competing claims of two towns to such renown: Stockton, California, and Holliston, Massachusetts.
On the possible model for Casey, Thayer dismissed the notion that any single living baseball player was an influence. However, late 1880s Boston star Mike &quot;King&quot; Kelly is likely as a model for Casey&#x27;s baseball situations. Besides being a native of a town close to Boston, Thayer, as a &quot;San Francisco Examiner&quot; baseball reporter in the off-season of 1887–88, covered exhibition games featuring Kelly. During November 1887, some of his reportage about a Kelly at-bat has the same ring as Casey&#x27;s famous at-bat in the poem. A 2004 book by Howard W. Rosenberg, &quot;Cap Anson 2: The Theatrical and Kingly Mike Kelly: U.S. Team Sport&#x27;s First Media Sensation and Baseball&#x27;s Original Casey at the Bat,&quot; reprints a 1905 Thayer letter to a Baltimore scribe who was asking about the poem&#x27;s roots. In the letter, Thayer named Kelly (d. 1894), as having shown &quot;impudence&quot; in claiming to have inspired it. Rosenberg argues that if Thayer still felt offended, Thayer may have later denied Kelly as an influence. Kelly had also performed as a vaudeville actor, and recited the poem dozens of times.

The first public performance of the poem was on August 14, 1888, by actor De Wolf Hopper, on Thayer&#x27;s 25th birthday. Thayer recited of the poem at a Harvard class reunion in 1895.

During the mid-1890s, Thayer contributed several other comic poems for Hearst&#x27;s newspaper &quot;New York Journal&quot; and then began overseeing his family&#x27;s mills in Worcester full-time. Thayer relocated to Santa Barbara in 1912, where he married Rosalind Buel Hammett and retired. He died in 1940, seven days after his 77th birthday.

&quot;The New York Times&quot;&#x27; obituary of Thayer on August 22, 1940, p. 19 quotes comedian DeWolf Hopper, who helped make the poem famous: 

==References==


==External links==
*Ernest Lawrence Thayer: Profile and Poem at Poets.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q288369" start="0" end="22" title="Ernest Thayer" label="Ernest Lawrence Thayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735619" start="140" end="156" title="Casey at the Bat" label="Casey at the Bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866428" start="253" end="269" title="Baseball Almanac" label="Baseball Almanac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671604" start="314" end="325" title="comic verse" label="comic verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="328" end="334" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q369675" start="399" end="415" title="Johnny Appleseed" label="Johnny Appleseed"/>
<link wikidata="Q150519" start="419" end="430" title="Paul Bunyan" label="Paul Bunyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49163" start="472" end="495" title="Lawrence, Massachusetts" label="Lawrence, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="518" end="527" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581478" start="548" end="563" title="magna cum laude" label="magna cum laude"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="573" end="583" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="589" end="607" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362081" start="655" end="670" title="Harvard Lampoon" label="Harvard Lampoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588813" start="716" end="729" title="Hasty Pudding Theatricals" label="Hasty Pudding"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="731" end="754" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086863" start="809" end="818" title="columnist" label="columnist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164240" start="829" end="855" title="The San Francisco Examiner" label="The San Francisco Examiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054291" start="1063" end="1076" title="One-hit wonder" label="one-poem poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743985" start="1096" end="1125" title="American Heritage (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;American Heritage&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="1595" end="1613" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q49240" start="1770" end="1790" title="Stockton, California" label="Stockton, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q596394" start="1796" end="1820" title="Holliston, Massachusetts" label="Holliston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527827" start="1972" end="1999" title="King Kelly" label="Mike &amp;quot;King&amp;quot; Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020065" start="3042" end="3056" title="De Wolf Hopper" label="De Wolf Hopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984695" start="3255" end="3271" title="New York Journal" label="New York Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q159288" start="3372" end="3385" title="Santa Barbara, California" label="Santa Barbara"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020065" start="3599" end="3612" title="DeWolf Hopper" label="DeWolf Hopper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9714" wikidata="Q2135436" url="?curid=9714" title="List of English-language poets">
<text>This is a list of English-language poets, who have written much of their poetry in English. Main country of residence as a poet (not place of birth): A = Australia, Ag = Antigua, B = Barbados, Bo = Bosnia, C = Canada, Ch = Chile, Cu = Cuba, D = Dominica, De = Denmark, E = England, F = France, G = Germany, Ga = Gambia, Gd = Grenada, Gh = Ghana/Gold Coast, Gr = Greece, Gu = Guyana/British Guiana, Gy = Guernsey, HK = Hong Kong, In = India, IoM = Isle of Man, Is = Israel, Ir = Ireland, It = Italy, J = Jamaica, Je = Jersey, Jp = Japan, K = Kenya, L = Lebanon, M = Malta, Me = Mexico, Mo = Montserrat, Ne = Nepal, Nf = Newfoundland (colony), Ni = Nigeria, NI = Northern Ireland, Nt = Netherlands, NZ = New Zealand, P = Pakistan, Pa = Palestine, Ph = Philippines, PI = Pitcairn Islands, RE = Russian Empire, S = Scotland, SA = South Africa, Se = Serbia, SL = Saint Lucia, SLe = Sierra Leone, SLk = Sri Lanka, So = Somalia, Sw = Sweden, T = Trinidad and Tobago, US = United States/preceding colonies, W = Wales, Z = Zimbabwe/Rhodesia


==A==
===Aa–Al===
*Jonathan Aaron (born 1941, US)
*Chris Abani (born 1966, Ni/US)
*Henry Abbey (1842–1911, US)
*Eleanor Hallowell Abbott (1872–1958, US)
*J. H. M. Abbott (1874–1953, A)
*Lascelles Abercrombie (1881–1938, E)
*Arthur Talmage Abernethy (1872–1956, US)
*Mark Abley (born 1955, C)
*James Aboud (born 1956, T)
*Lionel Abrahams (1928–2004, SA)
*Sam Abrams (born 1935, US)
*Seth Abramson (born 1976, US)
*Dannie Abse (1923–2014, W)
*Chinua Achebe (1930–2013, Ni/US)
*Catherine Obianuju Acholonu (1951–2014, Ni)
*Kathy Acker (1947–1997, US)
*Diane Ackerman (born 1948, US)
*Duane Ackerson (1942–2020, US)
*Milton Acorn (1923–1986, C)
*Harold Acton (1904–1994, E/It)
*Gilbert Adair (1944–2011, S/F)
*Virginia Hamilton Adair (1919–2004, US)
*Helen Adam (1909–1993, S/US)
*Jean Adam (1704–1765, S)
*Arthur Henry Adams (1872–1936, NZ/A)
*Douglas Adams (1952–2001, E)
*John Adams (1704–1740, US)
*Léonie Adams (1899–1988, US)
*Ryan Adams (born 1974, US)
*Gil Adamson (born 1961, C)
*Robert Adamson (1943–2022, A)
*Fleur Adcock (1934–2024, NZ/E)
*Joseph Addison (1672–1719, E)
*Kim Addonizio (born 1954, US)
*Bayo Adebowale (born 1944, Ni)
*Toyin Adewale-Gabriel (born 1969, Ni)
*Opal Palmer Adisa (born 1954, J)
*Tatamkhulu Afrika (1920–2002, SA)
*John Agard (born 1949, Gu)
*Sandra Agard (living, E)
*Patience Agbabi (born 1965, W/E)
*Deborah Ager born 1978, US)
*Kelli Russell Agodon (living, US)
*Allan Ahlberg (1938–1994, E)
*Ai (1947–2010, US)
*Ama Ata Aidoo (1940–2023, Gh)
*Conrad Aiken (1889–1973, US)
*Douglas Ainslie (1865–1948, S)
*Thomas Aird (1802–1876, S)
*Adam Aitken (born 1960, A)
*Neil Aitken (born 1974, C)
*Funso Aiyejina (1949–2024, Ni)
*Tolu Ajayi (born 1946, Ni)
*Mark Akenside (1721–1770, E)
*Salman Akhtar (born 1946, In/US)
*Tolu Akinyemi (living, Ni)
*Alasdair MacMhaighstir Alasdair (c. 1695–1770, S)
*Jordie Albiston (1961–2022, A)
*Ammiel Alcalay (born 1956, US)
*Amos Bronson Alcott (1799–1888, US)
*Louisa May Alcott (1832–1888, US)
*Kaye Aldenhoven (living, A)
*Richard Aldington (1892–1962, E)
*Elizabeth Alexander (born 1962, US)
*Sidney A. Alexander (1866–1948, E)
*William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling (c. 1567–1640, S)
*Sherman Alexie (born 1966, US)
*Felipe Alfau (1902–1999, US)
*Edna Alford (born 1947, C)
*Mike Alfred (living, SA)
*Agha Shahid Ali (1949–2001, In/US)
*James Alexander Allan (1889–1956, A)
*Rob Allan (born 1945, NZ)
*Sandra Alland (living, C/S)
*Donna Allard (living, C)
*Dick Allen (1939–2017, US)
*Donald Allen (1912–2004, US)
*Elizabeth Allen (living, A)
*Elizabeth Akers Allen (1832–1911, US)
*Leslie Holdsworth Allen (1879–1964, A)
*Lillian Allen (born 1951, C)
*Richard James Allen (born 1960, A)
*Ron Allen (1947–2010, US)
*Ellen Palmer Allerton (1835–1893, US)
*William Allingham (1824/28–1889, Ir/E)
*Washington Allston (1779–1843, US)
*Anne-Marie Alonzo (1951–2005, C)
*Alta (Alta Gerrey, 1942–2024, US)
*Al Alvarez (1929–2019, E)
*Ivy Alvarez (living, A)
*Julia Alvarez (born 1950, D/US)
*Moniza Alvi (born 1954, E)

===Am–Az===
*George Amabile (born 1936, C)
*Abdulkareem Baba Aminu (born 1977, Ni)
*Kingsley Amis (1922–1995, E)
*A. R. Ammons (1926–2001, US)
*Madhur Anand (born 1971, C)
*Ingrid Andersen (born 1965, SA)
*Ethel Anderson (1883–1958, A)
*Freddie Anderson (1922–2001, Ir/S)
*J. Redwood Anderson (1883–1964, E)
*Patrick Anderson (1915–1979, E/C)
*Rod Anderson (born 1935, C)
*Victor Henry Anderson (1917–2001, US)
*Michael Andre (born 1946, C/US)
*Bruce Andrews (born 1948, US)
*Kevin Andrews (1924–1989, E/Gr)
*Ron Androla (born 1954, US)
*Ralph Angel (born 1951, US)
*Maya Angelou (1928–2014, US)
*James Stout Angus (1830–1923, S)
*Marion Angus (1865–1946, S)
*J. K. Annand (1908–1993, S)
*David Antin (1932–2016, US)
*Antler (born 1946, US)
*Susanne Antonetta (born 1956, US)
*Brother Antoninus (1912–1994, US)
*Raymond Antrobus (living, E)
*Philip Appleman (1926–2020, US)
*Richard Appleton (1932–2005, A)
*Alexander Arbuthnot (1538–1583, S)
*Walter Conrad Arensberg (1878–1954, US)
*Rae Armantrout (born 1947, US)
*Simon Armitage (born 1963, E)
*Annie Armitt (1850–1933, E)
*Richard Armour (1906–1989, US)
*Jeannette Armstrong (born 1948, C)
*Peter Armstrong (born 1957, E)
*Tammy Armstrong (born 1974, C)
*David Arnason (born 1940, C)
*Craig Arnold (1967–2009, US)
*Matthew Arnold (1822–1888, E)
*Joanne Arnott (born 1960, C)
*K. O. Arvidson (1938–2011, NZ)
*M. K. Asante (born 1982, US)
*John Ashbery (1927–2017, US)
*Cliff Ashby (1919–2012, E)
*Joseph Ashby-Sterry (1836 or 1838–1917, E)
*Thomas Ashe (1836–1889, E)
*Renée Ashley (born 1949, US)
*Anne Askew (1521–1546, E)
*Timoshenko Aslanides (1943–2020, A)
*Herbert Asquith (1881–1947, E)
*Thea Astley (1925–2004, A)
*Tilly Aston (1873–1947, A)
*Edwin Atherstone (1788–1872, E)
*Cassandra Atherton (living, A)
*Rupert Atkinson (1881–1961, A)
*Tiffany Atkinson (born 1972, W)
*Margaret Atwood (born 1939, C)
*Dorothy Auchterlonie (1915–1991, A)
*John Audelay (died c. 1426, E)
*W. H. Auden (1907–1973, E/US)
*William Auld (1924–2006, S)
*Joseph Auslander (1897–1965, US)
*Paul Auster (1947–2024, US)
*Alfred Austin (1835–1913, E)
*Oana Avasilichioaei (living, C)
*James Avery (born 1948, US)
*Tusiata Avia (born 1966, NZ)
*Margaret Avison (1918–2007, C)
*Kofi Awoonor (1935–2013, Gh)
*Ayo Ayoola-Amale (born 1970, Ni)
*Pam Ayres (born 1947, E)
*Sir Robert Aytoun (1570–1638, S/E)
*William Edmondstoune Aytoun (1813–1865, S)
*Nnorom Azuonye (born 1967, Ni)
*Jody Azzouni (born 1954, US)
==B==
===Ba===
*Ken Babstock (born 1970, C)
*Peter Babyon (fl. 1317 – 1366, E)
*Jimmy Santiago Baca (born 1952, US)
*Bellamy Bach (group pseudonym, 1980s, US)
*Joseph M. Bachelor (Joseph Morris, 1889–1947, US)
*Elizabeth Bachinsky (born 1976, C)
*Gabeba Baderoon (born 1969, SA)
*Grace Shattuck Bail (1898–1996, US)
*Alfred Bailey (1905–1997, C)
*Jacob Bailey (1731–1808, US/C)
*Kevin Bailey (born 1953, E)
*Philip James Bailey (1816–1902, E)
*Joanna Baillie (1762–1861, S/E)
*David Baker (born 1954, US)
*Henry Baker (1698–1774, E)
*Marie Annharte Baker (born 1942, C)
*Peter Bakowski (born 1954, A)
*John Balaban (born 1943, US)
*Jesse Ball (born 1978, US)
*Addie L. Ballou (1838–1916, US)
*Samuel Bamford (1788–1872, E)
*John Banim (1798–1842, Ir/E)
*Chris Banks (born 1970, C)
*Russell Banks (born 1940, US)
*Kaushalya Bannerji (living, C)
*Anne Bannerman (1765–1829, S)
*Frances Bannerman (1855–1944, C)
*Lex Banning (1921–1965, A)
*Ivy Bannister (born 1951, US/Ir)
*Shabbir Banoobhai (born 1949, SA)
*Amiri Baraka (1934–2014, US)
*Anna Laetitia Barbauld (1743–1825, E)
*Mary Barber (c. 1685 – c. 1755, Ir)
*Ros Barber (born 1964, E)
*Anna Laetitia Barbauld (1743–1825, E)
*John Barbour (c. 1320–1395, S)
*Alexander Barclay (1476–1552, S)
*Leland Bardwell (1922–2016, Ir)
*Serie Barford (living, NZ)
*Richard Barham (Thomas Ingoldsby, 1788–1845, E)
*George Barker (1913–1991, E)
*Les Barker (born 1947, E)
*Coleman Barks (born 1937, US)
*Clement Barksdale (1609–1687, E)
*Joel Barlow (1754–1812, US/F)
*Lady Anne Barnard (1750–1825, S/SA)
*Mary Barnard (1909–2002, US)
*Djuna Barnes (1892–1982, US)
*Stuart Barnes (born 1977, A)
*William Barnes (1801–1886, E)
*Annie Wall Barnett (1859–1942, US)
*Catherine Barnett (born 1960, US)
*Richard Barnfield (1574–1627, E)
*Willis Barnstone (born 1927, US)
*John Barr (1809–1889, S/NZ)
*Miriam Barr (born 1982, NZ)
*Laird Barron (born 1970, US)
*Bernard Barton (1784–1849, E)
*John Barton (born 1957, C)
*Bertha Hirsch Baruch (later 19th – early 20th century, US)
*Gary Barwin (born 1964, C)
*Todd Bash (born 1965, US)
*Michael Basinski (born 1950, US)
*Shaunt Basmajian (1950–1990, C)
*Ellen Bass (born 1947, US)
*Arlo Bates (1850–1918, US)
*David Bates (1809–1870, US)
*H. E. Bates (1905–1974, E)
*Katharine Lee Bates (1859–1929, US)
*Joseph Bathanti (born 1953, US)
*Dawn-Michelle Baude (born 1959, US)
*Bill Bauer (1932–2010, US/C)
*Edward Baugh (1936–2023, J)
*Charles Baxter (born 1947, US)
*James K. Baxter (1926–1972, NZ)
*Arthur Bayldon (1865–1958, A)
*William Baylebridge (1883–1942, A)

===Be–Bo===
*Eric Beach (born 1947, A)
*Thomas Beach (died 1737, W)
*John Beaglehole (1901–1971, NZ)
*Anne Beale (1816–1900, E/W)
*Doug Beardsley (born 1941, C)
*James Beattie (1735–1803, S)
*Jan Beatty (born 1952, US)
*Derek Beaulieu (born 1973, C)
*Francis Beaumont (1586–1616, E)
*Bruce Beaver (1928–2004, A)
*Samuel Beckett (1906–1989, Ir)
*Joshua Beckman (living, US)
*Thomas Lovell Beddoes (1803–1849, E/G)
*Ruth Bedford (1882–1963, A)
*Jack Bedson (born 1950, A)
*Patricia Beer (1919–1999, E)
*Ven Begamudré (born 1956, C)
*Brendan Behan (1923–1964, Ir)
*Aphra Behn (1640–1689, E)
*Sinclair Beiles (1930–2000, SA)
*Gerard Beirne (born 1962, Ir/C)
*Henry Beissel (born 1929, G/C)
*Billy-Ray Belcourt (living, C)
*Ken Belford (born 1946, C)
*Erin Belieu (born 1965, US)
*J. J. Bell (1871–1934, S)
*Julian Bell (1908–1937, E)
*Marvin Bell (1937–2020, US)
*Lisa Bellear (1961–2006, A)
*Lesley Belleau (living, C)
*Hilaire Belloc (1870–1953, E)
*John Bemrose (living, C)
*Gwen Benaway (born 1987, C)
*Hester A. Benedict (1838–1921, US)
*Stephen Vincent Benét (1898–1943, US)
*William Rose Benét (1886–1950, US)
*Elizabeth Benger (1775–1827, E)
*Gwendolyn B. Bennett (1902–1981, US)
*Jim Bennett (born 1951, E)
*Louise Bennett-Coverley (1919–2006, J)
*Robbie Benoit (died 2007, C)
*A. C. Benson (1862–1925, E)
*Richard Berengarten (born 1943, E)
*Bill Berkson (1939–2016, US)
*Charles Bernstein (born 1950, US)
*Robert Berold (born 1948, SA)
*Anselm Berrigan (born 1972, US)
*Daniel Berrigan (1921–2016, US)
*Ted Berrigan (1934–1983, US)
*James Berry (1924–2017, J/E)
*Wendell Berry (born 1934, US)
*John Berryman (1914–1972, US)
*Charles Best (1570–1627, E)
*Mary Matilda Betham (1776–1852, E)
*Matilda Betham-Edwards (1836–1919, E)
*Ursula Bethell (1874–1945, NZ)
*John Betjeman (1906–1984, E)
*Craven Langstroth Betts (1853–1941, C)
*Elizabeth Beverley (fl. 1815–1830, E)
*Judith Beveridge (born 1956, A)
*Helen Bevington (1906–2001, US)
*L. S. Bevington (1845–1895, E)
*Thomas Bibby (1799–1863, Ir)
*Ruth Bidgood (1922–2022, W)
*Lettie S. Bigelow (1849–1906, US)
*Vonani Bila (born 1972, SA)
*Robert Billings (1949–1986, C)
*William Billington (1825–1884, E)
*Margaret Bingham (1740–1814, E)
*Laurence Binyon (1869–1943, E)
*Hera Lindsay Bird (born 1987, NZ)
*Earle Birney (1904–1995, C)
*Dora Birtles (1903–1992, A)
*Elizabeth Bishop (1911–1979, US)
*Morris Bishop (1893–1973, US)
*Samuel Bishop (1731–1795, E)
*Bill Bissett (born 1939, C)
*Sherwin Bitsui (born 1974, US)
*David MacLeod Black (born 1941, S)
*Sophie Cabot Black (born 1958, US)
*Paul Blackburn (1926–1971, US)
*Thomas Blacklock (1721–1791, S)
*Leigh Blackmore (born 1959, A)
*R. P. Blackmur (1904–1965, US)
*Peter Bladen (1922–2001, A)
*Isa Blagden (1816 or 1817–1873, It)
*Max Blagg (born 1948, E/US)
*Mark Blagrave (born 1956, C)
*Robert Blair (1699–1746, S)
*Lewis Blake (born 1946, E)
*William Blake (1757–1827, E)
*Susanna Blamire (1747–1794, E)
*Paddy Blanchfield (1911–1980, NZ)
*Richard Blanco (born 1968, US)
*Don Blanding (1894–1957, US)
*Robin Blaser (1925–2009, C)
*Ann Eliza Bleecker (1752–1783, US)
*Adrian Blevins (born 1964, US)
*John Blight (1913–1995, A)
*Mathilde Blind (1841–1896, E)
*Laurie Block (1949–2018, C)
*E. D. Blodgett (1935–2018, C)
*Benjamin Paul Blood (1832–1919, US)
*Valerie Bloom (born 1956, J/E)
*Robert Bloomfield (1766–1823, E)
*Elizabeth Blower (c. 1757/63 – post-1816, E)
*Edmund Blunden (1896–1974, E)
*Roy Blumenthal (born 1968, SA)
*Wilfrid Scawen Blunt (1840–1922, E)
*Robert Bly (1926–2021, US)
*Ali Blythe (living, C)
*Barcroft Boake (1866–1892, A)
*Robert Boates (born 1954, C)
*Merlinda Bobis (born 1959, A)
*Louise Bogan (1897–1970, US)
*Michelle Boisseau (1955–2017, US)
*Christian Bök (born 1966, C)
*Osbern Bokenam (c. 1393 – c. 1464, E)
*George Henry Boker (1823–1890, US)
*Eavan Boland (1944–2020, Ir)
*Alan Bold (1943–1998, S)
*Dermot Bolger (born 1959, Ir)
*Stephanie Bolster (born 1969, C)
*Edmund Bolton (c. 1575 – c. 1633)
*Ken Bolton (born 1949, A)
*Roger Bonair-Agard (living, J/US)
*Horatius Bonar (1808–1889, S)
*Elizabeth Bonhôte (1744–1818, E)
*Sean Bonney (1969–2019, E)
*Arna Wendell Bontemps (1902–1973, US)
*Shane Book (living, C)
*Luke Booker (1762–1835, E)
*Kurt Boone (born 1959, US)
*Henry Ernest Boote (1865–1949, A)
*Ivan Bootham (1939–2016, NZ)
*Pat Boran (born 1963, Ir)
*Jenny Bornholdt (born 1960, NZ)
*Roo Borson (born 1952, C)
*Keith Bosley (1937–2018, E)
*Anne Lynch Botta (1815–1891, US)
*Gordon Bottomley (1874–1948, E)
*David Bottoms (born 1949, US)
*Jenny Boult (MML Bliss, 1951–2005, A)
*Francis William Bourdillon (1852–1921, E)
*Arthur Bourinot (1893–1969, C)
*John Philip Bourke (1860–1914, A)
*Jane Bowdler (1743–1784, E)
*George Bowering (born 1936, C)
*Marilyn Bowering (born 1949, C)
*Cathy Smith Bowers (born 1949, US)
*Edgar Bowers (1924–2000, US)
*Tim Bowling (born 1964, C)
*Alex Boyd (born 1969, C)
*Louise Esther Vickroy Boyd (1827–1909, US)
*Mark Alexander Boyd (1563–1601, S)
*Kay Boyle (1902–1992, US)
*Peter Boyle (born 1951, A)
*Samuel Boyse (1702/1703–1749, Ir/E)
*Virginia Frazer Boyle (1863–1938, US)

===Br–By===
*Francis Brabazon (1907–1984, A)
*Thomas Bracken (1843–1898, NZ)
*Alison Brackenbury (born 1953, E)
*Anna Braden (1858–1939, US)
*James Bradley (born 1967, A)
*Anne Bradstreet (c. 1612–1672, US)
*Robert Bradstreet (1766–1836, E)
*E. J. Brady (1869–1952, A)
*Kate Braid (born 1947, C)
*Lawrence Ytzhak Braithwaite (1963–2008, C)
*Shannon Bramer (born 1973, C)
*Bertha Southey Brammall (1878–1957, A)
*James Bramston (c. 1694–1743, E)
*Dionne Brand (born 1953, C)
*Di Brandt (born 1952, C)
*Charles Brasch (1909–1973, NZ)
*Giannina Braschi (born 1953, US)
*Kamau Brathwaite (1930–2020, B)
*Richard Brautigan (1935–1984, US)
*John Jefferson Bray (1912–1995, A)
*Diana Brebner (1956–2001, C)
*Jean &quot;Binta&quot; Breeze (1956–2021, J)
*Christopher Brennan (1870–1932, A)
*Breyten Breytenbach (born 1939, SA/F)
*Joseph Payne Brennan (1918–1990, US)
*Michael Brennan (born 1973, A)
*Jane Brereton (1685–1740, W)
*John Le Gay Brereton (1871–1933, A)
*Nicholas Breton (1542–1626, E)
*Brian Brett (born 1950, C)
*Lily Brett (born 1946, A)
*Ken Brewer (1941–2006, US)
*Elizabeth Brewster (1922–2012, C)
*Martha Wadsworth Brewster (1710 – c. 1757, US)
*Breyten Breytenbach (born 1939, SA)
*Diana Bridge (born 1942, NZ)
*Robert Bridges (1844–1930, E)
*Kim Bridgford (1959–2000, US)
*Robert Bringhurst (born 1946, C)
*Geoffrey Brock (born 1964, US)
*Eve Brodlique (1867–1949, UK/C/US)
*Alexander Brome (1620–1666, E)
*David Bromige (1933–2009, C/US)
*William Bronk (1918–1999, US)
*Anne Brontë (1820–1849, E)
*Branwell Brontë (1817–1848, E)
*Charlotte Brontë (1816–1855, E)
*Emily Brontë (1818–1848, E)
*Rupert Brooke (1887–1915, E)
*David Brooks (born 1953, A)
*Gwendolyn Brooks (1917–2000, US)
*Alice Williams Brotherton (1848–1930, US)
*Audrey Alexandra Brown (1904–1998, C)
*George Mackay Brown (1921–1996, S)
*James Brown (J. B. Selkirk, 1832–1904, S)
*Jericho Brown (born 1976, US)
*Pam Brown (born 1948, A)
*Sterling Allen Brown (1901–1989, US)
*Stewart Brown (born 1951, E)
*Thomas Edward Brown (1830–1897, IoM)
*Wayne Brown (1944–2009, T)
*Frances Browne (1816–1879, Ir)
*Isaac Hawkins Browne (1705–1760, E)
*Moses Browne (1704–1787, E)
*Sir Thomas Browne (1605–1682, E)
*William Browne (1588–1643, E)
*Elizabeth Barrett Browning (1806–1861, E/It)
*Robert Browning (1812–1889, E/It)
*Charles Tory Bruce (1906–1971, C)
*Mary Grant Bruce (1878–1958, A)
*Julie Bruck (living, C)
*Dennis Brutus (1924–2009, SA)
*William Cullen Bryant (1794–1878, US)
*Colette Bryce (born 1970, NI/E)
*Bryher (Annie Winifred Ellerman, 1894–1983, E)
*Dugald Buchanan (1716–1768, S)
*George Buchanan (1506–1582, S)
*Robert Williams Buchanan (1841–1901, S)
*Vincent Buckley (1925–1988, A)
*Charles Buckmaster (1950–1972, A)
*David Budbill (1940–2016, US)
*Andrea Hollander Budy (born 1947, US)
*Suzanne Buffam (living, C)
*Charles Bukowski (1920–1994, US)
*April Bulmer (born 1963, C)
*Rhoda Bulter (1929–1994, S)
*Basil Bunting (1900–1985, E)
*Anthony Burgess (1917–1993, E)
*Haldane Burgess (1862–1927, S)
*Andrew Burke (1944–2023, A)
*Murdoch Burnett (1953–2015, C)
*Joanne Burns (born 1945, A)
*Robert Burns (1759–1796, S)
*Stanley Burnshaw (1906–2005, US)
*John Burnside (born 1955, S)
*Sophia Burrell (1753–1802, E)
*William S. Burroughs (1914–1997, US)
*Mick Burrs (1940–2021, C)
*Duncan Bush (1946–2017, W/E)
*Olivia Ward Bush-Banks (1869–1944, US)
*Aaron Bushkowsky (born 1957, C)
*Guy Butler (1918–2001, SA)
*Samuel Butler (1612–1680, E)
*Ray Buttigieg (born 1955, M)
*Anthony Butts (born 1969, US)
*A. S. Byatt (1936–2023, E)
*Kathryn Stripling Byer (1944–2017, US)
*Witter Bynner (Emanuel Morgan, 1881–1968, US)
*Lord Byron (1788–1824, E/It)
==C==
===Ca–Ci===
*Richard Caddel (1949–2003, E)
*Caroline Caddy (born 1944, A)
*Charmaine Cadeau (living, C)
*Adrian Caesar (born 1955, A)
*Stephen Cain (born 1970, C)
*Scott Cairns (born 1954, US)
*Alison Calder (born 1969, C)
*Angus Calder (1942–2008, S)
*Alex Caldiero (born 1949, US)
*Frank Oliver Call (1878–1956, C)
*Barry Callaghan (born 1937, C)
*Michael Feeney Callan (living, Ir)
*Charles Stuart Calverley (1831–1884, E)
*Robert Calvert (1945–1988, E)
*Anne Cameron (Cam Hubert, 1938–2022, C)
*Norman Cameron (1905–1953, S)
*Jason Camlot (born 1967, C)
*A. Y. Campbell (1885–1958, S)
*Alistair Campbell (1925–2009, NZ)
*Angus Peter Campbell (living, S)
*David Campbell (1915–1979, A)
*Elizabeth Campbell (born 1980, A)
*Joseph Campbell (1879–1944, Ir)
*Meg Campbell (1937–2007, NZ)
*Paul-Henri Campbell (born 1982, US)
*Roy Campbell (1901–1957, SA)
*Thomas Campbell (1774–1844, S/E)
*William Wilfred Campbell (1860–1918, C)
*Thomas Campion (1567–1620, E)
*Melville Henry Cane (1879–1980, US)
*Mary Wedderburn Cannan (1893–1973, E)
*Moya Cannon (born 1956, Ir)
*Edward Capern (1819–1894, E)
*Vahni Capildeo (born 1973, T/S)
*Natalee Caple (born 1970, C)
*Thomas Carew (1595–1639, E)
*Henry Carey (1693–1743, E)
*Robert Carliell (died c. 1622, E)
*Bliss Carman (1861–1929, C/US)
*Clyde Carr (1886–1962, NZ)
*Fern G. Z. Carr (born 1956, C)
*Jim Carroll (1949–2009, US)
*Lewis Carroll (1832–1898, E)
*Hayden Carruth (1921–2008, US)
*A.J. Carruthers (living, A)
*Ann Elizabeth Carson (1929–2023, C)
*Anne Carson (born 1950, C)
*Ciaran Carson (1948–2019, NI)
*Elizabeth Carter (1717–1806, E)
*Jared Carter (born 1939, US)
*William Cartwright (1611–1643, E)
*Raymond Carver (1938–1988, US)
*Alice Cary (1820–1871, US)
*Phoebe Cary (1824–1871, US)
*Marietta Stanley Case (1845–1900, US)
*James Casey (1824–1909, Ir)
*Juanita Casey (1925–2012, E)
*Neal Cassady (1926–1968, US)
*Cyrus Cassells (born 1957, US)
*Ana Castillo (born 1953, US)
*Lee Cataldi (born 1942, A)
*Nancy Cato (1917–2000, A)
*Charles Causley (1917–2003, E)
*Nick Cave (born 1957, A)
*George Cavendish (1494 – c. 1562, E)
*Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne (1623–1673, E)
*Kate Cayley (living, C)
*Susanna Centlivre (c. 1667/1670 – 1723, E)
*Thomas Centolella (living, US)
*Joseph Ceravolo (1934–1988, US)
*John Chalkhill (fl. 1600, E)
*Gordon Challis (1932–2018, NZ)
*Weyman Chan (born 1963, C)
*Catherine Chandler (born 1950, C)
*Elizabeth Margaret Chandler (1807–1834, US)
*Diana Chang (1924–2009, US)
*William Ellery Channing (1818–1901, US)
*Arthur Chapman (1873–1935, US)
*George Chapman (1560–1634, E)
*Patrick Chapman (born 1968, Ir)
*Fred Chappell (1936–2024, US)
*Craig Charles (born 1964, E)
*James Charlton (born 1947, A)
*Thomas Chatterton (1752–1770, E)
*Geoffrey Chaucer (c. 1343–1400, E)
*Angelico Chavez (1910–1996, US)
*Syl Cheney-Coker (born 1945, SLe)
*Maxine Chernoff (born 1952, US)
*Kelly Cherry (1940–2022, US)
*G. K. Chesterton (1874–1936, E)
*Thomas Chestre (late 14th c., E)
*James Wm. Chichetto (born 1941, US)
*Lydia Maria Child (1802–1880, US)
*Harriet L. Childe-Pemberton (1852–1922, E)
*Billy Childish (born 1959, E)
*Marilyn Chin (born 1955, US)
*Staceyann Chin (born 1972, J)
*Eileen Chong (born 1980, A)
*Robert Choquette (1905–1991, C)
*Lesley Choyce (born 1951, C)
*Margaret Christakos (born 1962, C)
*Evie Christie (living, C)
*Ralph Chubb (1892–1960, E)
*Mary Chudleigh (1656–1710, E)
*Hubert Newman Wigmore Church (1857–1932, A)
*Richard Church (1893–1972, E)
*Charles Churchill (1731–1764, E)
*John Ciardi (1916–1986, US)
*Colley Cibber (1671–1757, E)
*Charl Cilliers (born 1941, SA)
*Sandra Cisneros (born 1954, US)
*Carson Cistulli (born 1979, US)

===Cl===
*Amy Clampitt (1920–1994, US
*Kate Clanchy (born 1965, S)
*John Clanvowe (c. 1341–1391, W/E)
*John Clare (1793–1864, E)
*Dave Clark (living, C)
*Douglas Clark (1942–2010, E)
*Elizabeth Clark (1918–1978, S)
*Emily Clark (fl. 1798–1833, E)
*Ross Clark (born 1953, A)
*Tom Clark (1941–2018, US)
*Thomas Clark (born 1980, S)
*Amy Key Clarke (1892–1980, E)
*Austin Clarke (1886–1974, Ir)
*George Elliott Clarke (born 1960, C)
*Gillian Clarke (born 1937, W)
*Jack Clarke (1933–1992, US)
*Marcus Clarke (1846–1881, A)
*Brian P. Cleary (born 1959, US)
*Brendan Cleary (born 1958, NI)
*William Cleland (1661–1689, S)
*Justin Clemens (born 1969, A)
*Benjamin Clementine (born 1988, E/F)
*Jack Clemo (1916–1994, E)
*John Cleveland (1613–1658, E)
*Michelle Cliff (1946–2016, J/US)
*Wayne Clifford (born 1944, C)
*Lucille Clifton (1936–2010, US)
*Caroline Clive (1801–1873, E)
*Arthur Hugh Clough (1819–1861, E)

===Co–Cu===
*Grace Stone Coates (1881–1976, US)
*Florence Earle Coates (1850–1927, US)
*Bob Cobbing (1920–2002, E)
*Ellen Melicent Cobden (1848–1914, E)
*Robbie Coburn (born 1994, A)
*Alison Cockburn (awa Alison Rutherford, 1712–1794, S)
*Alice Rollit Coe (1858–1940, US)
*Judith Ortiz Cofer (1952–2016, US)
*Brian Coffey (1905–1995, Ir/F)
*Fred Cogswell (1917–2004, C)
*Leonard Cohen (1934–2016, C)
*Matt Cohen (1942–1999, C)
*Allison Hedge Coke (born 1958, US)
*Norma Cole (born 1945, C/US)
*Hal Gibson Pateshall Colebatch (1945–2019, A)
*Aidan Coleman (born 1976, A)
*Victor Coleman (born 1944, C)
*Wanda Coleman (1946–2013, US)
*Hartley Coleridge (1796–1849, E)
*Mary Elizabeth Coleridge (1861–1907, E)
*Samuel Taylor Coleridge (1772–1834, E)
*Don Coles (1927–2017, C)
*Katharine Coles (born 1959, US)
*Edward Coletti (living, US)
*Mary Collier (c. 1688–1762, E)
*Billy Collins (born 1941, US)
*John Collins (1742–1808, E)
*William Collins (1721–1759, E)
*Laurence Collinson (1925–1986, A)
*Stephen Collis (living, C)
*John Robert Colombo (born 1936, C)
*Glenn Colquhoun (born 1964, NZ)
*Padraic Colum (1881–1972, Ir/US)
*Anna Olcott Commelin (1841–1924, US)
*Anne Compton (born 1947, C)
*Wayde Compton (born 1972, C)
*Helen Gray Cone (1859–1934, US)
*William Congreve (1670–1729, E)
*Jan Conn (born 1952, C/US)
*Stewart Conn (born 1936, S)
*Paul Conneally (born 1959, E)
*Karen Connelly (born 1969, C)
*Kevin Connolly (born 1962, C)
*Susan Connolly (born 1956, Ir)
*Robert Conquest (1917–2015, E)
*Tony Conran (1931–2013, W)
*Henry Constable (1562–1613, E/F)
*David Constantine (born 1944, E)
*Eliza Cook (1818–1889, E)
*Elizabeth Cook-Lynn (born 1930, US)
*Sophie Cooke (born 1976, S)
*Ina Coolbrith (1841–1928, US)
*Dennis Cooley (born 1944, C)
*Clark Coolidge (born 1939, US)
*Afua Cooper (born 1957, J/C)
*Thomas Cooper (1805–1892, E)
*John Cooper Clarke (born 1949, E)
*Jack Cope (1913–1991, SA)
*Wendy Cope (born 1945, E)
*Judith Copithorne (born 1939, C)
*Robert Copland (fl. 1508–1547, E)
*A. E. Coppard (1878–1957, E)
*Julia Copus (born 1969, E)
*Richard Corbet (1582–1635, E)
*Cid Corman (1924–2004, US)
*Alfred Corn (born 1943, US)
*Adam Cornford (born 1950, E)
*Frances Cornford (1886–1960, E)
*Francis M. Cornford (1874–1943, E)
*John Cornford (1915–1936, E)
*Joe Corrie (1894–1968, S)
*Gregory Corso (1930–2001, US)
*Jayne Cortez (1936–2012, US)
*William Johnson Cory (1823–1892, E)
*Louisa Stuart Costello (1799–1877, Ir/F)
*Charles Cotton (1630–1687, E)
*Anna Couani (born 1948, A)
*Anne Ross Cousin (1824–1906, E/S)
*Dani Couture (born 1978, C)
*Thomas Cowherd (1817–1907, C)
*Abraham Cowley (1618–1667, E)
*Hannah Cowley (1743–1809, E)
*Malcolm Cowley (1898–1989, US)
*Dorothy Cowlin (1911–2010, E)
*William Cowper (1731–1800, E)
*George Crabbe (1754–1832, E)
*Christine Craig (born 1943, J)
*Helen Craik (c. 1751–1825, S/E)
*Hart Crane (1899–1932, US)
*Stephen Crane (1871–1900, US)
*Richard Crashaw (1613–1649, E)
*Isabella Valancy Crawford (1846–1887, C)
*Robert Crawford (1868–1930, A)
*Robert Crawford (born 1959, S)
*Richard Crawley (1840–1893, W/E)
*Morri Creech (born 1970, US)
*Robert Creeley (1926–2006, US)
*Caroline de Crespigny (1797–1861, E/G)
*Walter D&#x27;Arcy Cresswell (1896–1960, NZ)
*Louise Crisp (born 1957, A)
*Ann Batten Cristall (1769–1848, E)
*Andy Croft (born 1956, E)
*Julian Croft (born 1941, A)
*Alison Croggon (born 1962, A)
*Jeremy Cronin (born 1949, SA)
*M. T. C. Cronin (born 1963, A)
*Lynn Crosbie (born 1963, C)
*Camilla Dufour Crosland (1812–1895, E)
*Zora Cross (1890–1964, A)
*Aleister Crowley (1875–1947, E)
*Andrew Crozier (1943–2008, E)
*Lorna Crozier (Lorna Uher, born 1948, C)
*Helen Cruickshank (1886–1975, S)
*Michael Crummey (born 1965, C)
*Julie Crysler (living, C)
*Anne Virginia Culbertson (1857–1918, US)
*Catherine Ann Cullen (living, Ir)
*Countee Cullen (1903–1946, US)
*Nancy Jo Cullen (living, C)
*Patrick Cullinan (1932–2011, SA)
*E. E. Cummings (1894–1962, US)
*Gary Cummiskey (born 1963, SA)
*Allan Cunningham (1784–1842, S/E)
*J. V. Cunningham (1911–1985, US)
*John Cunningham (1729–1773, Ir/E)
*Allen Curnow (1911–2001, NZ)
*Margaret Curran (1887–1962, A)
*Jen Currin (living, US/C)
*Tony Curtis (born 1946, W)
*Tony Curtis (born 1955, Ir)
*James Cuthbertson (1851–1910, A)
*Ivor Cutler (1923–2006, S)
*Lidija Cvetkovic (born 1967, A)
*Kayla Czaga (born 1989, C)
==D==
===Da–Do===
*H.D. (Hilda Doolittle, 1886–1961, US)
*Cyril Dabydeen (living, Gu/C)
*David Dabydeen (born 1955, Gu)
*Kalli Dakos (living, C)
*Victor Daley (1858–1905, A)
*Mary Dalton (born 1950, C)
*Pádraig J. Daly (born 1943, Ir)
*Raymond Garfield Dandridge (1882/1883–1930, US)
*Joseph A. Dandurand (living, C)
*Achmat Dangor (born 1948, SA)
*Samuel Daniel (1562–1619, E)
*David Daniels (1933–2008, US)
*Jeffrey Daniels (living, US)
*George Darley (1795–1846, Ir)
*Tina Darragh (born 1950, US)
*Keki N. Daruwalla (born 1937, In)
*Erasmus Darwin (1731–1802, E)
*Elizabeth Daryush (1887–1977, E)
*Robert von Dassanowsky (Robert Dassanowsky) (born 1965, US)
*Beverley Daurio (born 1953, C)
*William Davenant (1606–1668, E)
*Guy Davenport (1927–2005, US)
*Frank Davey (born 1940, C)
*Donald Davidson (1893–1968, US)
*John Davidson (1857–1909, S/E)
*Lucretia Maria Davidson (1808–1825, US)
*Michael Davidson (born 1944, US)
*Donald Davie (1922–1995, E)
*Alan Davies (born 1951, US)
*Deborah Kay Davies (living, W)
*Hugh Sykes Davies (1909–1984, E)
*Idris Davies (1905–1953, W)
*John Davies (1569–1626, E)
*W. H. Davies (1871–1940, W)
*Nicholas Flood Davin (1840–1901, C)
*Olive Dehn (1914–2007, E)
*Beatrice Deloitte Davis (1909–1992, A)
*Jon Davis (living, US)
*Norma Davis (1905–1945, A)
*Tanya Davis (living, C)
*Thomas Osborne Davis (1814–1845, Ir)
*Edward Davison (1898–1970, S/US)
*Peter Davison (1928–2004, US)
*Bruce Dawe (1930–2020, A)
*Kwame Dawes (born 1962, US)
*Tom Dawe (born 1940, C)
*Jeffery Day (1896–1918, E)
*Sarah Day (born 1958, A)
*Cecil Day-Lewis (1904–1972, E)
*Adriana de Barros (born 1976, C)
*Somerset de Chair (1911–1995, E)
*Jean Louis De Esque (1879–1956, US)
*Madeline DeFrees (1919–2015, US)
*Celia de Fréine (born 1948, Ir)
*Ingrid de Kok (born 1951, SA)
*Walter de la Mare (1873–1956, E)
*Christine De Luca (born 1947, S)
*Sadiqa de Meijer (born 1977, C)
*Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford (1550–1604, E)
*Phillippa Yaa de Villiers (born 1966, SA)
*James Deahl (born 1945, C)
*Dulcie Deamer (1890–1972, A)
*John F. Deane (born 1943, Ir)
*Joel Deane (born 1969, A)
*Patrick Deeley (born 1953, Ir)
*Madeline DeFrees (1919–2015, US)
*Thomas Dekker (1575–1641, E)
*Greg Delanty (born 1958, Ir/US)
*Kris Demeanor (living, C)
*Barry Dempster (born 1952, C)
*Joe Denham (living, C)
*John Denham (1615–1669, E)
*C. J. Dennis (1876–1938, A)
*John Dennison (born 1978, NZ)
*Tory Dent (1958–2005, US)
*Enid Derham (1882–1941, A)
*Thomas Dermody (1775–1802, Ir)
*Toi Derricotte (born 1941, US)
*Heather Derr-Smith (born 1971, US)
*Michelle Desbarats (living, C)
*Babette Deutsch (1895–1982, US)
*James Devaney (1890–1976, A)
*Mary Deverell (1731–1805, E)
*Denis Devlin (1908–1959, Ir)
*George E. Dewar (1895–1969, NZ)
*Christopher Dewdney (born 1951, C]
*Imtiaz Dharker (born 1954, P/W)
*Pier Giorgio Di Cicco (1949–2019, C)
*Mary di Michele (born 1949, C)
*Diane di Prima (1934–2020, US)
*Ann Diamond (living, C)
*Natalie Diaz (born 1978, US)
*Anne Dick (died 1741, S)
*Jennifer K Dick (born 1970, US)
*James Dickey (1923–1997, US)
*Adam Dickinson (living, C)
*Emily Dickinson (1830–1886, US)
*Matthew Dickman (born 1975, US)
*Michael Dickman (born 1975, US)
*Robert Dickson (1944–2007, C)
*Peter Didsbury (born 1946, E)
*Modikwe Dikobe (1913–?, SA)
*Des Dillon (living, S)
*John Dillon (1851–1927, Ir)
*B. R. Dionysius (born 1969, A)
*Ray DiPalma (1943–2016, US)
*Thomas M. Disch (born 1940, US)
*Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni (born 1956, In/US)
*Isobel Dixon (born 1969, SA/E)
*Sarah Dixon (1671–1765, E)
*William Hepworth Dixon (1821–1879, E)
*Angifi Dladla (born 1950, SA)
*Tim Dlugos (1950–1990, US)
*Kildare Dobbs (1923–2013, C)
*Henry Austin Dobson (1840–1921, E)
*Rosemary Dobson (1920–2012, A)
*Stephen Dobyns (born 1941, US)
*Jeramy Dodds (born 1974, C)
*Robert Dodsley (1703–1764, E)
*Pete Doherty (born 1979, E)
*Digby Mackworth Dolben (1848–1867, E)
*Joe Dolce (born 1947, US/A)
*Don Domanski (born 1950, C)
*Magie Dominic (born 1944, C)
*Jeffery Donaldson (living, C)
*John Donaldson (Jon Inglis, 1921–1989, E)
*John Donne (1572–1631, E)
*David Donnell (born 1939, C)
*Timothy Donnelly (born 1969, US)
*Gerard Donovan (born 1959, Ir/E)
*Theo Dorgan (born 1953, Ir)
*Ed Dorn (1929–1999, US)
*Catherine Ann Dorset (1752–1834, E)
*Candas Jane Dorsey (born 1952, C)
*Mark Doty (born 1953, US)
*Clive Doucet (born 1946, C)
*Sarah Doudney (1841–1926, E)
*Lucy Dougan (born 1966, A)
*Charles Montagu Doughty (1843–1926, E)
*Lord Alfred Douglas (1870–1945, E)
*Alice May Douglas (1865–1943, US)
*Gavin Douglas (c. 1474–1522, S)
*George Brisbane Scott Douglas (1856–1935, S)
*Keith Douglas (1920–1944, E)
*Orville Lloyd Douglas (born 1976, C)
*Rita Dove (born 1952, US)
*Basil Dowling (1910–2000, NZ)
*Finuala Dowling (born 1962, SA)
*Gordon Downie (1964–2017, C)
*Ellen Mary Patrick Downing (1828–1869, Ir)
*Ernest Dowson (1867–1900, E)
*Francis Hastings Doyle (1810–1888, E)
*Kirby Doyle (1932–2003, US)

===Dr–Dy===
*Michael Dransfield (1948–1973, A)
*Jane Draycott (born 1954, E)
*Michael Drayton (1563–1631, E)
*John Swanwick Drennan (1809–1893, Ir)
*William Drennan (1754–1820, Ir)
*Adam Drinan (also Joseph Macleod, 1903–1984, E)
*John Drinkwater (1882–1937, E)
*William Drummond of Hawthornden (1585–1649, S)
*William Henry Drummond (1854–1907, C)
*John Dryden (1631–1700, E)
*W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963, US)
*I. D. du Plessis (1900–1981, SA)
*Klara du Plessis (living, SA/C)
*Norman Dubie (born 1945, US)
*Stephen Duck (c. 1705–1756, E)
*Louis Dudek (1918–2001, S)
*Carol Ann Duffy (born 1955, S)
*Charles Gavan Duffy (1816–1903, Ir/A)
*Maureen Duffy (born 1933, E)
*Alan Dugan (1923–2003, J/US)
*Michael Dugan (1947–2006, A)
*Sasha Dugdale (born 1974, E)
*Eileen Duggan (1894–1972, NZ)
*Laurie Duggan (born 1949, A)
*Jas H. Duke (1939–1992, A)
*Richard Duke (1658–1711, E)
*Tug Dumbly (Geoff Forrester, living, A)
*Marilyn Dumont (born 1955, C)
*Paul Laurence Dunbar (1872–1906, US)
*Robert Nugent Dunbar (1798–1866, Ag)
*William Dunbar (1459/1460 – c. 1530, S)
*Andrew Duncan (born 1956, E)
*Robert Duncan (1919–1988, US)
*Camille Dungy (born 1972, US)
*Helen Dunmore (1952–2017, E)
*Douglas Dunn (born 1942, S)
*Max Dunn (died 1963, A)
*Stephen Dunn (1939–2021, US)
*Joe Dunthorne (born 1982, W)
*Paul Durcan (born 1944, Ir)
*Lawrence Durrell (1912–1990, E)
*Anne Dutton (1692–1765, E)
*Geoffrey Dutton (1922–1998, A)
*Stuart Dybek (born 1942, US)
*Edward Dyer (1543–1607, E)
*John Dyer (1699–1758, W)
*Bob Dylan (born 1941, US)
*Edward Dyson (1865–1931, A)
==E==

*Joan Adeney Easdale (1913–1998, E)
*Evelyn Eaton (1902–1983, C)
*Richard Eberhart (1904–2005, US)
*Emily Eden (1797–1869, E)
*Helen Parry Eden (1885–1960, E)
*Stephen Edgar (born 1951, A)
*Lauris Edmond (1924–2000, NZ)
*Russell Edson (1928–2014, US)
*Richard Edwardes (c. 1523–1566, E)
*Dic Edwards (born 1953, W)
*Jonathan Edwards (born 1979, W)
*Rhian Edwards (living, W/E)
*Helen Merrill Egerton (1866–1951, C)
*Terry Ehret (born 1955, US)
*Vic Elias (1948–2006, US/C)
*Anne Elder (1918–1976, A)
*George Eliot (Mary Anne Evans, 1819–1880, E)
*T. S. Eliot (1888–1965, US/E)
*Elizabeth F. Ellet (1818–1877, US)
*Charlotte Elliot (1839–1880, S)
*David Elliott (1923–1999, C)
*Julia Anne Elliott (1809–1841, E)
*Jean Elliot (1727–1805, S)
*Ebenezer Elliott (1781–1849, E)
*George Ellis (1753–1815, E)
*Royston Ellis (born 1941, E)
*Chris Else (born 1942, NZ)
*Rebecca Elson (1960–1999, C)
*Crispin Elsted (living, C)
*Edmund Elviden (fl. 1570, E)
*Claudia Emerson (1957–2014, US)
*Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–1882, US)
*Chris Emery (born 1963, E)
*William Empson (1906–1984, E)
*Paul Engle (1908–1991, US)
*John Ennis (born 1944, Ir)
*Karen Enns (living, C)
*D. J. Enright (1920–2002, E)
*Riemke Ensing (born 1939, NZ)
*Theodore Enslin (1925–2011, US)
*Louise Erdrich (born 1954, US)
*Ralph Erskine (1685–1752, S)
*Clayton Eshleman (1935–2021, US)
*Martín Espada (born 1957, US)
*Rhina Espaillat (born 1932, US)
*Ramabai Espinet (born 1948, T)
*Jill Alexander Essbaum (born 1971, US)
*Maggie Estep (1963–2014, US)
*Michael Estok (1939–1989, C)
*Jerry Estrin (1947–1993, US)
*George Etherege (1635–1691, E)
*Anne Evans (1820–1870, E)
*Christine Evans (born 1943, E/W)
*George Essex Evans (1863–1909, A)
*Margiad Evans (Peggy Whistler, 1909–1958, E)
*Mari Evans (1919–2017, US)
*Sebastian Evans (1830–1909, E)
*William Everson (Brother Antoninus, 1912–1994, US)
*Gavin Ewart (1916–1995, E)
*John K. Ewers (1904–1978, A)
*Elisabeth Eybers (1915–2007, SA/Nt)
==F==

*Frederick William Faber (1814–1863, E)
*Diane Fahey (born 1945, A)
*Ruth Fainlight (born 1931, US/E)
*Kingsley Fairbridge (1885–1924, SA)
*A. R. D. Fairburn (1904–1957, NZ)
*Maria and Harriet Falconar (born c. 1771–1774, E or S)
*William Falconer (1732–1769, S)
*Padraic Fallon (1905–1974, Ir)
*Catherine Maria Fanshawe (1765–1834, E)
*U. A. Fanthorpe (1929–1909, E)
*Patricia Fargnoli (born 1937, US)
*Eleanor Farjeon (1881–1965, E)
*Fiona Farrell (born 1947, NZ)
*John Farrell (1851–1904, A)
*John Farrell (1968–2010, US)
*Michael Farrell (born 1965, A)
*Katie Farris (born 1983, US)
*Margaretta Faugères (1771–1801, US)
*Jessie Redmon Fauset (1882–1961, US)
*Brian Fawcett (1944–2022, C)
*Elaine Feeney (living, Ir)
*Elaine Feinstein (1930–2019, E)
*Alison Fell (born 1944, S)
*Charles Fenerty (c. 1821–1892, C)
*Elijah Fenton (1683–1730, E)
*James Fenton (1931–2021, NI)
*James Fenton (born 1949, E)
*Richard Fenton (1747–1821, W)
*Gus Ferguson (1940–2020, SA)
*Samuel Ferguson (1810–1886, Ir)
*Robert Fergusson (1750–1774, S)
*Lawrence Ferlinghetti (1919–2021, US)
*Ferron (Deborah Foisy, born 1952, C)
*George Fetherling (born 1949, C)
*Michael Field (Katherine Bradley, 1846–1914, and Edith Cooper, 1862–1913, E)
*Henry Fielding (1707–1754, E)
*Connie Fife (1961–2017, C)
*Anne Finch, Countess of Winchilsea (1661–1720, E)
*Annie Finch (born 1956, US)
*Peter Finch (living, W)
*Robert Finch (1900–1995, C)
*Ian Hamilton Finlay (1925–2006, S)
*Joan Finnigan (1925–2007, C)
*Jon Paul Fiorentino (living, C)
*Catherine Fisher (born 1957, W)
*Roy Fisher (1930–2017, E)
*Edward FitzGerald (1809–1883, E)
*Judith Fitzgerald (1952–2015, C)
*R. D. Fitzgerald (1902–1987, A)
*Robert Fitzgerald (1910–1985, US)
*Richard FitzPatrick (1748–1813, Ir/E)
*Roderick Flanagan (1828–1862, A)
*James Elroy Flecker (1884–1915, E)
*Marjorie Fleming (1803–1811, S)
*Giles Fletcher (c. 1586–1623, E)
*Giles Fletcher, the Elder (c. 1548–1611, E)
*John Fletcher (1579–1625, E)
*John Gould Fletcher (1886–1950, US)
*Lisa Anne Fletcher (1844–1905, US)
*Phineas Fletcher (1582–1650, E)
*Robert Fletcher (fl. 1586, E)
*Maria De Fleury (c. 1754 – c. 1794, E)
*F. S. Flint (1885–1960, E)
*Alice Flowerdew (1759–1830, E)
*Lionel Fogarty (born 1958, A)
*Jack Foley (born 1940, US)
*Mary Hannay Foott (1846–1918, A)
*John Forbes (1950–1998, A)
*Carolyn Forché (born 1950, US)
*Ford Madox Ford (1873–1939, E)
*John Ford (1586–1639, E)
*John M. Ford (1957–2006, US)
*Robert Ford (1915–1998, C)
*Mabel Forrest (1872–1935, A)
*William Forrest (fl. 1581, E)
*Veronica Forrest-Thomson (1947–1975, S)
*Gary Jeshel Forrester (born 1946, NZ)
*William Forster (1818–1882, A)
*John Foulcher (born 1952, A)
*Ellen Thorneycroft Fowler (1860–1920, E)
*William Fowler (c. 1560–1612, S)
*Kate Fox (born 1975, E)
*Len Fox (1905–2004, A)
*Janet Frame (1924–2004, NZ)
*Ruth France (1913–1968, NZ)
*Matthew Francis (born 1956, E/W)
*Robert Francis (1901–1987, US)
*George Sutherland Fraser (1915–1980, S)
*Gregory Fraser (living, US)
*Raymond Fraser (1941–2018, C)
*Benjamin Frater (1979–2007, A)
*Brentley Frazer (born 1972, A)
*Grace Beacham Freeman (1916–2002, US)
*John Freeman (1880–1929, E)
*Nicholas Freeston (1907–1978, E)
*Patrick Friesen (born 1946, C)
*Anthony Freston (1757–1819, E) 
*Robert Frost (1874–1963, US)
*Gwen Frostic (1906–2001, US)
*Gene Frumkin (1928–2007, US)
*Mark Frutkin (born 1948, US/C)
*Sheila Meiring Fugard (born 1932, SA)
*Ethel Romig Fuller (1883–1965, US)
*John Fuller (born 1937, E)
*Roy Fuller (1912–1991, E)
*Mary Eliza Fullerton (1868–1946, A)
*Alice Fulton (born 1952, US)
*Robin Fulton (born 1937, S)
*Ulpian Fulwell (1545/1546 – before 1586, E)
*Richard Furness (1791–1857, E)
==G==
===Ga–Go===
*Frances Dana Barker Gage (1808–1884, US)
*Georgie Starbuck Galbraith (1909–1980, US)
*Dunstan Gale (fl. 1596, E)
*Kate Gale (living, US)
*James Galvin (born 1951, US)
*Patrick Galvin (1927–2011, Ir)
*Forrest Gander (born 1956, US)
*Robert Garioch (1909–1981, S)
*Hamlin Garland (1860–1940, US)
*Raymond Garlick (1926–2011, W)
*Richard Garnett (1835–1906, E)
*Jean Garrigue (1912–1972, US)
*Samuel Garth (1661–1719, E)
*George Gascoigne (1525–1577, E)
*David Gascoyne (1916–2001, E/F)
*Bill Gaston (born 1953, C)
*John Gay (1685–1732, E)
*Ross Gay (born 1974, US)
*William Gay (1865–1897, S/A)
*Alexander Geddes (1737–1802, S)
*Leon Gellert (1892–1977, A)
*W. R. P. George (1912–2006, W)
*Dan Gerber (born 1940, US)
*Amy Gerstler (born 1956, US)
*Marty Gervais (living, C)
*Charles Ghigna (born 1946, US)
*Monk Gibbon (1896–1987, Ir)
*Reginald Gibbons (born 1947, US)
*Stella Gibbons (1902–1989, E)
*Ivy Gibbs (c. 1886–1966, NZ)
*Kahlil Gibran (1883–1931, L/US)
*G. H. Gibson (Ironbark, 1846–1921, A)
*Wilfrid Wilson Gibson (1878–1962, E)
*Elsa Gidlow (1898–1986, C)
*Angus Morrison Gidney (1803–1882, C)
*Gerry Gilbert (1936–2009, C)
*Jack Gilbert (1925–2012, US)
*Kevin Gilbert (1933–1993, A)
*W. S. Gilbert (1836–1911, E)
*Ellen Gilchrist (born 1935, US)
*George Gilfillan (1813–1878, S)
*Charlotte Perkins Gilman (1860–1935, US)
*Mary Gilmore (1865–1962, A)
*Allen Ginsberg (1926–1997, US)
*Dana Gioia (born 1950, US)
*Nikki Giovanni (1943–2024, US)
*Jesse Glass (born 1954, US/Jp)
*John Glassco (1909–1981, C)
*Madeline Gleason (1903–1979, US)
*Duncan Glen (1933–2008, S)
*William Glen (1789–1826, S)
*Lorri Neilsen Glenn (living, C)
*Denis Glover (1912–1980, NZ)
*Louise Glück (born 1943, US)
*Rumer Godden (1907–1998, In/E)
*Patricia Goedicke (1931–2006, US)
*Oliver St. John Gogarty (1878–1957, Ir)
*Albert Goldbarth (born 1948, US)
*Kenneth Goldsmith (born 1961, US)
*Oliver Goldsmith (1728–1774, Ir/E)
*Oliver Goldsmith (1794–1861, C)
*Peter Goldsworthy (born 1951, A)
*Leona Gom (born 1946, C)
*W. T. Goodge (1862–1909, A)
*Lorna Goodison (born 1947, J)
*Paul Goodman (1911–1972, US)
*Barnabe Googe (1540–1594, E)
*Adam Lindsay Gordon (1833–1870, A)
*Katherine L. Gordon (living, C)
*Robert Gordon of Straloch (1580–1661, S)
*Hedwig Gorski (born 1949, US)
*Edmund Gosse (1849–1928, E)
*Phyllis Gotlieb (1926–2009, C)
*Keith Gottschalk (born 1946, SA)
*Alan Gould (born 1949, A)
*Nora Gould (living, C)
*John Gower (c. 1330–1408, E)
*Susan Goyette (born 1964, C)

===Gr–Gy===
*James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose (1612–1650, S)
*Jorie Graham (born 1950, US)
*Neile Graham (born 1958, C)
*Robert Cunninghame Graham of Gartmore (1735–1797, S)
*W. S. Graham (1918–1986, S)
*James Grahame (1765–1811, S)
*Mark Granier (born 1957, E/Ir)
*Paul Grano (1894–1975, A)
*Alex Grant (living, US)
*Richard Graves (1715–1804, E)
*Richard Harry Graves (1897–1971, A)
*Robert Graves (1895–1985, E)
*Alexander Gray (1882–1968, S)
*Catherine Gray, Lady Manners (1766–1852, Ir)
*Kathryn Gray (born 1973, W)
*Maxwell Gray (Mary Gleed Tuttiett, 1846–1923, E)
*Robert Gray (born 1945, A)
*Stephen Gray (born 1941, SA)
*Thomas Gray (1716–1771, E)
*Dorothy Auchterlonie Green (1915–1991, A)
*H. M. Green (1881–1962, A)
*Paula Green (born 1955, NZ)
*Richard Greene (born 1961, C)
*Robert Greene (1558–1592, E)
*Lavinia Greenlaw (born 1962, E)
*Gavin Greenlees (1930–1983, A)
*Leslie Greentree (living, C)
*Dora Greenwell (1821–1882, E)
*Jane Greer (born 1953, US)
*Linda Gregg (1942–2019, US)
*Horace Gregory (1898–1982, US)
*Andrew Greig (born 1951, S)
*Eamon Grennan (born 1941, Ir)
*H. W. Gretton (1914–1983, NZ)
*Fulke Greville, 1st Baron Brooke (1554–1628, E)
*Gerald Griffin (1803–1840, Ir)
*Sarah Maria Griffin (living, Ir)
*Susan Griffin (born 1943, US)
*Bill Griffiths (1948–2007, E)
*Bryn Griffiths (living, W/E)
*Jane Griffiths (born 1970, E)
*Geoffrey Grigson (1905–1985, E)
*Nicholas Grimald (1519–1562, E)
*Angelina Weld Grimké (1880–1958, US)
*Charlotte Forten Grimké (1837–1914, US)
*Eliza Griswold (born 1973, US)
*Rufus Wilmot Griswold (1815–1857, US)
*Philip Gross (born 1952, E)
*Paul Groves (born 1947, E/W)
*Bertha Jane Grundy (Mrs. Leith Adams, 1837–1912, E)
*Jeff Guess (born 1948, A)
*Barbara Guest (1920–2006, US)
*Edgar Guest (1881–1959, US)
*Paul Guest (living, US)
*Malcolm Guite (born 1957, E)
*Arthur Guiterman (1871–1943, US)
*Genni Gunn (born 1949, C)
*Thom Gunn (1929–2004, E/US)
*Kristjana Gunnars (born 1948, C)
*Lee Gurga (born 1949, US)
*Ivor Gurney (1890–1937, E)
*Ralph Gustafson (1909–1995, C)
*Mafika Gwala (1946–2014, SA)
*Cyril Gwynn (1897–1988, W/A)
*Stephen Gwynn (1864–1950, Ir)
*Beth Gylys (born 1964, US)
*Brion Gysin (1916–1986, C/E)
==H==
===Ha–He===
*William Habington (1605–1654, E)
*Marilyn Hacker (born 1942, US)
*John Haines (1924–2011, US)
*Paul Haines (1933–2003, US/C)
*Helen Hajnoczky (born 1985, C)
*Thomas Gordon Hake (1809–1895, E)
*Sarah Josepha Hale (1788–1879, US)
*Bernadette Hall (born 1945, NZ)
*Donald Hall (1928–2018, US)
*Megan Hall (born 1972, SA)
*Phil Hall (born 1953, C)
*Radclyffe Hall (1880–1943, E)
*Rodney Hall (born 1935, A)
*Arthur Hallam (1811–1833, E)
*Alan Halsey (born 1949, W/E)
*Michael Hamburger (1924–2007, E)
*Ian Hamilton (1938–2001, E)
*Jane Eaton Hamilton (born 1954, C)
*Janet Hamilton (1795–1873, S)
*Philip Hammial (born 1937, A)
*Robert Gavin Hampson (born 1948, E)
*Susan Hampton (born 1949, A)
*Sophie Hannah (born 1971, E)
*Bilal Haq (born 1948, P)
*Caroline Hardaker (born 1986, E)
*Kerry Hardie (born 1951, NI)
*Thomas Hardy (1840–1928, E)
*Lesbia Harford (1891–1927, A)
*Joy Harjo (born 1951, US)
*William Harmon (born 1938, US)
*Frances Harper (1825–1911, US)
*Michael S. Harper (1938–2016 US)
*Charles Harpur (1813–1868, A)
*Alice Harriman (1861–1925, US)
*Edward Harrington (1895–1966, A)
*Claire Harris (1937–2018, C)
*Joseph Harris (1773–1825, W)
*Max Harris (1921–1995, A)
*Michael Harris (born 1944, C)
*Robert Harris (1951–1993, A)
*Wilson Harris (1921–2018, Gu/E)
*Jennifer Harrison (born 1955, A)
*Jim Harrison (1937–2016, US)
*Martin Harrison (1949–2014, A)
*Richard Harrison (poet) (living, C)
*Tony Harrison (born 1937, E)
*Les Harrop (born 1948, E/A)
*Kingsley O. Harrop-Williams (1947-2019, GU) 
*Molly Harrower (1906–1999, S)
*J. S. Harry (1939–2015, A)
*Carla Harryman (born 1952, US)
*David Harsent (born 1942, E)
*Kevin Hart (born 1954, A)
*Paul Hartal (born 1936, Is/C)
*Anne Le Marquand Hartigan (living, Ir)
*Jill Hartman (born 1974, C)
*Sadakichi Hartmann (1867–1944, US)
*Michael Hartnett (1941–1999, Ir)
*Diana Hartog (born 1942, C)
*William Hart-Smith (1911–1990, NZ)
*F. W. Harvey (1888–1957, E)
*Elisabeth Harvor (1936–2024, C)
*Gwen Harwood (1920–1995, A)
*Lee Harwood (1939–2015, E)
*Alamgir Hashmi (born 1951, E)
*J. H. Haslam (1874–1969, NZ)
*Nicholas Hasluck (born 1942, A)
*Robert Hass (born 1941, US)
*Katherine Hastings (living, US)
*Ann Hatton (1764–1838, W)
*Stephen Hawes (died 1523, E)
*Robert Stephen Hawker (1803–1875, E)
*Kathleen Hawkins (1883–1981, NZ)
*George Campbell Hay (1915–1984, S)
*Gilbert Hay (born c. 1403, S)
*Myfanwy Haycock (1913–1963, W/E)
*Robert Hayden (1913–1980, US)
*William Hayley (1745–1820, E)
*Robert Hayman (1575–1629, Nf)
*Tony Haynes (born 1960, US)
*Joel Hayward (born 1964, NZ)
*Eliza Haywood (c. 1693–1756, E)
*H.D. (Hilda Doolittle, 1886–1961, E)
*Randolph Healy (born 1956, Ir)
*Seamus Heaney (1939–2013, Ir)
*Josephine D. Heard (1861 – c. 1921, US)
*John Heath-Stubbs (1918–2006, E)
*Charles Heavysege (1816–1876, C)
*James Hebblethwaite (1857–1921, A)
*Anthony Hecht (1923–2004, US)
*Jennifer Michael Hecht (born 1965, US)
*John Hegley (born 1953, E)
*Wilfrid Heighington (1897–1945, C)
*Steven Heighton (1961–2022, C)
*Anita Heiss (born 1968, A)
*Lyn Hejinian (born 1941, US)
*Jill Hellyer (1925–2012, A)
*David Helwig (1938–2018, C)
*Maggie Helwig (born 1961, C)
*Felicia Hemans (1793–1835, E)
*Kris Hemensley (born 1946, A)
*Essex Hemphill (1957–1995, US)
*Brian Henderson (born 1948, C)
*Hamish Henderson (1919–2002, S)
*Philip Henderson (1906–1977, E)
*Thomas William Heney (1862–1928, A)
*John Henley (1692–1756, E)
*William Ernest Henley (1849–1903, E)
*Adrian Henri (1932–2000, E)
*Paul Henry (born 1959, W)
*Robert Henryson (fl. 1460–1500, S)
*Thomas Nicoll Hepburn (wrote as Gabriel Setoun, 1861–1930, S)
*Dorothea Herbert (c. 1767–1829, Ir)
*Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury (1582–1648, E/W)
*George Herbert (1593–1632, W)
*Mary Herbert, Countess of Pembroke (Mary Sidney, 1561–1621, E)
*W. N. Herbert (born 1961, S)
*Jason Heroux (born 1971, C)
*Robert Herrick (1591–1674, E)
*Steven Herrick (born 1958, A)
*Benjamin Hertwig (living, C)
*Thomas Kibble Hervey (1799–1959, E)
*Phoebe Hesketh (1909–2005, E)
*Paul Hetherington (born 1958, A)
*William Maxwell Hetherington (1803–1865, S)
*Dorothy Hewett (1923–2002, A)
*John Hewitt (1907–1987, NI)
*Maurice Hewlett (1861–1923, E)
*William Heyen (born 1940, US)
*Thomas Heywood (c. 1570s – 1650, E)

===Hi–Hu===
*Bob Hicok (born 1960, US)
*Dick Higgins (1938–1998, US)
*F. R. Higgins (1896–1941, Ir)
*Kevin Higgins (born 1967, Ir)
*Rita Ann Higgins (born 1955, Ir)
*Colleen Higgs (born 1962, SA)
*Charles Higham (1931–2012, A)
*Scott Hightower (born 1952, US)
*Conrad Hilberry (1928–2017, US)
*Fiona Hile (living, A)
*Barry Hill (born 1943, A)
*Edward Hill (1843–1923, US)
*Geoffrey Hill (1932–2016, E/US)
*Robert Hilles (born 1951, C)
*Richard Hillman (born 1964, A)
*Ellen Hinsey (born 1960, US)
*Jane Hirshfield (born 1953, US)
*George Hitchcock (1914–2010, US)
*H. L. Hix (born 1960, US)
*Thomas Hoccleve (c. 1368–1426, E)
*Philip Hodgins (1959–1995, A)
*Ralph Hodgson (1871–1962, E/US)
*W. N. Hodgson (1893–1916, E)
*Barbara Hofland (1770–1844, E)
*Michael Hofmann (born 1957, G/US)
*James Hogg (1770–1835, S)
*David Holbrook (1923–2011, E)
*Susan Holbrook (living, C)
*Thomas Holcroft (1745–1809, E)
*Clive Holden (living, C)
*Margaret Holford (1778–1852, E)
*Abraham Holland (died 1626, E)
*Barbara Holland (1933–2010, US)
*Hugh Holland (1569–1633, W)
*Jane Holland (born 1966, E)
*John Holland (1794–1872, E)
*Norah M. Holland (1876–1925, C)
*Sarah Holland-Batt (born 1982, A)
*John Hollander (1929–2013, US)
*Matthew Hollis (born 1971, E)
*Anselm Hollo (1934–2013, US)
*Nancy Holmes (born 1959, C)
*Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. (1809–1894, US)
*Thomas Hood (1798–1845, E)
*Cornelia Hoogland (living, C)
*Ellen Sturgis Hooper (1812–1848, US)
*Hilda Mary Hooke (1898–1978, C)
*Harry Hooton (1908–1961, A)
*A. D. Hope (1907–2000, A)
*Christopher Hope (born 1944, SA)
*Gerard Manley Hopkins (1844–1889, E)
*Leah Horlick (living, C)
*Sean Horlor (born 1981, C)
*Frances Horovitz (1938–1983, E)
*Michael Horovitz (1935–2021, E)
*Peter Horn (1934–2019, SA)
*George Moses Horton (1797–1884, US)
*Allan Kolski Horwitz (born 1952, SA)
*Sylvester Houédard (1924–1992, Gy)
*Karen Houle (living, C)
*Joan Houlihan (living, US)
*A. E. Housman (1859–1936, E)
*Edward Howard (1793–1841, E) 
*Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey (1517–1547, E)
*Liz Howard (living, C)
*Richard Howard (1929–2022, US)
*Robert Guy Howarth (1906–1974, A)
*Fanny Howe (born 1940, US)
*George Howe (1769–1821, A)
*Julia Ward Howe (1819–1910, US)
*Susan Howe (born 1937, US)
*Ada Verdun Howell (1902–1981, A)
*Anthony Howell (born 1945, E)
*Harry Howith (1934–2014, C)
*Mary Howitt (1799–1888, E)
*Richard Howitt (1799–1869, E)
*William Howitt (1792–1879, E)
*Francis Hubert (died 1629, E)
*Thomas Hudson (d. c. 1605, S)
*Annie Campbell Huestis (1878–1960, C)
*Frieda Hughes (born 1960, A)
*Langston Hughes (1902–1967, US)
*Richard Hughes (1900–1976, E/W)
*Ted Hughes (1930–1998, E)
*Richard Hugo (1923–1982, US)
*Coral Hull (born 1965, A)
*Lynda Hull (1954–1994, US)
*T. E. Hulme (1883–1917, E)
*Alexander Hume (c. 1560–1609, S)
*Anna Hume (fl. 1644, S)
*David Hume of Godscroft (1558–1629, S)
*Barry Humphries (1934–2023, A/E)
*Emyr Humphreys (1919–2020, W)
*Helen Humphreys (born 1961, C)
*Leigh Hunt (1784–1859, E)
*Sam Hunt (born 1946, NZ)
*Aislinn Hunter (living, C)
*Al Hunter (living, C)
*Bruce Hunter (born 1952, C)
*Catherine Hunter (born 1957, C)
*Rex Hunter (1889–1960, NZ)
*Constance Hunting (1925–2006, US)
*Cynthia Huntington (born 1952, US)
*Chris Hutchinson (born 1972, C)
*Pearse Hutchinson (1927–2012, Ir)
*William Hutton (1723–1815, E)
*Aldous Huxley (1894–1963, E)
*Douglas Smith Huyghue (1816–1891, C/A)
*Douglas Hyde (1860–1949, Ir)
*Robin Hyde (pen name of Iris Wilkinson; 1906–1939, NZ)
*Helen von Kolnitz Hyer (1896–1983, US)
*Maureen Hynes (living, C)
==I==

*John Imlah (1799–1846, S)
*Rex Ingamells (1913–1955, A)
*Jean Ingelow (1820–1897, E)
*P. Inman (born 1947, US)
*Susan Ioannou (born 1944, C)
*Valentin Iremonger (1918–1991, Ir)
*Eric Irvin (1908–1993, A)
*Frances Itani (born 1942, C)
*Helen Ivory (born 1969, E)
==J==

*Alan Jackson (born 1938, S)
*Violet Jacob (1863–1946, S)
*Josephine Jacobsen (1908–2003, US)
*Ethel Jacobson (1899–1991, US)
*Richard Jago (1715–1781, E)
*James I of Scotland (1394–1437, S)
*James VI and I (1566–1625, S/E)
*Alan James (living, SA)
*Clive James (1939–2019, A)
*John James (1939–2018, W/E)
*Maria James (1793–1868, W/US)
*Kathleen Jamie (born 1962, S)
*Robert Alan Jamieson (born 1958, S)
*Patricia Janus (1932–2006, US)
*Derek Jarman (1942–1994, E)
*Mark Jarman (born 1952, US)
*Lisa Jarnot (born 1967, US)
*Randall Jarrell (1914–1965, US)
*Alan Jefferies (born 1957, A)
*Robinson Jeffers (1887–1962, US)
*Isadore G. Jeffery (1840–1919, US)
*Rod Jellema (1927–1918, US)
*Jemeni (Joanne Gairy, born 1976, Gd/C)
*Graham Jenkin (born 1938, A)
*John Jenkins (born 1949, A)
*Joseph Jenkins (1818–1898, W/A)
*Mike Jenkins (born 1953, W)
*Nigel Jenkins (1949–2014, W)
*Elizabeth Jennings (1926–2001, E)
*Kate Jennings (1948–2021, A)
*Wopko Jensma (1939–1993 or after, SA)
*Sydney Jephcott (1864–1951, A)
*Paulette Jiles (born 1943, US/C)
*Liesl Jobson (living, SA)
*Rita Joe (1932–2007, C)
*Edmund John (1883–1917, E)
*Godfrey John (living, W)
*E. Pauline Johnson (1861–1913, C)
*Fenton Johnson (born 1953, US)
*Georgia Douglas Johnson (1880–1966, US)
*Helene Johnson (1906–1995, US)
*James Weldon Johnson (1871–1938, US)
*Linton Kwesi Johnson (born 1952, J)
*Lionel Johnson (1867–1902, E)
*Samuel Johnson (1709–1784, E)
*Sarah Johnson (born 1980, SA)
*George Benson Johnston (1913–2004, C)
*Martin Johnston (1947–1990, A)
*Amanda Jones (1835–1914, US)
*D. G. Jones (1929–2016, C)
*David Jones (1895–1974, E)
*Ebenezer Jones (1820–1860, E)
*El Jones (living, C)
*Emma Jones (born 1977, A)
*Evan Jones (1931–2022, A)
*Glyn Jones (1905–1995, W)
*Jack Jones (born 1992, W)
*Jill Jones (born 1951, A)
*John Joseph Jones (1930–2000, A)
*Patrick Jones (born 1965, W)
*Rae Desmond Jones (1941–2017, A)
*Richard Jones (living, US)
*Terry Jones (1942–2020, W/E)
*Erica Jong (born 1942, US)
*Ben Jonson (1573–1637, E)
*Julie Joosten (born 1980, US/C)
*John Jordan (1930–1988, Ir)
*June Jordan (1936–2002, J/US)
*Anthony Joseph (born 1966, T/E)
*Eve Joseph (born 1953, C)
*Jenny Joseph (1932–2018, E)
*Danilo Jovanovitch (1919–2015, A)
*James Joyce (1882–1941, Ir/I)
*Trevor Joyce (born 1947, Ir)
*Frank Judge (living, US)
*A. M. Juster (born 1956, US)
*Donald Justice (1925–2004, US)
==K==

*Jim Kacian (born 1953, US)
*Aryan Kaganof (born 1964, SA)
*Chester Kallman (1921–1975, US)
*Surjeet Kalsey (living, C)
*Smaro Kamboureli (living, C)
*Ilya Kaminsky (born 1977, US)
*Julie Kane (born 1952, US)
*Adeena Karasick (born 1965, C/US)
*Mary Karr (born 1955, US)
*Julia Kasdorf (born 1962, US)
*Laura Kasischke (born 1961, US)
*Bob Kaufman (1925–1986, US)
*Shirley Kaufman (1923–2016, US)
*Rupi Kaur (born 1992, C)
*Patrick Kavanagh (1904–1967, Ir)
*Jackie Kay (born 1961, S)
*Jayne Fenton Keane (living, A)
*Lionel Kearns (born 1937, C)
*Annie Keary (1825–1879, E)
*Diane Keating (living, C)
*John Keats (1795–1821, E)
*John Keble (1792–1866, E)
*Janice Kulyk Keefer (born 1952, C)
*Weldon Kees (1914–1955, US)
*Nancy Keesing (1923–1993, A)
*Antigone Kefala (1935–2022, A)
*Christopher Kelen (born 1958, A)
*S. K. Kelen (born 1956, A)
*Anne Kellas (born 1951, SA/A)
*Isabella Kelly (1759–1857, S/E)
*M. T. Kelly (born 1946, C)
*Arthur Kelton (died c. 1550, E/W)
*Penn Kemp (born 1944, C)
*Henry Kendall (1839–1882, A)
*Francis Kenna (1865–1932, A)
*Cate Kennedy (born 1963, A)
*Geoffrey Studdert Kennedy (&quot;Woodbine Willy&quot;, 1883–1929, E)
*Leo Kennedy (1907–2000, C)
*Miranda Kennedy (born 1975, US)
*Walter Kennedy (c. 1455 – c. 1508, S)
*X. J. Kennedy (born 1929, US)
*Jean Kent (born 1951, A)
*Jane Kenyon (1947–1995, US)
*Robert Kirkland Kernighan (1854–1926, C)
*Jack Kerouac (1922–1969, US)
*Sidney Keyes (1922–1943, E)
*Keorapetse Kgositsile (1938–2018, SA/US)
*Mimi Khalvati (born 1944, E)
*Charles Kickham (1828–1882, Ir)
*Anne Killigrew (1660–1685, E)
*Joyce Kilmer (1886–1918, US)
*Arthur Henry King (1910–2000, E/US)
*Henry King (1592–1669, E)
*William King (1663–1712, E)
*Charles Kingsley (1819–1875, E)
*Barbara Kingsolver (born 1955, US)
*Galway Kinnell (1927–2014, US)
*John Kinsella (born 1963, A)
*Thomas Kinsella (1928–2021, Ir)
*Rudyard Kipling (1865–1936, E)
*Olga Kirsch (1924–1997, SA/Is)
*Roy Kiyooka (1926–1994, C)
*Carolyn Kizer (1925–1914, US)
*Barbara Klar (born 1966, C)
*Sarah Klassen (born 1932, C)
*A. M. Klein (1909–1972, C)
*August Kleinzahler (born 1949, US)
*Etheridge Knight (1931–1991, US)
*Stephen Knight (born 1960, W/E)
*Raymond Knister (1899–1932, C)
*Kenneth Koch (1925–2002, US)
*Ruth Ellen Kocher (born 1965, US)
*Joy Kogawa (born 1935, C)
*komninos (born 1950, A)
*Yusef Komunyakaa (born 1947, US)
*Ted Kooser (born 1939, US)
*Shane Koyczan (born 1976, C)
*Rustum Kozain (born 1966, SA)
*Rudi Krausmann (1933–2019, A)
*Ruth Krauss (1901–1993, US)
*Carolyn Kreiter-Foronda (born 1946, US)
*Uys Krige (1910–1987, SA)
*Robert Kroetsch (1927–2011, C)
*Antjie Krog (born 1952, SA)
*Anton Robert Krueger (born 1971, SA)
*Marilyn Krysl (born 1942, US)
*Anatoly Kudryavitsky (born 1954, Ir)
*Abhay Kumar (born 1980, In)
*Mazisi Kunene (1930–2006, SA)
*Tuli Kupferberg (1923–2010, US)
*Maxine Kumin (1925–2014, US)
*Stanley Kunitz (1905–2006, US)
*Frank Kuppner (born 1951, S)
*Stephen Kuusisto (born 1955, US)
*Morris Kyffin (c. 1555–1598, W/E)
*Joanne Kyger (1934–2017, US)
*Francis Kynaston (1587–1642, E)
==L==
===La–Ln===
*John La Rose (1927–2006, J/E)
*Sonnet L&#x27;Abbé (born 1973, C)
*Edward A. Lacey (1938–1995, C)
*Mike Ladd (born 1959, A)
*Ben Ladouceur (born 1987, C)
*Nick Laird (born 1975, NI)
*David Lake (1929–2016, A)
*Philip Lamantia (1927–2005, US)
*Kendrick Lamar (born 1987, US)
*Charles Lamb (1775–1834, E)
*Archibald Lampman (1861–1899, C)
*Tim Lander (1938–2023, C)
*Letitia Elizabeth Landon (1802–1838, E)
*Walter Savage Landor (1775–1864, E)
*M. Travis Lane (born 1934, US/C)
*Patrick Lane (1939–2019, C)
*Andrew Lang (1844–1912, S)
*D. L. Lang (born 1983, US)
*William Langland (c. 1332 – c. 1386, E)
*Eve Langley (1904–1974, A)
*Emilia Lanier (1569–1645, E)
*Sidney Lanier (1842–1881, US)
*Lucy Larcom (1824–1893, US)
*Rebecca Hammond Lard (1772–1855, US)
*Bruce Larkin (born 1957, US)
*Philip Larkin (1922–1985, E)
*Richard Latewar (1560–1601, E) 
*Evelyn Lau (born 1971, C)
*James Laughlin (1914–1997, US)
*Ann Lauterbach (born 1942, US)
*Dorianne Laux (born 1952, US)
*Emily Lawless (1845–1913, Ir)
*Anthony Lawrence (born 1957, A)
*D. H. Lawrence (1885–1930, E)
*Henry Lawson (1867–1922, A)
*Louisa Lawson (1848–1920, A)
*Robert Lax (1915–2000, US)
*Layamon (late 12th – early 13th c., E)
*Irving Layton (1912–2006, C)
*Emma Lazarus (1849–1887, US)
*Augustus Asplet Le Gros (1840–1877, Je)
*Bronwyn Lea (living, A)
*Mary Leapor (1722–1746, E)
*Edward Lear (1812–1888, E)
*Lesley Lebkowicz (born 1946, A)
*Francis Ledwidge (1887–1917, Ir)
*David Lee (born 1944, US)
*Dennis Lee (born 1939, C)
*John B. Lee (born 1951, C)
*Muna Lee (1895–1965, US)
*Lily Alice Lefevre (1854–1938, C)
*Anne Brydges Lefroy (1747/8–1804, E)
*Joy Leftow (born 1949, US)
*Sylvia Legris (born 1960, C)
*Ursula K. Le Guin (1929–2018, US)
*David Lehman (born 1948, US)
*Geoffrey Lehmann (born 1940, A)
*Brad Leithauser (born 1953, US)
*Mark Lemon (1809–1870, E)
*Sue Lenier (born 1957, E)
*Charlotte Lennox (c. 1730–1804, S/E)
*John Lent (living, C)
*John Leonard (born 1965, A)
*Tom Leonard (1944–2018, S)
*William Ellery Leonard (1876–1944, US)
*Douglas LePan (1914–1998, C)
*Ben Lerner (born 1979, US)
*Alex Leslie (living, C)
*Rika Lesser (born 1953, US)
*Lilian Leveridge (1879–1953, C)
*Denise Levertov (1923–1997, E/US)
*Dana Levin (born 1965, US)
*Philip Levine (1928–2015, US)
*Larry Levis (1946–1996, US)
*D. A. Levy (1942–1968, US)
*William Levy (1939–2019, US/Nt)
*Emma Lew (born 1962, A)
*Oswald LeWinter (1931–2013, US)
*Alun Lewis (1915–1944, W)
*C. S. Lewis (1898–1963, Ir/E)
*Gwyneth Lewis (born 1959, W)
*J. Patrick Lewis (born 1942, US)
*Wyndham Lewis (1882–1957, E)
*Anne Ley (c. 1599–1641, E)
*Tim Liardet (born 1959, E)
*Isabella Lickbarrow (1784–1847, E)
*James Liddy (1934–2008, Ir)
*Tim Lilburn (born 1950, C)
*Charles Lillard (1944–1997, C)
*Kate Lilley (born 1960, A)
*Tao Lin (born 1983, US)
*Ada Limón (born 1976, US)
*Jack Lindeman (living, US)
*Eddie Linden (1935–2023, S/E)
*Anne Morrow Lindbergh (1906–2001, US)
*Jack Lindsay (1900–1990, A/E)
*Maurice Lindsay (1918–2009, S)
*Sarah Lindsay (born 1958, US)
*Vachel Lindsay (1879–1931, US)
*Jessie Litchfield (1883–1956, A)
*Dorothy Livesay (1909–1996, C)
*Billie Livingston (living, C)
*Douglas Livingstone (1932–1996, SA)

===Lo–Ly===
*Douglas Lochhead (1922–2011, C)
*Liz Lochhead (born 1947, S)
*Terry Locke (born 1946, NZ)
*Thomas Lodge (1556–1625, E)
*John Logan (1748–1788, S/E)
*Christopher Logue (1926–2011, E)
*James Longenbach (living, US)
*Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807–1882, US)
*Michael Longley (1939–2025, NI)
*John Longmuir (1803–1883, S)
*Audre Lorde (1934–1992, US)
*LindaAnn Loschiavo (living, US)
*Marguerite St. Leon Loud (1812–1889, US)
*Mary Stanley Low (1912–2007, Cu F US)
*Jennifer LoveGrove (living, C)
*Richard Lovelace (1618–1658, E)
*Henry Lovelich (fl. mid-15th c., E)
*Samuel Lover (1797–1868, Ir/E)
*Amy Lowell (1874–1925, US)
*James Russell Lowell (1819–1891, US)
*Maria White Lowell (1821–1853, US)
*Robert Lowell (1917–1977, US)
*Pat Lowther (1935–1975, C)
*Mina Loy (1882–1966, E/US)
*Edward Lucie-Smith (born 1933, E)
*Fitz Hugh Ludlow (1836–1870, US)
*Tatjana Lukić (1959–2008, A)
*Suzanne Lummis (living, US)
*Laura Lush (born 1959, C)
*Richard Lush (born 1934, C)
*Thomas Lux (1946–2017, US)
*John Lydgate (1370–1450, E)
*John Lyly (1553–1606, E)
*Michael Lynch (1944–1991, US/C)
*David Lyndsay (c. 1490 – c. 1555, S)
*P. H. B. Lyon (1893–1986, E)
*Henry Francis Lyte (1793–1847, S)
*George Lyttelton Lord Lyttelton (1709–1773, E)
==M==
===Ma–Mi===

*Rozena Maart (born 1962, SA/C)
*Lindiwe Mabuza (1938–2021, US/SA)
*Frederick Macartney (1887–1980, A)
*Thomas Babington Macaulay (1800–1859, E)
*George MacBeth (1932–1992, S)
*Norman MacCaig (1910–1996, S)
*Denis Florence MacCarthy (1817–1882, Ir)
*Karen Mac Cormack (born 1956, C/US)
*Hugh MacDiarmid (1892–1978, S)
*Donagh MacDonagh (1912–1968, Ir)
*Thomas MacDonagh (1878–1916, Ir)
*Allan MacDonald (1859–1905, S)
*Elizabeth Roberts MacDonald (1864–1922, C)
*George Macdonald (1824–1905, S)
*Hugh MacDonald (born 1945, C)
*Wilson MacDonald (1880–1967, C)
*Patrick MacDonogh (1902–1961, Ir)
*Gwendolyn MacEwen (1941–1987, C)
*Seán Mac Falls (1957–2023, Ir)
*Walter Scott MacFarlane (1896–1979, C)
*Patrick MacGill (1889–1963, Ir)
*Alasdair Alpin MacGregor (1899–1970, S)
*Ronald Campbell Macfie (1867–1931, S)
*James Pittendrigh Macgillivray (1856–1938, S)
*Thomas MacGreevy (1893–1967, Ir)
*Arthur Machen (1863–1947, W/E)
*Tom MacInnes (1867–1951, C)
*Louise Mack (1870–1935, A)
*John William Mackail (1859–1945, S)
*John Macken (c. 1784–1823, Ir)
*Lachlan Mackinnon (born 1956, S)
*Compton Mackenzie (1883–1972, S)
*Kenneth Mackenzie (Seaforth Mackenzie, 1913–1955, A)
*Archibald MacLeish (1892–1982, US)
*Dorothea Mackellar (1885–1968, A)
*Don Maclennan (1929–2009, SA)
*Joseph Macleod (1903–1984, E)
*Nathaniel Mackey (born 1947, US)
*Don Maclennan (1929–2009, SA)
*Jackson Mac Low (1922–2004, US)
*Louis MacNeice (1907–1963, Ir/E)
*Kevin MacNeil (living, S)
*Hector Macneill (1746–1818, S)
*Lachlan Mackinnon (born 1956, S)
*Alasdair Maclean (1926–1994, S)
*Archibald MacLeish (1892–1982, US)
*Andrea MacPherson (living, C)
*James Macpherson (1736–1796, S)
*Jay Macpherson (1931–2012, C)
*Barry MacSweeney (1948–2000, E)
*Haki R. Madhubuti (born 1942, US)
*John Gillespie Magee Jr. (1922–1941, C)
*Wes Magee (1939–2021, S)
*Jayanta Mahapatra (1928–2023, In)
*Sitakant Mahapatra (born 1937, In)
*Mzi Mahola (born 1949, SA)
*Derek Mahon (born 1941, NI)
*Jennifer Maiden (born 1949, A)
*Keith Maillard (born 1942, US/C)
*Charles Mair (1838–1827, C)
*Alice Major (born 1949, C)
*Clarence Major (born 1936, US)
*Robert Majzels (born 1950, C)
*Taylor Mali (born 1965, US)
*David Mallet (c. 1705–1765, S)
*Thomas Malory (c. 1415–1471, E)
*David Malouf (born 1934, A)
*Kim Maltman (born 1951, C)
*Eli Mandel (1922–1992, C)
*Tom Mandel (born 1942, US)
*Ahdri Zhina Mandiela (born 1953, J/C)
*James Clarence Mangan (1803–1849, Ir)
*Bill Manhire (born 1946, NZ)
*David Manicom (born 1960, C)
*John Manifold (1915–1985, A)
*Leonard Mann (1895–1981, A)
*Emily Manning (1845–1890, A)
*Frederic Manning (1882–1935, A)
*Maurice Manning (born 1966, US)
*Ruth Manning-Sanders (1886–1988, W)
*Robert Mannyng (1269–1340, E)
*Chris Mansell (born 1953, A)
*Peter Manson (born 1969, S)
*Lee Maracle (1950–2021, C)
*Blaine Marchand (born 1949, C)
*Morton Marcus (1936–2009, US)
*Paul Mariani (born 1940, US)
*E. A. Markham (1939–2008, Mo/E)
*Edwin Markham (1852–1940, US)
*Nicole Markotic (born 1962, C)
*Daphne Marlatt (born 1942, C)
*Christopher Marlowe (1564–1593, E)
*Don Marquis (1878–1937, US)
*Edward Garrard Marsh (1783–1862, E)
*Tom Marshall (1938–1993, C)
*John Marston (1576–1634, E)
*Garth Martens (living, C)
*Camille Martin (born 1956, C)
*David Martin (1915–1997, E/A)
*Philip Martin (1931–2005, A)
*Theodore Martin (1816–1909, S)
*Sid Marty (born 1944, C)
*Andrew Marvell (1621–1678, E)
*John Masefield (1878–1967, E)
*Lebogang Mashile (born 1979, SA)
*R. A. K. Mason (1905–1971, NZ)
*Edgar Lee Masters (1868–1950, US)
*John Mateer (born 1971, A)
*Ray Mathew (1929–2002, A)
*Robin Mathews (1931–2023, C)
*Roland Mathias (1915–2007, W)
*Cleopatra Mathis (born 1947, US)
*Don Mattera (1935–2022, SA)
*James Matthews (1929–2024, SA)
*Glyn Maxwell (born 1962, E)
*Bernadette Mayer (born 1945, US)
*Micheline Maylor (born 1970, C)
*Seymour Mayne (born 1944, C)
*Chandra Mayor (born 1973, C)
*Ben Mazer (born 1964, US)
*Mzwakhe Mbuli (born 1959, SA)
*James McAuley (1917–1976, A)
*Robert McBride (c. 1811/1812–1895, C)
*Neil McBride (1861–1942, Ir)
*Ian McBryde (born 1953, A)
*Brian McCabe (born 1951, S)
*Steven McCabe (living, C)
*Steve McCaffery (born 1947, C)
*Julia McCarthy (living, C)
*Susan McCaslin (born 1947, C)
*J. D. McClatchy (1945–2018, US)
*Kim McClenaghan (born 1974, SA/E)
*Michael McClure (1932–2020, US)
*Kathleen McConnell (Kathy Mac, living, C)
*David McCooey (born 1967, A)
*George Gordon McCrae (1833–1927, A)
*John McCrae (1872–1918, C)
*Shane McCrae (born 1975, US)
*Kathleen McCracken (born 1960, C)
*John McCrae (1872–1918, C)
*Ronald McCuaig (1908–1993, A)
*Matthew McDiarmid (1914–1996, S)
*Nan McDonald (1921–1974, A)
*Roger McDonald (born 1941, A)
*Roy McDonald (1937–2018, C)
*Walt McDonald (1934–2022, US)
*David McFadden (1940–2018, C)
*Hugh McFadden (living, Ir)
*David McGimpsey (living, C)
*Phyllis McGinley (1905–1978, US)
*Elvis McGonagall (born 1960, S)
*William McGonagall (1825–1902, S)
*Roger McGough (born 1937, E)
*Michelle McGrane (born 1974, Z/SA)
*Campbell McGrath (born 1962, US)
*Thomas McGrath (1916–1990, US)
*Wendy McGrath (living, C)
*Medbh McGuckian (born 1950, NI)
*Heather McHugh (born 1948, US)
*William McIlvanney (1936–2015, S)
*Nadine McInnis (born 1957, C)
*James McIntyre (1828–1906, S/C)
*Claude McKay (1889–1948, J/US)
*Don McKay (born 1942, C)
*Barry McKinnon (born 1944, C)
*Rod McKuen (1933–2015, US)
*Greg McLaren (born 1967, A)
*Isaac McLellan (1806–1899, US)
*John McLellan (early 19th century, E)
*Brendan McLeod (born 1979, C)
*Nigel McLoughlin (born 1968, NI)
*Emily Julian McManus (1865–1918, C)
*Rhyll McMaster (born 1947, A)
*Susan McMaster (born 1950, C)
*James L. McMichael (born 1939, US)
*Ian McMillan (born 1956, E)
*Eugene McNamara (1930–2016, US/C)
*Anthony McNeill (1941–1996, J)
*Andrew McNeillie (born 1946, W/E)
*Hollie McNish (born 1984, E)
*Bernard McNulty (1842–1892, US)
*Steve McOrmond (living, C)
*Dionyse McTair (born 1950, T)
*Máighréad Medbh (born 1959, Ir]
*Thomas Medwin (1788–1869, E)
*Paula Meehan (born 1955, Ir)
*Peter Meinke (born 1932, US)
*Mary Melfi (born 1951, C)
*Elizabeth Melville (c. 1578 – c. 1640, S)
*Herman Melville (1819–1891, US)
*Christopher Meredith (born 1955, W)
*George Meredith (1828–1909, E)
*Louisa Anne Meredith (1812–1895, E/A)
*James Merrill (1926–1995, US)
*Stuart Merrill (1863–1915, US)
*Iman Mersal (born 1966, C)
*Thomas Merton (1915–1968, US)
*W. S. Merwin (1927–2019, US)
*Sarah Messer (born 1966, US)
*Joan Metelerkamp (born 1956, SA)
*Charlotte Mew (1869–1928, E)
*Bruce Meyer (born 1957, C)
*Alice Meynell (1847–1922, E)
*Viola Meynell (1885–1956, E)
*James Lionel Michael (1824–1868, E/A)
*Anne Michaels (born 1958, C)
*William Julius Mickle (1734–1788, S)
*Marianne Micros (born 1943, C)
*Christopher Middleton (c. 1560–1628, E)
*Christopher Middleton (1926–2015, E)
*Richard Barham Middleton (1882–1911, E)
*Thomas Middleton (1580–1627, E)
*Roy Miki (born 1942, C)
*Dorothy Miles (1931–1993, W/US)
*Josephine Miles (1911–1985, US)
*Jennifer Militello (living, US)
*Edna St. Vincent Millay (1892–1950, US)
*Alice Duer Miller (1874–1942, US)
*Jane Miller (born 1949, US)
*Joaquin Miller (1837–1913, US)
*Leslie Adrienne Miller (born 1956, US)
*Ruth Miller (1919–1969, SA)
*Thomas Miller (1807–1874, E)
*Vassar Miller (1924–1998, US)
*John Millett (1921–2019, A)
*Robert Millhouse (1788–1839, E)
*Alice Milligan (1865–1953, Ir/NI)
*Spike Milligan (1918–2002, E/Ir)
*Kenneth G. Mills (1923–2004, C)
*Roswell George Mills (1896–1966, C)
*John Milton (1608–1674, E)
*Robert Minhinnick (born 1952, W)
*Matthew Minicucci (born 1981, US)
*Gary Miranda (born 1939, US)
*Sudesh Mishra (born 1962, A)
*Adrian Mitchell (1932–2008, E)
*Paul Mitchell (born 1968, A)
*Silas Weir Mitchell (1829–1914, US)
*Stephen Mitchell (born 1943, US)
*Waddie Mitchell (born 1950, US)
*Naomi Mitchison (1897–1999, S)
*Amitabh Mitra (living, SA)
*Ange Mlinko (born 1960, US)

===Mo–Mu===
*David Macbeth Moir (1798–1851, S)
*Anis Mojgani (born 1977, US)
*John Mole (born 1941, E)
*Natalia Molebatsi (living, SA)
*Dorothy Molloy (1942–2004, Ir)
*Geraldine Monk (born 1952, E)
*Harold Monro (1879–1932, E)
*Harriet Monroe (1860–1936, US)
*Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax (1661–1715, E)
*John Montague (1929–2016, Ir)
*Lady Mary Wortley Montagu (1689–1762, E)
*Alexander Montgomerie (c. 1550–1598, S)
*James Montgomery (1771–1854, E)
*Lucy Maud Montgomery (L. M. Montgomery, 1874–1942, C)
*Marion E. Moodie (1867–1958, C)
*Susanna Moodie (1803–1885, E/C)
*Kobus Moolman (living, SA)
*Jacob McArthur Mooney (born 1983, C)
*Alan Moore (born 1960, Ir)
*Marianne Moore (1887–1972, US)
*Merrill Moore (1903–1957, US)
*Ruth Moore (1903–1989, US)
*T. Inglis Moore (1901–1978, A)
*Thomas Moore (1779–1852, Ir/E)
*Thomas Sturge Moore (1870–1944, E)
*Dom Moraes (1938–2004, In)
*Barbara Moraff (born 1939, US)
*Cherríe Moraga (born 1952, US)
*Edythe Morahan de Lauzon (fl. early 20th c., C)
*Pamela Mordecai (born 1942, J/C)
*Hannah More (1745–1833, E)
*Dwayne Morgan (born 1974, C)
*Edwin Morgan (1920–2010, S)
*J. O. Morgan (born 1978, S)
*Jeffrey Morgan (living, C)
*Mal Morgan (1936–1999, A)
*Robin Morgan (born 1941, US)
*Lorin Morgan-Richards (born 1975, US)
*A. F. Moritz (born 1947, US/C)
*Eliza F. Morris (1821–1874, E)
*Mervyn Morris (born 1937, J)
*Sharon Morris (living, W/E)
*William Morris (1834–1896, E)
*David R. Morrison (1941–2012, S)
*Jim Morrison (1943–1971, US)
*Morrissey (born 1959, E)
*Kim Morrissey (Janice Dales, living, C)
*Garry Thomas Morse (living, C)
*Viggo Mortensen (born 1958, US/De)
*Colin Morton (born 1948, C)
*Frank Morton (1869–1923, A)
*Twm Morys (born 1961, W)
*Daniel David Moses (born 1952, C)
*Howard Moss (1922–1987, US)
*Thylias Moss (born 1954, US)
*Isabella Motadinyane (1963–2003, SA)
*William Motherwell (1797–1835, S)
*Andrew Motion (born 1952, E)
*Seitlhamo Motsapi (born 1966, SA)
*Casey Motsisi (1932–1977, SA)
*Eric Mottram (1924–1995, E)
*Erín Moure (born 1955, C)
*Oswald Mbuyiseni Mtshali (born 1940, SA)
*Ian Mudie (1911–1976, A)
*Mudrooroo (Colin Thomas Johnson, 1938–2019, A)
*Lisel Mueller (1924–2020, US)
*Micere Githae Mugo (1942–2023, K/Z)
*Edwin Muir (1887–1959, S/E)
*Paul Muldoon (born 1951, Ir/US)
*Wendy Mulford (born 1941, W/E)
*Harryette Mullen (born 1953, US)
*Laura Mullen (born 1958, US)
*Anthony Munday (c. 1560–1633, E)
*Jane Munro (born 1943, C)
*Sachiko Murakami (born 1980, C)
*William Murdoch (1823–1887, S/C)
*Edwin Greenslade Murphy (Dryblower, 1866–1939, A)
*Hayden Murphy (born 1945, Ir)
*Richard Murphy (1927–2018, Ir/SLk)
*Sheila Murphy (born 1951, US)
*Charles Murray (1864–1941, S)
*George Murray (born 1971, C)
*Joan Murray (born 1945, US)
*Les Murray (1938–2019, A)
*David Musgrave (born 1965, A)
*Susan Musgrave (born 1951, C)
*Togara Muzanenhamo (born 1975, Z)

==N==

*Vladimir Nabokov (1899–1977, RE/US)
*Constance Naden (1858–1889, E)
*Sarojini Naidu (1879–1949, In)
*Carolina Nairne (1766–1845, S)
*Sydney Elliott Napier (1870–1940, A)
*Akhtar Naraghi (living, C)
*Ogden Nash (1902–1971, US)
*Roger Nash (born 1942, E/C)
*Thomas Nashe (1567–1601, E)
*John Neal (1793–1876, US)
*Charles Neaves (1800–1876, S)
*Henry Neele (1798–1828, E)
*Lyle Neff (born 1969, C)
*John Neihardt (1881–1973, US)
*William Neill (1922–2010, S)
*Philip Neilsen (living, A)
*Shaw Neilson (1872–1942, A)
*Alice Dunbar Nelson (1875–1935, US)
*Holly Nelson (living, US/C)
*Marilyn Nelson (born 1946, US)
*Howard Nemerov (1920–1991, US)
*Kenn Nesbitt (born 1962, US)
*W. H. New (born 1938, C)
*Henry Newbolt (1862–1938, E)
*John Newlove (1938–2003, C)
*John Henry Newman (1801–1890, E)
*Kate Newmann (born 1965, NI/Ir)
*William Newton (1750–1830, E)
*Aimee Nezhukumatathil (born 1974, US)
*Nuala Ní Chonchúir (born 1970, Ir)
*Eiléan Ní Chuilleanáin (born 1942, Ir)
*Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill (born 1952, Ir)
*Ailbhe Ní Ghearbhuigh (born 1984, Ir)
*Doireann Ní Ghríofa (born 1981, Ir)
*Nicholas of Guildford (12th or 13th c., E)
*Barrie Phillip Nichol (bpNichol, 1944–1988, C)
*Grace Nichols (born 1950, Gu/E)
*Robert Nichols (1893–1944, E)
*Cecily Nicholson (living, C)
*Norman Nicholson (1914–1987, E)
*Lorine Niedecker (1903–1970, US)
*Emilia Nielsen (living, C)
*Hume Nisbet (1849–1923, A/S)
*Christopher Nolan (1965–2009, Ir)
*Oodgeroo Noonuccal (1920–1993, A)
*Leslie Norris (1921–2006, W/US)
*Harry Northup (born 1940, US)
*Arthur Nortje (1942–1970, SA)
*Caroline Norton (1808–1877, E)
*Alice Notley (born 1945, US)
*Alden Nowlan (1933–1983, C)
*Alfred Noyes (1880–1958, E)
*Jeff Nuttall (1933–2004, E)
*Naomi Shihab Nye (born 1952, US)
*Robert Nye (1939–2016, E)
==O==

*Joyce Carol Oates (born 1938, US)
*John O&#x27;Brien (Patrick Joseph Hartigan, 1878–1952, A)
*Sean O&#x27;Brien (born 1952, E)
*Patrick O&#x27;Connell (1944–2005, C)
*Mark O&#x27;Connor (born 1945, A)
*Philip O&#x27;Connor (1916–1998, E)
*Mary O&#x27;Donnell (born 1954, Ir)
*Bernard O&#x27;Donoghue (born 1945, Ir)
*Gregory O&#x27;Donoghue (1951–2005, Ir)
*Bernard O&#x27;Dowd (1866–1953, A)
*Dennis O&#x27;Driscoll (born 1954, Ir)
*Ernest O&#x27;Ferrall (1881–1925, A)
*Ron Offen (1930–2010, US)
*William Henry Ogilvie (1869–1963, S)
*Frank O&#x27;Hara (1926–1966, US)
*John Bernard O&#x27;Hara (1862–1927, A)
*Theodore O&#x27;Hara (1820–1867, US)
*Pixie O&#x27;Harris (1903–1991, A)
*Sharon Olds (born 1942, US)
*Alexandra Oliver (living, C)
*Mary Oliver (1935–2019, US)
*Redell Olsen (born 1971, E)
*Charles Olson (1910–1970, US)
*Sheree-Lee Olson (born 1954, C)
*Nessa O&#x27;Mahony (living, Ir)
*Michael Ondaatje (born 1943, SLk/C)
*Heather O&#x27;Neill (born 1973, C)
*Henrietta O&#x27;Neill (1758–1793, Ir)
*Mary Devenport O&#x27;Neill (1879–1976, Ir)
*George Oppen (1908–1984, US)
*Mary Oppen (1908–1990, US)
*Antoine Ó Raifteiri (1784–1835, Ir)
*Edward Otho Cresap Ord, II (1858–1923, US)
*Dowell O&#x27;Reilly (1865–1923, A)
*Peter Orlovsky (1933–2010, US)
*John Ormond (1923–1990, W)
*Frank Ormsby (born 1947, NI)
*Gregory Orr (born 1947, US)
*Arthur O&#x27;Shaughnessy (1844–1881, E)
*Micheal O&#x27;Siadhail (born 1947, Ir)
*Alicia Ostriker (born 1937, US)
*Maggie O&#x27;Sullivan (born 1951, E)
*Seumas O&#x27;Sullivan (1879–1958, Ir)
*Niyi Osundare (born 1947, Ni/US)
*Alice Oswald (born 1966, E)
*John Oswald (died 1793, S)
*Eoghan Ó Tuairisc (1919–1982, Ir)
*Richard Outram (1930–2005, C)
*Ouyang Yu (歐陽昱; born 1955, A)
*Catherine Owen (living, C)
*Jan Owen (born 1940, A)
*Wilfred Owen (1893–1918, E)
==P==

*Susan Paddon (living, C)
*Ruth Padel (born 1947, E)
*Ron Padgett (born 1942, US)
*Isabel Pagan (c. 1740–1821, S)
*Geoff Page (born 1940, A)
*P. K. Page (1916–2010, C)
*Janet Paisley (1948–2018, S)
*Grace Paley (1922–2007, E)
*Francis Turner Palgrave (1824–1897, E)
*Michael Palmer (born 1943, US)
*Nettie Palmer (1885–1964, A)
*Vance Palmer (1885–1959, A)
*Sylvia Pankhurst (1882–1960, E)
*William Williams Pantycelyn (W)
*Aristides Paradissis (1923–2006, A)
*Arleen Paré (born 1946, C)
*Dorothy Parker (1893–1967, US)
*Amy Parkinson (1855–1938, C)
*Thomas Parnell (1670–1718, Ir/E)
*Robert Parry (1540–1612, W)
*Lisa Pasold (living, C)
*John Pass (born 1947, C)
*Linda Pastan (1932–2023, US)
*Kenneth Patchen (1911–1972, US)
*Banjo Paterson (1864–1941, A)
*Don Paterson (born 1963, S)
*Coventry Patmore (1823–1896, E)
*Brian Patten (born 1946, E)
*Ian Patterson (born 1948, E)
*Philip Kevin Paul (living, C)
*Tom Paulin (born 1949, NI/E)
*Ricardo Pau-Llosa (born 1954, Cu)
*James Payn (1830–1898, E/S)
*Molly Peacock (born 1947, US/C)
*Thomas Love Peacock (1785–1866, E)
*Patrick Pearse (1879–1916, Ir)
*Soraya Peerbaye (living, C)
*Pearl Poet (14th c., E)
*Patrick Pearse (1879–1916, Ir)
*James Larkin Pearson (1879–1981, US)
*Neil Peart (1952–2020, C)
*Kathleen Peirce (born 1956, US)
*J. D. C. Pellow (1890–1960, E)
*Nathan Penlington (living, W/E)
*Anne Penny (1729–1784, W/E)
*Margaret Pennyman (bap. 1685, d. 1733), E
*Hilary Douglas Clark Pepler (1878–1951, E)
*Sam Pereira (born 1949, US)
*Lucia Perillo (1958–2016, US)
*Grace Perry (1927–1987, A)
*Alice E. Heckler Peters (1845–1921, US)
*Lenrie Peters (1932–2009, Ga)
*Robert Peters (1924–2014, US)
*Pascale Petit (born 1953, W)
*Mario Petrucci (born 1958, E)
*W. T. Pfefferle (born 1962, C)
*Anna Augusta Von Helmholtz-Phelan (1890–1964, US)
*M. NourbeSe Philip (born 1947, T/C)
*Ambrose Philips (1674–1749, E)
*Katherine Philips (1631/1632–1664, E/W)
*Ben Phillips (born 1947, C)
*Eden Phillpotts (1862–1960, E)
*Alison Pick (born 1975, C)
*Tom Pickard (born 1946, E)
*Leah Lakshmi Piepzna-Samarasinha (born 1975, US/C)
*Marge Piercy (born 1936, US)
*Laetitia Pilkington (c. 1709–1750, Ir/E)
*Mary Pilkington (1761–1839, E)
*Sarah Pinder (living, C)
*Percy Edward Pinkerton (1855–1946, E)
*Robert Pinsky (born 1940, US)
*George Pirie (1799–1870, C)
*Christopher Pitt (1699–1748, E)
*Marie Pitt (1869–1948, A)
*Ruth Pitter (1897–1992, E)
*Al Pittman (1940–2001, C)
*Marjorie Pizer (1920–2016, A)
*Sylvia Plath (1932–1963, US/E)
*William Plomer (1903–1973, SA/E)
*Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany (1878–1957, Ir/E)
*Joseph Plunkett (1887–1916, Ir)
*Edgar Allan Poe (1809–1849, US)
*Emily Pohl-Weary (born 1973, C)
*Craig Poile (living, C)
*Suman Pokhrel (born 1967, Ne)
*Marcella Polain (born 1958, A)
*Margaret Steuart Pollard (1904–1996, E)
*Edward Pollock (1823–1858, US)
*Robert Pollok (c. 1798–1827, S)
*John Pomfret (1667–1702, E)
*Marie Ponsot (1921–2019, US)
*John Pook (born 1942, W/F)
*Sandy Pool (living, C)
*Marie Ponsot (1921–2019, US)
*Alexander Pope (1688–1744, E)
*Judith Pordon (born 1954, US)
*Anna Maria Porter (1780–1832, E)
*Dorothy Porter (1954–2008, A)
*Hal Porter (1911–1984, A)
*Peter Porter (1929–2010, A)
*Rochelle Potkar (born 1979, In)
*Robert Potter (1721–1804, E)
*Charles Potts (born 1943, US)
*Ezra Pound (1885–1972, US)
*B. W. Powe (born 1955, C)
*Craig Powell (born 1940, A)
*Winthrop Mackworth Praed (1802–1839, E)
*Claire Pratt (1921–1995, C)
*E. J. Pratt (1882–1964, C)
*Jack Prelutsky (born 1940, US)
*Karen Press (born 1956, SA)
*Thomas Preston (1537–1598, E)
*Ron Pretty (1940–2023, A)
*Frank Prewett (1893–1962, C)
*Nancy Price (1880–1970, E)
*Richard Price (born 1966, S/E)
*Robert Priest (born 1951, C)
*F. T. Prince (1912–2003, E)
*Thomas Pringle (1789–1834, S/SA)
*Matthew Prior (1664–1721, E)
*Pauline Prior-Pitt (living, S)
*Adelaide Anne Procter (1825–1864, E)
*Bryan Procter (1787–1874, E)
*Kevin Prufer (born 1969, US)
*J. H. Prynne (born 1936, E)
*Sheenagh Pugh (born 1950, W/E)
*Al Purdy (1918–2000, C)
==Q==

*Andy Quan (born 1969, C/A)
*Francis Quarles (1592–1644, E)
*Peter Quennell (1905–1993, E)
*Sina Queyras (living, C)
*Roderic Quinn (1867–1949, A)
==R==
===Ra–Ri===
*William Radice (born 1951, E)
*Kenneth Radu (born 1945, C)
*Sam Ragan (1915–1996, US)
*Jennifer Rahim (born 1963, T)
*Craig Raine (born 1944, E)
*Kathleen Raine (1908–2003, US)
*Carl Rakosi (1903–2004, US)
*Walter Raleigh (1552 or 1554–1618, E)
*James Ralph (1705–1762, US/E)
*Raymond Ramcharitar (living, T)
*Lesego Rampolokeng (born 1965, S)
*Allan Ramsay (1686–1758, S)
*Theodore Harding Rand (1835–1900, C)
*Dudley Randall (1914–2000, US)
*Julia Randall (1924–2005, US)
*Thomas Randolph (1605–1635, E)
*Jennifer Rankin (1941–1979, A)
*Claudia Rankine (born 1963, J)
*John Crowe Ransom (1888–1974, US)
*Lennox Raphael (born 1939, J)
*Stephen Ratcliffe (born 1948, US)
*Angela Rawlings (born 1978, C)
*Tom Raworth (1938–2017, E)
*Herbert Read (1893–1968, E)
*Angela Readman (born 1973, E)
*James Reaney (1926–2008, C)
*George Reavey (1907–1976, Ir)
*Peter Redgrove (1932–2003, E)
*Michael Redhill (born 1966, C)
*Beatrice Redpath (1886–1937, C)
*Henry Reed (1914–1986, E)
*Ishmael Reed (born 1938, US)
*Jeremy Reed (born 1951, Je)
*Kerry Reed-Gilbert (1956–2019, A)
*Ennis Rees (1925–2009, US)
*Lizette Woodworth Reese (1856–1935, US)
*Deryn Rees-Jones (living, E/W)
*James Reeves (1909–1978, E)
*Nell Regan (born 1969, Ir)
*Alastair Reid (1926–2014, S)
*Christopher Reid (born 1949, E)
*D. C. Reid (born 1952, C)
*Jamie Reid (1941–2015, C)
*Azila Talit Reisenberger (living, SA)
*James Reiss (1941–2016, US)
*Joseph Relph (1712–1743, E)
*Robert Rendall (1898–1967, S)
*Kenneth Rexroth (1905–1982, US)
*Oliver Reynolds (born 1957, W)
*Charles Reznikoff (1894–1976, US)
*Shane Rhodes (living, C)
*Ernest Rhys (1859–1946, W/E)
*Henry Rice (1585 or 1586–1651, W/E)
*Stan Rice (1942–2002, US)
*Adrienne Rich (1929–2012, US)
*Dorothy Richardson (1873–1957, E)
*John Richardson (1817–1886, E)
*Robert Richardson (1850–1901, A)
*Edgell Rickword (1898–1982, E)
*Elizabeth Riddell (1910–1998, A)
*Lola Ridge (1873–1941, US)
*Laura Riding (1901–1991, US)
*Elijah Ridings (1802–1872)
*Anne Ridler (1912–2001, E)
*Denise Riley (born 1948, E)
*James Whitcomb Riley (1849–1916, US)
*John Riley (1937–1978, E)
*Peter Riley (born 1940, E)
*Mary Roberts Rinehart (1876–1958, US)
*Maurice Riordan (born 1953, Ir)
*Alberto Ríos (born 1952, US)

===Ro–Ru===
*E. M. Roach (Merton Maloney, 1915–1974, T)
*Charles G. D. Roberts (1860–1943, C)
*Emma Roberts (1794–1840, E)
*Michael Roberts (1902–1948, E)
*Edith Anne Robertson (1883–1973, S)
*James Robertson (born 1958, S)
*Lisa Robertson (born 1961, C)
*Robin Robertson (born 1955, S)
*Edwin Arlington Robinson (1869–1935, US)
*Lennox Robinson (1886–1958, Ir)
*Mary Robinson (1758–1800, E)
*Matt Robinson (born 1974, C)
*Roland Robinson (1912–1992, A)
*Ajmer Rode (living, C)
*Gordon Rodgers (born 1952, C)
*W. R. Rodgers (1909–1969, NI)
*Carmen Rodríguez (born 1948 Ch/C)
*Judith Rodriguez (1936–2018, A)
*Theodore Roethke (1908–1963, US)
*January Rogers (born 1963, C)
*Linda Rogers (born 1944, C)
*Samuel Rogers (1763–1855, E)
*Isabella Whiteford Rogerson (Isabella Whiteford, 1835–1905, Ir/C)
*Matthew Rohrer (born 1972, US)
*Mary Rolls (1775–1835, E)
*Ethel Rolt Wheeler (1869–1958, E)
*David Romtvedt (living, US)
*Dilys Rose (born 1954, S)
*Peter Rose (born 1955, A)
*Raymond Roseliep (1917–1983, US)
*Franklin Rosemont (1943–2009, US)
*Penelope Rosemont (born 1942, US)
*Isaac Rosenberg (1890–1918, E)
*Joe Rosenblatt (1933–2019, C)
*Gabriel Rosenstock (born 1949, Ir)
*Laisha Rosnau (born 1972, C)
*Alan Ross (1922–2001, E)
*Bruce Ross (living, C)
*Stuart Ross (born 1959, C)
*W. W. E. Ross (1894–1966, C)
*Christina Rossetti (1830–1894, E)
*Dante Gabriel Rossetti (1828–1882, E)
*Jerome Rothenberg (1931–2024, US)
*Nancy-Gay Rotstein (living, C)
*Anne Rouse (born 1954, US/E)
*David Rowbotham (1924–2010, A)
*Elizabeth Singer Rowe (1674–1737, E)
*Nicholas Rowe (1674–1718, E)
*Noel Rowe (1951–2007, A)
*Stephen Rowe (born 1980, C)
*Graham Rowlands (born 1947, A)
*Richard Rowlands (1565–1630, E/Nt)
*Samuel Rowlands (c. 1573–1630, E)
*Rosemarie Rowley (born 1942, Ir)
*Susanna Rowson (1762–1824, E/US)
*Susanna Roxman (1946–2015, Sw)
*Adam Rudden (born 1983, Ir)
*Ellen Sergeant Rude (1838–1916, US)
*Muriel Rukeyser (1913–1980, US)
*Charlotte Runcie (born 1989, S)
*Jenny Terrill Ruprecht (1839–1916, US)
*George William Russell (1867–1935, Ir/E)
*Nipsey Russell (1918–2005, US)
*Brendan Ryan (born 1963, A)
*Gig Ryan (born 1956, A)
*Kay Ryan (born 1945, US)
*Michael Ryan (born 1946, US)
*Tracy Ryan (born 1964, A)
*Thomas Rymer (c. 1643–1713, E)
==S==
===Sa–Si===
*Charles Sackville (1643–1706, E)
*Thomas Sackville (1536–1608, E)
*Vita Sackville-West (1892–1962, E)
*Benjamin Alire Sáenz (born 1954, US)
*Maria Grace Saffery (1773–1858, E)
*Lake Sagaris (born 1956, C/Ch)
*Nandini Sahu (born 1973, In)
*Arja Salafranca (born 1971, SA)
*Trish Salah (living, C)
*Nina Salaman (1877–1925, E)
*Blanaid Salkeld (1880–1959, Ir)
*Philip Salom (born 1950, A)
*John Salusbury (1567–1612, W/E)
*Thomas Salusbury (1612–1643, W/E)
*Fiona Sampson (born 1963, E)
*Sonia Sanchez (born 1934, US)
*Carl Sandburg (1878–1967, US)
*Peter Sanger (born 1943, C)
*Charles Sangster (1822–1893, C)
*Ann Sansom (living, E)
*Clive Sansom (1910–1981, E/A)
*Andrew Sant (born 1950, A)
*Robyn Sarah (born 1949, C)
*Jaydeep Sarangi (born 1973, India)
*Dipti Saravanamuttu (born 1960, A)
*May Sarton (1912–1995, US)
*Siegfried Sassoon (1886–1967, E)
*K. Satchidanandan (born 1948, In)
*Esther Saunders (1793–1862, US)
*Jen Saunders (born 1962, A)
*Richard Savage (c. 1697–1743, E)
*Jaya Savige (born 1978, A)
*Leslie Scalapino (1944–2010, US)
*Herman George Scheffauer (1876–1927, US)
*Jacob Scheier (born 1980, C)
*Libby Scheier (1946–2000, US/C)
*Bel Schenk (born 1975, A)
*Dennis Schmitz (1937–2019, US)
*Pat Schneider (1934–2020, US)
*Jane Johnston Schoolcraft (1800–1842, US)
*Andreas Schroeder (born 1946, C)
*Philip Schultz (born 1945, US)
*James Schuyler (1923–1991, US)
*Delmore Schwartz (1913–1966, US)
*Stephen Scobie (born 1943, C)
*Gregory Scofield (born 1966, C)
*Alexander Scott (c. 1520 – c. 1583, S)
*Alexander Scott (1920–1989, S)
*Dennis Scott (1939–1991, J)
*Duncan Campbell Scott (1862–1947, C)
*F. R. Scott (1899–1985, C)
*Frederick George Scott (1861–1944, C)
*Geoffrey Scott (1884–1929, E)
*John A. Scott (born 1948, A)
*Margaret Scott (1934–2005, A)
*Peter Dale Scott (born 1929, C)
*Tom Scott (1918–1995, S)
*Sir Walter Scott (1771–1832, S)
*William Bell Scott (1811–1890, S)
*Gil Scott-Heron (1949–2011, US)
*Ann Scott-Moncrieff (1914–1943, S)
*E. J. Scovell (1907–1999, E)
*Maurice Scully (1952–2023, Ir)
*George Bazeley Scurfield (1920–1991, E)
*Peter Seaton (1942–2010, US)
*Charles Sedley (1639–1701, E)
*Frederick Seidel (born 1936, US)
*Hugh Seidman (born 1940, US)
*Rebecca Seiferle (living, US)
*Lasana M. Sekou (born 1959, SM)
*Francis Sempill (c. 1616–1682, S)
*Robert Sempill (c. 1595 – c. 1663, S)
*Olive Senior (born 1941, J/C)
*Sipho Sepamla (1932–2007, SA)
*Mongane Wally Serote (born 1944, SA)
*Nina Serrano (born 1934, US)
*Robert W. Service (1874–1958, S/C)
*Vikram Seth (born 1952, SM)
*Elkanah Settle (1648–1724, E)
*Anna Seward (1742–1809, E)
*Anne Sexton (1928–1974, US)
*John W. Sexton (born 1958, Ir)
*Thomas Shadwell (1642–1692, E)
*Kathy Shaidle (born 1964, C)
*William Shakespeare (1564–1616, E)
*Tupac Shakur (1971–1996, US)
*Otep Shamaya (born 1979, US)
*Eileen Shanahan (1901–1979, Ir)
*Ntozake Shange (1948–2018, US)
*Edward Shanks (1892–1953, E)
*Jo Shapcott (born 1953, E)
*Thomas Shapcott (born 1935, A)
*Karl Shapiro (1913–2000, US)
*Michael Sharkey (born 1946, A)
*William Sharp (awa Fiona MacLeod, 1855–1905, S)
*Brenda Shaughnessy (born 1970, US)
*Luci Shaw (born 1928, E/US)
*Owen Sheers (born 1974, W/E)
*Percy Bysshe Shelley (1792–1822, E)
*William Shenstone (1714–1763, E)
*Nan Shepherd (1893–1981, S)
*Francis Joseph Sherman (1871–1926, C)
*Joseph Sherman (1945–2006, C)
*Kate Brownlee Sherwood (1841–1914, US)
*Carol Shields (1935–2003, US/C)
*Trish Shields (living, C)
*Thomas Shipman (1632–1680, E)
*James Shirley (1596–1666, E)
*Dora Adele Shoemaker (1873–1962, US)
*Fredegond Shove (1889–1949, E)
*Sandy Shreve (living, C)
*Penelope Shuttle (born 1947, E)
*Beau Sia (born 1976, US)
*Mary Sidney (1561–1621, E)
*Philip Sidney (1554–1586, E)
*Melanie Siebert (living, C)
*Eli Siegel (1902–1978, US)
*Robert Siegel (1939–2012, US)
*Jon Silkin (1930–1997, E)
*Hilda Siller (1861–1945, US)
*Ron Silliman (born 1946, US)
*Shel Silverstein (1930–1999, US)
*Charles Simic (1938–2023, US)
*Goran Simić (born 1952, Bo/C)
*Bren Simmers (born 1976, C)
*James Simmons (1933–2001, NI)
*Anne Simpson (born 1956, C)
*Louis Simpson (1923–2012, J/US)
*Matt Simpson (1936–2009, E)
*R. A. Simpson (1929–2002, A)
*Bennie Lee Sinclair (1939–2000, US)
*Iain Sinclair (born 1943, W/E)
*May Sinclair (1863–1946, E)
*Sue Sinclair (living, C)
*Tim Sinclair (born 1972, A)
*Burns Singer (1928–1964, S)
*Marilyn Singer (born 1948, US)
*Sarah Singleton (born 1966, E)
*George Sipos (living, C)
*Peter Sirr (born 1960, Ir)
*Lemn Sissay (born 1967, E)
*C. H. Sisson (1914–2003, E)
*Ari Sitas (born 1952, SA)
*Edith Sitwell (1887–1964, E)
*Osbert Sitwell (1892–1969, E)
*Sacheverell Sitwell (1897–1988, E)

===Sk–Sq===
*Sonja Skarstedt (1960–2009, C)
*John Skelton (1460–1529, E)
*Robin Skelton (1925–1997, E/C)
*Douglas Reid Skinner (born 1949, SA)
*Myra Sklarew (born 1934, US)
*Ed Skoog (born 1971, US)
*Zoë Skoulding (born 1967, W)
*Peter Skrzynecki (born 1945, A)
*Kenneth Slessor (1901–1971, A)
*Daniel Sloate (1931–2009, C)
*Edward Slow (1841–1925, E)
*Adam Small (1936–2016, SA)
*Carolyn Smart (born 1952, C)
*Christopher Smart (1722–1771, E)
*Elizabeth Smart (1913–1986, C)
*A. J. M. Smith (1902–1980, C)
*Alexander Smith (1830–1867, S)
*Bruce Smith (born 1946, US)
*Charlotte Turner Smith (1749–1806, E)
*Clara Kathleen Smith (1911–2004, C)
*Clark Ashton Smith (1893–1961, US)
*Douglas Burnet Smith (born 1949, C)
*Iain Crichton Smith (1928–1998, S)
*John Smith (1927–2018, C)
*Malachi Smith (living, J)
*Marc Smith (born 1949, US)
*Margaret Smith (born 1958, US)
*Michael Smith (1942–2014, Ir)
*Michael V. Smith (living, C)
*Patti Smith (born 1946, US)
*Rod Smith (born 1962, US)
*Ron Smith (born 1943, C)
*Steven Ross Smith (born 1945, C)
*Stevie Smith (1902–1971, E)
*Sydney Goodsir Smith (1915–1975, S)
*Tracy K. Smith (born 1972, US)
*Vivian Smith (born 1933, A)
*William Jay Smith (1918–2015, US)
*Tobias Smollett (1721–1771, S)
*W. D. Snodgrass (1925–2009, US)
*Gary Snyder (born 1930, US)
*Karen Solie (born 1966, C)
*David Solway (born 1941, C)
*William Somervile (1675–1742, E)
*Cathy Song (born 1955, US)
*Madeline Sonik (born 1960, C)
*Edward Sorenson (1869–1939, A)
*Charles Sorley (1895–1915, S)
*Gary Soto (born 1952, US)
*Carolyn Marie Souaid (born 1959, C)
*Raymond Souster (1921–2012, C)
*William Soutar (1898–1946, S)
*Caroline Anne Southey (1786–1854, E)
*Robert Southey (1774–1843, E)
*Robert Southwell (1561–1595, E)
*Wole Soyinka (born 1934, Ni)
*Esta Spalding (living, US/C)
*Heather Spears (1934–2021, C/De)
*Alan Spence (living, S)
*Lewis Spence (1874–1955, S)
*Anne Spencer (1882–1975, US)
*Bernard Spencer (1909–1963, E)
*Thomas Edward Spencer (1845–1911, A)
*Stephen Spender (1909–1995, E)
*Edmund Spenser (1552–1599, E)
*Leonora Speyer (1872–1956, US)
*Harriet Elizabeth Prescott Spofford (1835–1921, US)
*Eintou Pearl Springer (born 1944, T)
*Birk Sproxton (1943–2007, C)
*J. C. Squire (1884–1958, E)
*Geoffrey Squires (born 1942, NI)

===St–Sy===
*William Stafford (1914–1993, US)
*A. E. Stallings (born 1968, US)
*Jon Stallworthy (1935–2014, E)
*Ann Stanford (1916–1987, US)
*Frank Stanford (1948–1978, US)
*George Stanley (born 1937, US/C)
*George Starbuck (1931–1996, US)
*Carmine Starnino (born 1970, C)
*Nicolette Stasko (born 1950, A)
*C. K. Stead (born 1932, NZ)
*Peter Steele (1939–2012, A)
*Richard Steere (1643–1721, US)
*John Steffler (born 1947, C)
*Gertrude Stein (1874–1946, US)
*Mattie Stepanek (1990–2004, US)
*Ian Stephens (1955–1996, C)
*James Stephens (1880–1950, Ir)
*James Brunton Stephens (1835–1902, S)
*George Stepney (1663–1707, E)
*John Sterling (1806–1844, S)
*Gerald Stern (1925–2022, US)
*Ricardo Sternberg (born 1948, C/US)
*C. J. Stevens (1927–2021, US)
*Wallace Stevens (1880–1955, US)
*Richard Stevenson (born 1952, C)
*Robert Louis Stevenson (1850–1894, S)
*Margo Taft Stever (living, US)
*Amanda Stewart (born 1959, A)
*Douglas Stewart (1913–1985, A)
*Harold Stewart (1916–1995, A)
*Shannon Stewart (living, C)
*W. Gregory Stewart (living, C/US)
*Trumbull Stickney (1874–1904, US)
*John Stiles (living, C/E)
*James Still (1906–2001, US)
*Anne Stone (living, C)
*Donna J. Stone (1933–1994, US)
*Ruth Stone (1915–2011, US)
*Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet (born 1968, US)
*Edward Storer (1880–1944, E)
*Randolph Stow (1935–2010, A)
*Mark Strand (1934–2014, US)
*Jennifer Strauss (born 1933, A)
*Sean Street (born 1946, E)
*Agnes Strickland (1796–1874, E)
*Adelle Stripe (born 1976, E)
*Trumbull Stickney (1874–1904, US)
*Donna J. Stone (1933–1994, US)
*Billy Marshall Stoneking (1947–2016, A)
*Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet (born 1968, US)
*Edward Storer (1880–1944, E)
*Eithne Strong (1923–1999, Ir)
*Joseph Stroud (born 1943, US)
*Betsy Struthers (born 1951, C)
*John Struthers (1776–1853, S)
*Jesse Stuart (1906–1984, US)
*Abhi Subedi (born 1945)
*John Suckling (1609–1642, E)
*Julie Suk (born 1924, US)
*Andrew Suknaski (1942–2012, C)
*Alan Sullivan (1868–1947, C)
*Aloysius Michael Sullivan (1896–1980, US)
*Rosemary Sullivan (born 1947, C)
*Maud Sulter (1960–2008, S)
*Moez Surani (born 1979, C)
*Kamala Surayya (1934–2009, In)
*Efua Sutherland (1924–1996, Gh)
*John Sutherland (1919–1956, C)
*Robert Swanson (1905–1994, C)
*Robert Sward (1933–2022, US/C)
*George Swede (born 1940, C)
*Matthew Sweeney (1951–2018, Ir)
*Cole Swensen (born 1955, US)
*Karen Swenson (born 1936, US)
*May Swenson (1913–1989, US)
*Jonathan Swift (1667–1745, Ir/E)
*Todd Swift (born 1966, C/E)
*Algernon Charles Swinburne (1837–1909, E)
*Randall Swingler (1909–1967, E)
*Ieuan ap Hywel Swrdwal (c. 1430 – c. 1480, W)
*Bobbi Sykes (1943–2010, A)
*Joshua Sylvester (1563–1618, E)
*Arthur Symons (1865–1945, E)
*John Millington Synge (1871–1909, Ir)
*Arthur Sze (born 1950, US)
*George Szirtes (born 1948, E)
*Anne Szumigalski (1922–1999, E/C)
==T==

*Eileen Tabios (born 1960, US)
*Proma Tagore (living, C)
*Rabindranath Tagore (1861–1941, In)
*Maria Takolander (born 1973, A)
*Francis W. Tancred (1874–1925, E)
*Robert Tannahill (1774–1810, S)
*Dorothea Tanning (1910–2012, US)
*Allen Tate (1899–1979, US)
*James Tate (1943–2015, US)
*Emma Tatham (1829–1855, E)
*Andrew Taylor (born 1940, A)
*Ann Taylor (1782–1866, E)
*Bruce Taylor (born 1960, C)
*Edward Taylor (1645–1729, E/US)
*Emily Taylor (1795–1872, E)
*Heather Taylor (living, C)
*Henry Taylor (1800–1886, E)
*Henry S. Taylor (born 1942, US)
*Jane Taylor (1783–1824, E)
*Rachel Annand Taylor (1876–1960, S)
*Ruth Taylor (1961–2006, C)
*Sara Teasdale (1883–1933, US)
*Barry Tebb (born 1942, E)
*Fiona Templeton (born 1951, S/E)
*William Tennant (1784–1848, S)
*Alfred, Lord Tennyson (1809–1892, E)
*Frederick Tennyson (1807–1898, E)
*John Terpstra (living, C)
*Elaine Terranova (born 1939, US)
*A. S. J. Tessimond (1902–1962, E)
*Lucy Terry (c. 1730–1821, US)
*Souvankham Thammavongsa (born 1978, C)
*Celia Thaxter (1824–1894, US)
*Ernest Thayer (1863–1940, US)
*John Thelwall (1764–1834, E)
*Sharon Thesen (born 1946, C)
*Colin Thiele (1920–2006, A)
*Kai Cheng Thom (living, C)
*William Thom (1799–1848, S)
*Thomas the Rhymer (Thomas Learmonth, c. 1220 – c. 1298, S)
*Thomas of Hales (13th c., E)
*D. M. Thomas (1935–2023, E)
*Dylan Thomas (1914–1953, W/E)
*Edward Thomas (1878–1917, E)
*Elizabeth Thomas (1675–1731, E)
*Lorenzo Thomas (1944–2005, US)
*R. S. Thomas (1913–2000, W)
*William Thomas (1832–1878, W)
*Francis Thompson (1859–1907, E)
*John Thompson (1938–1976, E/C)
*John Reuben Thompson (1823–1873, US)
*Edward William Thomson (1849–1924, C)
*James Thomson (1700–1748, S)
*James Thomson (awa Bysshe Vanolis, 1834–1882, S)
*Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862, US)
*Tim Thorne (1944–2021, A)
*Russell Thornton (living, C)
*Joseph Thurston (1704–1732, E)
*Anthony Thwaite (1930–2021, E)
*Michael Thwaites (1915–2005, A)
*Chidiock Tichborne (1558–1586, E)
*Thomas Tickell (1685–1740, E)
*Matthew Tierney (born 1970, C)
*Mary Tighe (1772–1810, Ir)
*Lydia H. Tilton (1839–1915, US)
*Richard Tipping (born 1949, A)
*José Tlatelpas (born 1953, Me/C)
*Nick Toczek (born 1950, E)
*Barbara Euphan Todd (1890–1976, E)
*Ruthven Todd (1914–1978, S)
*Mohamud Siad Togane (born 1947, So/C)
*J. R. R. Tolkien (1892–1973, E)
*Francis Tolson (died 1745, E)
*Melvin B. Tolson (1898–1966, US)
*Charles Tomlinson (1927–2015, E)
*Jean Toomer (1894–1967, US)
*Charles Tompson (1807–1883, A)
*Angela Topping (born 1954, E)
*Lola Lemire Tostevin (born 1937, C)
*Cyril Tourneur (died 1626, E)
*Ann Townsend (born 1962, US)
*Thomas Traherne (1636/1637–1674, E)
*John Tranter (1943–2023, A)
*Elizabeth Treadwell (born 1967, US)
*Mark Tredinnick (born 1962, A)
*Rhea Tregebov (born 1953, C)
*Raymond D. Tremblay (living, C)
*Roland Michel Tremblay (born 1972, C/E)
*Natasha Trethewey (born 1966, US)
*Tony Trigilio (born 1966, US)
*Calvin Trillin (born 1935, US)
*David Trinidad (born 1953, US)
*John Tripp (1927–1986, W/E)
*Quincy Troupe (born 1939, US)
*Peter Trower (1930–2017, C)
*Mark Truscott (born 1970, US/C)
*Dimitris Tsaloumas (1921–2016, A)
*Charlotte Maria Tucker (A.L.O.E, 1821–1893, E)
*Eliza Dorothea Cobbe, Lady Tuite (c. 1764–1850, Ir)
*George Turberville (c. 1540 – before 1597, E)
*Richard Marggraf Turley (born 1970, E)
*Gael Turnbull (1928–2004, S)
*Charles Tennyson Turner (1808–1879, E)
*Julian Turner (born 1955, E)
*Walter J. Turner (1889–1946, A/E)
*Thomas Tusser (1524–1580, E)
*Emma Rood Tuttle (1839–1916, US)
*Hone Tuwhare (1922–2008, NZ)
*Violet Tweedale (1862–1936, S/E)
*Chase Twichell (born 1950, US)
*Katharine Tynan (1859–1932, Ir/E)
*John Tyndall (born 1951, C)
*Daniel Scott Tysdal (born 1978, C)
==U==

*Laura Ulewicz (1930–2007, US)
*Jeff Unaegbu (born 1979, Ni)
*Jean Starr Untermeyer (1886–1970, US)
*Louis Untermeyer (1885–1977, US)
*John Updike (1932–2009, US)
*Priscila Uppal (1974–2018, C)
*Allen Upward (1863–1926, E)
*Joan Ure (Elizabeth Thoms Clark, 1918–1978, S)
*David UU (David W. Harris, 1948–1994, C)
*Amy Uyematsu (1947–2023, US)
==V==

*Jean Valentine (1934–2020, US)
*Valentine Vallis (1916–2009, A)
*Cor van den Heuvel (born 1931, US)
*Mona Van Duyn (1921–2004, US)
*Lin Van Hek (born 1944, A)
*Peter van Toorn (1944–2021, C)
*Christopher van Wyk (1957–2014, SA)
*Henry Vaughan (1621–1695, W)
*R. M. Vaughan (born 1965, C)
*Thomas Vaux, 2nd Baron Vaux of Harrowden (1509–1556, E)
*Reetika Vazirani (1962–2003, US)
*Janine Pommy Vega (1942–2010, US)
*Edward Vere, Earl of Oxford (1550–1604, E)
*Helen Vendler (1933–2024, US)
*Jumoke Verissimo (born 1976, Ni)
*Paul Vermeersch (born 1973, C)
*Katherena Vermette (born 1977, C)
*Jones Very (1813–1880, US)
*Vicki Viidikas (1948–1998, A)
*Peter Viereck (1916–2006, US)
*José García Villa (1908–1997, Ph)
*Pamelia Sarah Vining (1826–1897, C)
*Vivian Virtue (1911–1998, J/E)
*Garth Von Buchholz (living, C)
*Brian Vrepont (1882–1955, A)
*Prvoslav Vujcic (Prvoslav Vujčić, born 1960, Se/C)
==W==
===Wa–We===
*Miriam Waddington (1917–2004, C)
*Michael Wade (1944–2004, C)
*Sidney Wade (born 1951, US)
*Fred Wah (born 1939, C)
*John Wain (1925–1994, E)
*A. E. Waite (1857–1942, E)
*Nayyirah Waheed (living, US)
*Diane Wakoski (born 1937, US)
*Derek Walcott (1930–2017, SL)
*Anne Waldman (born 1945, US)
*George Waldron (1690 – c. 1730, E/IoM)
*Keith Waldrop (1932–2023, US)
*Rosmarie Waldrop (born 1935, US)
*Arthur Waley (1889–1966, E)
*Alice Walker (born 1944, US)
*Margaret Walker (1915–1998, US)
*Rob Walker (born 1953, A)
*Bronwen Wallace (1945–1989, C)
*Chris Wallace-Crabbe (born 1934, A)
*Edmund Waller (1606–1687, E)
*Tom Walmsley (born 1948, C)
*Agnes Walsh (born 1950, C)
*Catherine Walsh (born 1964, Ir)
*Minnie Gow Walsworth (1859–1947, US)
*David Waltner-Toews (born 1948, C)
*Ania Walwicz (1951–2020, A)
*Connie Wanek (born 1952, US)
*John Powell Ward (born 1937, E/W)
*Ned Ward (1667–1731, E)
*Sarah Wardle (born 1969, E)
*Anna Laetitia Waring (1823–1910, W/E)
*Emily Warn (living, US)
*Sylvia Townsend Warner (1893–1978, E)
*Crystal Warren (living, SA)
*John Warren, 3rd Baron de Tabley (1835–1895, E)
*Meralda Warren (born 1959, PI)
*Robert Penn Warren (1905–1989, US)
*Thomas Warton (1728–1790, E)
*Terry Watada (born 1951, C)
*Vernon Watkins (1906–1967, W)
*George Watsky (born 1986, US)
*Rosamund Marriott Watson (Graham R. Tomson, 1860–1911, E)
*Samuel Wagan Watson (born 1972, A)
*Stephen Watson (1954–2011, SA)
*Thomas Watson (1555–1592, E)
*William Watson (1858–1935, E)
*Alison Watt (born 1957, C)
*Barrett Watten (born 1948, US)
*Isaac Watts (1674–1748, E)
*Rebecca Watts (born 1983, E)
*Theodore Watts-Dunton (1832–1914, E)
*Tom Wayman (born 1945, C)
*Alan Wearne (born 1948, A)
*Francis Webb (1925–1973, A)
*Harri Webb (1920–1994, W)
*Phyllis Webb (1927–2021, C)
*John Webster (c. 1580 – c. 1634, E)
*Mary Morison Webster (1894–1980, SA)
*James Wedderburn (c. 1495–1553, S)
*John Wedderburn (c. 1505–1553, S)
*Robert Wedderburn (c. 1510 – c. 1555, S)
*Rebecca Wee (living, US)
*George Weideman (1947–2008, SA)
*John Weier (born 1949, C)
*Hannah Weiner (1928–1997, US)
*Robert Stanley Weir (1856–1926, C)
*Marjorie Welish (born 1944, US)
*Zachariah Wells (born 1976, C)
*Viola S. Wendt (1907–1986, US)
*Marjory Heath Wentworth (born 1958, US)
*William Wentworth (1790–1872, A)
*Darren Wershler (Darren Wershler-Henry, born 1966, C)
*Charles Wesley (1707–1788, E)
*Gilbert West (1703–1756, E)
*Jane West (1758–1852, E)
*David Wevill (born 1935, C/US)

===Wh–Wy===
*Philip Whalen (1923–2002, US)
*Dawud Wharnsby (born 1972, C)
*Anne Wharton (1659–1685, E)
*Gordon Wharton (1929–2011, E)
*Herb Wharton (born 1936, A)
*Mary Whateley (1738–1835, E)
*Anne Wheathill (fl. 1584, E)
*David Wheatley (born 1970, Ir/S)
*Phillis Wheatley (1753–1784, US)
*Billy Edd Wheeler (born 1932, US)
*E. B. White (1899–1985, US)
*Henry Kirke White (1785–1806, E)
*James L. White (1936–1981, US)
*Kenneth White (1936–2023, S)
*Laura Rosamond White (1844–1922, US)
*Joshua Whitehead (living, C)
*Bruce Whiteman (born 1952, C)
*Walt Whitman (1819–1892, US)
*Isabella Whitney (c. 1546/1548 – after 1624, E)
*Zoe Whittall (born 1976, C)
*Reed Whittemore (1919–2012, US)
*John Greenleaf Whittier (1807–1892, US)
*Brian Whittingham (1950–2022, S)
*Christopher Whyte (born 1952, S)
*George Whyte-Melville (1821–1878, S/E)
*Anna Wickham (1883–1947, E/A)
*Les Wicks (born 1955, A)
*John Wieners (1934–2002, US)
*Nissanka Wijeyeratne (1924–2007, SLa)
*Richard Wilbur (1921–2017, US)
*Dora Wilcox (1873–1953, A)
*Ella Wheeler Wilcox (1850–1919, US)
*Robert Will (1615–1679, E)
*Jane Wilde (1821–1896, Ir/E)
*Oscar Wilde (1854–1900, Ir/E)
*Amos Wilder (1895–1993, US)
*Charlotte Wilder (1898–1980, US)
*Anne Wilkinson (1910–1961, C)
*John Wilkinson (born 1953, E)
*William of Nassyngton (died 1354, E)
*William of Shoreham (fl. 14th century, E)
*Aeneas Francon Williams (1886–1971, E)
*Alfred Williams (1877–1930, E)
*Anna Williams (1706–1783, W/E)
*Athol Williams (born 1970, SA)
*C. K. Williams (1936–2015, US)
*David Gwyn Williams (1904–1990, W/E)
*Donna Williams (1963–2017, A)
*Emmett Williams (1925–2007, US)
*Heathcote Williams (1941–2017, E)
*Helen Maria Williams (1759/1762–1827, E/F)
*Hugo Williams (born 1942, E)
*Isaac Williams (1802–1865, E)
*Jane Williams (1806–1885, W/E)
*Jonathan Williams (1929–2008, US)
*Miller Williams (1930–2015, US)
*Oscar Williams (1900–1964, US)
*Richard D&#x27;Alton Williams (1822–1862, Ir)
*Rowan Williams (born 1950, W/E)
*Saul Williams (born 1972, US)
*Sherley Anne Williams (1944–1999, US)
*William Carlos Williams (1883–1963, US)
*Frank S. Williamson (1865–1936, A)
*Elizabeth Willis (born 1961, US)
*James Wills (1790–1868, Ir)
*Ruth Wills (1826–1908, E)
*Clive Wilmer (born 1945, E)
*Frank Wilmot (Furnley Maurice, 1881–1942, A)
*John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester (1647–1680, E)
*Eleanor Wilner (born 1937, US)
*Alan R. Wilson (living, C)
*Anne Elizabeth Wilson (1901–1946, US/C)
*Arthur Wilson (1595–1652, E)
*Dede Wilson (born 1937, US)
*Edwin Wilson (born 1942, A)
*Florence Mary Wilson (c. 1870–1946, Ir/NI)
*Peter Lamborn Wilson (also Hakim Bey, 1945–2022, US)
*Sheri-D Wilson (living, C)
*Christian Wiman (born 1966, US)
*Liz Winfield (born 1964, A)
*Rob Winger (born 1974, C)
*Sheila Wingfield (1906–1992, E/Ir)
*Yvor Winters (1900–1968, US)
*Jane Wiseman (Mrs. Holt, 1673 – after 1717, E)
*George Wither (1588–1667, E)
*Charles Wolfe (1791–1823, Ir)
*Humbert Wolfe (1885–1940, E)
*Thomas Wolfe (1900–1938, US)
*Theresa Wolfwood (living, C)
*Jennifer Wong (living, HK)
*Nellie Wong (born 1934, US)
*Gwyneth Barber Wood (died 2006, J)
*George Woodcock (1912–1995, C)
*Gregory Woods (born 1953, E)
*Joseph Woods (born 1966, Ir/Z)
*Macdara Woods (1942–2018, Ir)
*Lance Woolaver (born 1948, C)
*Dorothy Wordsworth (1771–1855, E)
*William Wordsworth (1770–1850, E)
*Philip Stanhope Worsley (1835–1866, E)
*Sir Henry Wotton (1568–1639, E)
*Carolyn D. Wright (born 1949, US)
*Carolyne Wright (born 1949, US)
*Charles Wright (born 1935, US)
*David Wright (1920–1994, E)
*David McKee Wright (1869–1928, NZ/A)
*Franz Wright (1953–2015, US)
*James Wright (1927–1980, US)
*Jay Wright (born 1935, US)
*Judith Wright (1915–2000, A)
*Kirby Wright (living, US)
*Luke Wright (born 1982, E)
*Robert Wrigley (born 1951, US)
*Lady Mary Wroth (1587–1651 or 1653)
*Thomas Wyatt (1503–1542, E)
*Elinor Wylie (1885–1928, US)
*Edward Alexander Wyon (1842–1872, E)
==X–Y==

*Makhosazana Xaba (born 1957, SA)
*Mitsuye Yamada (born 1923, US)
*Leo Yankevich (1961–2018, US)
*Morgan Yasbincek (born 1964, A)
*J. Michael Yates (1938–2021, US/C)
*W. B. Yeats (1865–1939, Ir)
*Jean Yoon (born 1962, C)
*Marly Youmans (born 1953, US)
*Monica Youn (born 1971, US)
*Andrew Young (1885–1971, S)
*Augustus Young (born 1943, Ir)
*d&#x27;bi Young (born 1977, J/C)
*Douglas Young (1913–1973, S)
*Edward Young (1683–1765, E)
*Ellen Young (c. 1810–1872, A)
*Ian Young (born 1945, C)
*Kevin Young (born 1970, US)
*Marguerite Young (1908–1995, US)
==Z==

*Alessio Zanelli (born 1963, It)
*Matthew Zapruder (born 1967, US)
*Marya Zaturenska (1902–1982, US)
*Robert Zend (1929–1985, C)
*Benjamin Zephaniah (1958–2023, E)
*Komninos Zervos (born 1950, A)
*David Zieroth (born 1946, C)
*Rachel Zolf (born 1968, C)
*Daniel Zomparelli (living, C)
*Carolyn Zonailo (born 1947, C)
*Louis Zukofsky (1904–1978, US)
*Fay Zwicky (1933–2017, A)
*Jan Zwicky (born 1955, C)
==Lists of English language poets by nationality==
*List of Australian poets
*List of Canadian poets
*List of Irish poets
*List of English poets from India
*List of Nigerian poets
*List of South African poets
*List of poets from the United States

==See also==
*English poetry
*List of poets
*List of women poets

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2135436" start="10" end="40" title="List of English-language poets" label="list of English-language poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q10996263" start="1053" end="1067" title="Jonathan Aaron" label="Jonathan Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076935" start="1085" end="1096" title="Chris Abani" label="Chris Abani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060270" start="1117" end="1128" title="Henry Abbey" label="Henry Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q519064" start="1146" end="1170" title="Eleanor Hallowell Abbott" label="Eleanor Hallowell Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176684" start="1188" end="1203" title="J. H. M. Abbott" label="J. H. M. Abbott"/>
<link wikidata="Q561782" start="1220" end="1241" title="Lascelles Abercrombie" label="Lascelles Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800422" start="1258" end="1282" title="Arthur Talmage Abernethy" label="Arthur Talmage Abernethy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293975" start="1300" end="1310" title="Mark Abley" label="Mark Abley"/>
<link wikidata="Q20090051" start="1327" end="1338" title="James Aboud" label="James Aboud"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120389" start="1355" end="1370" title="Lionel Abrahams" label="Lionel Abrahams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407075" start="1388" end="1398" title="Sam Abrams" label="Sam Abrams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456427" start="1416" end="1429" title="Seth Abramson" label="Seth Abramson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164478" start="1447" end="1458" title="Dannie Abse" label="Dannie Abse"/>
<link wikidata="Q155845" start="1475" end="1488" title="Chinua Achebe" label="Chinua Achebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052851" start="1509" end="1536" title="Catherine Obianuju Acholonu" label="Catherine Obianuju Acholonu"/>
<link wikidata="Q270641" start="1554" end="1565" title="Kathy Acker" label="Kathy Acker"/>
<link wikidata="Q467169" start="1583" end="1597" title="Diane Ackerman" label="Diane Ackerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310288" start="1615" end="1629" title="Duane Ackerson" label="Duane Ackerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314519" start="1647" end="1659" title="Milton Acorn" label="Milton Acorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363838" start="1676" end="1688" title="Harold Acton" label="Harold Acton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366759" start="1708" end="1721" title="Gilbert Adair" label="Gilbert Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060279" start="1740" end="1763" title="Virginia Hamilton Adair" label="Virginia Hamilton Adair"/>
<link wikidata="Q250080" start="1781" end="1791" title="Helen Adam" label="Helen Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15615106" start="1811" end="1820" title="Jean Adam" label="Jean Adam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799032" start="1837" end="1855" title="Arthur Henry Adams" label="Arthur Henry Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q42" start="1875" end="1888" title="Douglas Adams" label="Douglas Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q11806" start="1905" end="1915" title="John Adams" label="John Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q467163" start="1933" end="1945" title="Léonie Adams" label="Léonie Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q437970" start="1963" end="1973" title="Ryan Adams" label="Ryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560455" start="1991" end="2002" title="Gil Adamson" label="Gil Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341360" start="2019" end="2033" title="Robert Adamson (poet)" label="Robert Adamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q270258" start="2050" end="2062" title="Fleur Adcock" label="Fleur Adcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q206384" start="2082" end="2096" title="Joseph Addison" label="Joseph Addison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408320" start="2113" end="2126" title="Kim Addonizio" label="Kim Addonizio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20604227" start="2144" end="2158" title="Bayo Adebowale" label="Bayo Adebowale"/>
<link wikidata="Q538186" start="2176" end="2197" title="Toyin Adewale-Gabriel" label="Toyin Adewale-Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095548" start="2215" end="2232" title="Opal Palmer Adisa" label="Opal Palmer Adisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q561509" start="2249" end="2266" title="Tatamkhulu Afrika" label="Tatamkhulu Afrika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893263" start="2284" end="2294" title="John Agard" label="John Agard"/>
<link wikidata="Q113117401" start="2312" end="2324" title="Sandra Agard" label="Sandra Agard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6463711" start="2338" end="2353" title="Patience Agbabi" label="Patience Agbabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248159" start="2372" end="2384" title="Deborah Ager" label="Deborah Ager"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385770" start="2401" end="2421" title="Kelli Russell Agodon" label="Kelli Russell Agodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161932" start="2436" end="2449" title="Allan Ahlberg" label="Allan Ahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q403146" start="2466" end="2468" title="Ai (poet)" label="Ai"/>
<link wikidata="Q298224" start="2486" end="2499" title="Ama Ata Aidoo" label="Ama Ata Aidoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q380645" start="2517" end="2529" title="Conrad Aiken" label="Conrad Aiken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301196" start="2547" end="2562" title="Douglas Ainslie" label="Douglas Ainslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442357" start="2579" end="2590" title="Thomas Aird" label="Thomas Aird"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678626" start="2607" end="2618" title="Adam Aitken" label="Adam Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192021" start="2635" end="2646" title="Neil Aitken" label="Neil Aitken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509405" start="2663" end="2677" title="Funso Aiyejina" label="Funso Aiyejina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814656" start="2695" end="2705" title="Tolu Ajayi" label="Tolu Ajayi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247855" start="2723" end="2736" title="Mark Akenside" label="Mark Akenside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405394" start="2753" end="2766" title="Salman Akhtar" label="Salman Akhtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q61996711" start="2787" end="2800" title="Tolu Akinyemi" label="Tolu Akinyemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708451" start="2815" end="2846" title="Alasdair MacMhaighstir Alasdair" label="Alasdair MacMhaighstir Alasdair"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052826" start="2866" end="2881" title="Jordie Albiston" label="Jordie Albiston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747243" start="2898" end="2912" title="Ammiel Alcalay" label="Ammiel Alcalay"/>
<link wikidata="Q474235" start="2930" end="2949" title="Amos Bronson Alcott" label="Amos Bronson Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q185696" start="2967" end="2984" title="Louisa May Alcott" label="Louisa May Alcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6380513" start="3002" end="3017" title="Kaye Aldenhoven" label="Kaye Aldenhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q514998" start="3031" end="3048" title="Richard Aldington" label="Richard Aldington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362284" start="3065" end="3084" title="Elizabeth Alexander (poet)" label="Elizabeth Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508921" start="3102" end="3121" title="Sidney A. Alexander" label="Sidney A. Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019920" start="3138" end="3177" title="William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling" label="William Alexander, 1st Earl of Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q727331" start="3197" end="3211" title="Sherman Alexie" label="Sherman Alexie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3753502" start="3229" end="3241" title="Felipe Alfau" label="Felipe Alfau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340012" start="3259" end="3270" title="Edna Alford" label="Edna Alford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441693" start="3287" end="3298" title="Mike Alfred" label="Mike Alfred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692327" start="3313" end="3328" title="Agha Shahid Ali" label="Agha Shahid Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11047743" start="3349" end="3370" title="James Alexander Allan" label="James Alexander Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7339939" start="3387" end="3396" title="Rob Allan" label="Rob Allan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416529" start="3414" end="3427" title="Sandra Alland" label="Sandra Alland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296296" start="3443" end="3455" title="Donna Allard" label="Donna Allard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272618" start="3469" end="3479" title="Dick Allen (poet)" label="Dick Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293963" start="3497" end="3509" title="Donald Allen" label="Donald Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22276775" start="3527" end="3542" title="Elizabeth Allen (poet)" label="Elizabeth Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362571" start="3556" end="3577" title="Elizabeth Akers Allen" label="Elizabeth Akers Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530893" start="3595" end="3618" title="Leslie Holdsworth Allen" label="Leslie Holdsworth Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240898" start="3635" end="3648" title="Lillian Allen" label="Lillian Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326813" start="3665" end="3684" title="Richard James Allen" label="Richard James Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363461" start="3701" end="3710" title="Ron Allen (playwright)" label="Ron Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364966" start="3728" end="3749" title="Ellen Palmer Allerton" label="Ellen Palmer Allerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q261007" start="3767" end="3784" title="William Allingham" label="William Allingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q468272" start="3807" end="3825" title="Washington Allston" label="Washington Allston"/>
<link wikidata="Q459791" start="3843" end="3860" title="Anne-Marie Alonzo" label="Anne-Marie Alonzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735950" start="3877" end="3881" title="Alta (poet)" label="Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q539853" start="3912" end="3922" title="Al Alvarez" label="Al Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q13231960" start="3939" end="3950" title="Ivy Alvarez" label="Ivy Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q450243" start="3964" end="3977" title="Julia Alvarez" label="Julia Alvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812805" start="3997" end="4008" title="Moniza Alvi" label="Moniza Alvi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536216" start="4038" end="4052" title="George Amabile" label="George Amabile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4665862" start="4069" end="4091" title="Abdulkareem Baba Aminu" label="Abdulkareem Baba Aminu"/>
<link wikidata="Q220078" start="4109" end="4122" title="Kingsley Amis" label="Kingsley Amis"/>
<link wikidata="Q279077" start="4139" end="4151" title="A. R. Ammons" label="A. R. Ammons"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251148" start="4169" end="4181" title="Madhur Anand" label="Madhur Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q9008489" start="4198" end="4213" title="Ingrid Andersen" label="Ingrid Andersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403066" start="4231" end="4245" title="Ethel Anderson" label="Ethel Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496683" start="4262" end="4278" title="Freddie Anderson (writer)" label="Freddie Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106918" start="4298" end="4317" title="J. Redwood Anderson" label="J. Redwood Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369186" start="4334" end="4350" title="Patrick Anderson (poet)" label="Patrick Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356102" start="4369" end="4381" title="Rod Anderson (writer)" label="Rod Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925988" start="4398" end="4419" title="Victor Henry Anderson" label="Victor Henry Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828204" start="4437" end="4450" title="Michael Andre" label="Michael Andre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398760" start="4470" end="4483" title="Bruce Andrews" label="Bruce Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395734" start="4501" end="4514" title="Kevin Andrews (writer)" label="Kevin Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363470" start="4534" end="4545" title="Ron Androla" label="Ron Androla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287170" start="4563" end="4574" title="Ralph Angel" label="Ralph Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19526" start="4592" end="4604" title="Maya Angelou" label="Maya Angelou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143731" start="4622" end="4639" title="James Stout Angus" label="James Stout Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765070" start="4656" end="4668" title="Marion Angus" label="Marion Angus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106185" start="4685" end="4697" title="J. K. Annand" label="J. K. Annand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230808" start="4714" end="4725" title="David Antin" label="David Antin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775370" start="4743" end="4749" title="Antler (poet)" label="Antler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648744" start="4767" end="4784" title="Susanne Antonetta" label="Susanne Antonetta"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008716" start="4802" end="4819" title="Brother Antoninus" label="Brother Antoninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q64010658" start="4837" end="4853" title="Raymond Antrobus" label="Raymond Antrobus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183129" start="4867" end="4882" title="Philip Appleman" label="Philip Appleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323759" start="4900" end="4916" title="Richard Appleton" label="Richard Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718244" start="4933" end="4952" title="Alexander Arbuthnot (poet)" label="Alexander Arbuthnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543934" start="4969" end="4992" title="Walter Arensberg" label="Walter Conrad Arensberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281906" start="5010" end="5024" title="Rae Armantrout" label="Rae Armantrout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1981093" start="5042" end="5056" title="Simon Armitage" label="Simon Armitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q21664083" start="5073" end="5085" title="Annie Armitt" label="Annie Armitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323777" start="5102" end="5116" title="Richard Armour" label="Richard Armour"/>
<link wikidata="Q599358" start="5134" end="5153" title="Jeannette Armstrong" label="Jeannette Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15436129" start="5170" end="5185" title="Peter Armstrong (poet)" label="Peter Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q53381881" start="5202" end="5217" title="Tammy Armstrong" label="Tammy Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230856" start="5234" end="5247" title="David Arnason" label="David Arnason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180704" start="5264" end="5276" title="Craig Arnold" label="Craig Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q271032" start="5294" end="5308" title="Matthew Arnold" label="Matthew Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206053" start="5325" end="5338" title="Joanne Arnott" label="Joanne Arnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6342943" start="5355" end="5369" title="K. O. Arvidson" label="K. O. Arvidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712734" start="5387" end="5399" title="M. K. Asante" label="M. K. Asante"/>
<link wikidata="Q29418" start="5417" end="5429" title="John Ashbery" label="John Ashbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132527" start="5447" end="5458" title="Cliff Ashby" label="Cliff Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487024" start="5475" end="5494" title="Joseph Ashby-Sterry" label="Joseph Ashby-Sterry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787167" start="5519" end="5530" title="Thomas Ashe (poet)" label="Thomas Ashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313827" start="5547" end="5559" title="Renée Ashley" label="Renée Ashley"/>
<link wikidata="Q447731" start="5577" end="5587" title="Anne Askew" label="Anne Askew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7806992" start="5604" end="5624" title="Timoshenko Aslanides" label="Timoshenko Aslanides"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516791" start="5641" end="5656" title="Herbert Asquith (poet)" label="Herbert Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q274730" start="5673" end="5684" title="Thea Astley" label="Thea Astley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889340" start="5701" end="5712" title="Tilly Aston" label="Tilly Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346215" start="5729" end="5745" title="Edwin Atherstone" label="Edwin Atherstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q27733950" start="5762" end="5780" title="Cassandra Atherton" label="Cassandra Atherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380245" start="5794" end="5809" title="Rupert Atkinson (poet)" label="Rupert Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23940091" start="5826" end="5842" title="Tiffany Atkinson" label="Tiffany Atkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183492" start="5859" end="5874" title="Margaret Atwood" label="Margaret Atwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298297" start="5891" end="5911" title="Dorothy Auchterlonie Green" label="Dorothy Auchterlonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219714" start="5928" end="5940" title="John Audelay" label="John Audelay"/>
<link wikidata="Q178698" start="5960" end="5971" title="W. H. Auden" label="W. H. Auden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12795" start="5991" end="6003" title="William Auld" label="William Auld"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281184" start="6020" end="6036" title="Joseph Auslander" label="Joseph Auslander"/>
<link wikidata="Q214642" start="6054" end="6065" title="Paul Auster" label="Paul Auster"/>
<link wikidata="Q575043" start="6083" end="6096" title="Alfred Austin" label="Alfred Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42531328" start="6113" end="6132" title="Oana Avasilichioaei" label="Oana Avasilichioaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q493077" start="6146" end="6157" title="James Avery (actor)" label="James Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856776" start="6175" end="6187" title="Tusiata Avia" label="Tusiata Avia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759152" start="6205" end="6220" title="Margaret Avison" label="Margaret Avison"/>
<link wikidata="Q921435" start="6237" end="6249" title="Kofi Awoonor" label="Kofi Awoonor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154492" start="6267" end="6283" title="Ayo Ayoola-Amale" label="Ayo Ayoola-Amale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408380" start="6301" end="6310" title="Pam Ayres" label="Pam Ayres"/>
<link wikidata="Q923718" start="6327" end="6344" title="Robert Aytoun" label="Sir Robert Aytoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q771270" start="6363" end="6390" title="William Edmondstoune Aytoun" label="William Edmondstoune Aytoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q13140762" start="6407" end="6421" title="Nnorom Azuonye" label="Nnorom Azuonye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357241" start="6439" end="6451" title="Jody Azzouni" label="Jody Azzouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387268" start="6484" end="6496" title="Ken Babstock" label="Ken Babstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172625" start="6513" end="6525" title="Peter Babyon" label="Peter Babyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6201217" start="6548" end="6567" title="Jimmy Santiago Baca" label="Jimmy Santiago Baca"/>
<link wikidata="Q4883450" start="6585" end="6597" title="Bellamy Bach" label="Bellamy Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6285086" start="6628" end="6646" title="Joseph M. Bachelor" label="Joseph M. Bachelor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362362" start="6679" end="6698" title="Elizabeth Bachinsky" label="Elizabeth Bachinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937233" start="6715" end="6730" title="Gabeba Baderoon" label="Gabeba Baderoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30570427" start="6748" end="6767" title="Grace Shattuck Bail" label="Grace Shattuck Bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834952" start="6785" end="6798" title="Alfred Bailey (poet)" label="Alfred Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118330" start="6815" end="6827" title="Jacob Bailey (author)" label="Jacob Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6395768" start="6847" end="6859" title="Kevin Bailey (poet)" label="Kevin Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q324158" start="6876" end="6895" title="Philip James Bailey" label="Philip James Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q463302" start="6912" end="6926" title="Joanna Baillie" label="Joanna Baillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231062" start="6945" end="6956" title="David Baker (poet)" label="David Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q928236" start="6974" end="6985" title="Henry Baker (naturalist)" label="Henry Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762743" start="7002" end="7022" title="Marie Annharte Baker" label="Marie Annharte Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172653" start="7039" end="7053" title="Peter Bakowski" label="Peter Bakowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220406" start="7070" end="7082" title="John Balaban (poet)" label="John Balaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186129" start="7100" end="7110" title="Jesse Ball" label="Jesse Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681137" start="7128" end="7143" title="Addie L. Ballou" label="Addie L. Ballou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410863" start="7161" end="7175" title="Samuel Bamford" label="Samuel Bamford"/>
<link wikidata="Q460546" start="7192" end="7202" title="John Banim" label="John Banim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5105808" start="7222" end="7233" title="Chris Banks (poet)" label="Chris Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q665144" start="7250" end="7263" title="Russell Banks" label="Russell Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378940" start="7281" end="7299" title="Kaushalya Bannerji" label="Kaushalya Bannerji"/>
<link wikidata="Q132138" start="7313" end="7327" title="Anne Bannerman" label="Anne Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478506" start="7344" end="7361" title="Frances Bannerman" label="Frances Bannerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6537524" start="7378" end="7389" title="Lex Banning" label="Lex Banning"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004952" start="7406" end="7419" title="Ivy Bannister" label="Ivy Bannister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426319" start="7440" end="7457" title="Shabbir Banoobhai" label="Shabbir Banoobhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q354783" start="7475" end="7487" title="Amiri Baraka" label="Amiri Baraka"/>
<link wikidata="Q268305" start="7505" end="7527" title="Anna Laetitia Barbauld" label="Anna Laetitia Barbauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459062" start="7544" end="7555" title="Mary Barber (poet)" label="Mary Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q28946323" start="7581" end="7591" title="Ros Barber" label="Ros Barber"/>
<link wikidata="Q268305" start="7608" end="7630" title="Anna Laetitia Barbauld" label="Anna Laetitia Barbauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699264" start="7647" end="7659" title="John Barbour (poet)" label="John Barbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821353" start="7679" end="7696" title="Alexander Barclay" label="Alexander Barclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816611" start="7713" end="7728" title="Leland Bardwell" label="Leland Bardwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7454777" start="7746" end="7759" title="Serie Barford" label="Serie Barford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476581" start="7774" end="7788" title="Richard Barham" label="Richard Barham"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012563" start="7823" end="7836" title="George Barker (poet)" label="George Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403418" start="7853" end="7863" title="Les Barker" label="Les Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q356730" start="7880" end="7893" title="Coleman Barks" label="Coleman Barks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131286" start="7911" end="7928" title="Clement Barksdale" label="Clement Barksdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q723604" start="7945" end="7956" title="Joel Barlow" label="Joel Barlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510181" start="7976" end="7993" title="Lady Anne Barnard" label="Lady Anne Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779010" start="8013" end="8025" title="Mary Barnard" label="Mary Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q234721" start="8043" end="8055" title="Djuna Barnes" label="Djuna Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q48817640" start="8073" end="8086" title="Stuart Barnes (poet)" label="Stuart Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q716856" start="8103" end="8117" title="William Barnes" label="William Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q64485868" start="8134" end="8152" title="Annie Wall Barnett" label="Annie Wall Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052533" start="8170" end="8187" title="Catherine Barnett" label="Catherine Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q684646" start="8205" end="8222" title="Richard Barnfield" label="Richard Barnfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022023" start="8239" end="8255" title="Willis Barnstone" label="Willis Barnstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6220825" start="8273" end="8282" title="John Barr (poet)" label="John Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6873277" start="8302" end="8313" title="Miriam Barr" label="Miriam Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474065" start="8331" end="8343" title="Laird Barron" label="Laird Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566669" start="8361" end="8375" title="Bernard Barton" label="Bernard Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15441101" start="8392" end="8403" title="John Barton (poet)" label="John Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895491" start="8420" end="8440" title="Bertha Hirsch Baruch" label="Bertha Hirsch Baruch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524664" start="8480" end="8491" title="Gary Barwin" label="Gary Barwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7812257" start="8508" end="8517" title="Todd Bash" label="Todd Bash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828481" start="8535" end="8551" title="Michael Basinski" label="Michael Basinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491049" start="8569" end="8585" title="Shaunt Basmajian" label="Shaunt Basmajian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364752" start="8602" end="8612" title="Ellen Bass" label="Ellen Bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792424" start="8630" end="8640" title="Arlo Bates" label="Arlo Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231204" start="8658" end="8669" title="David Bates (poet)" label="David Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608240" start="8687" end="8698" title="H. E. Bates" label="H. E. Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363035" start="8715" end="8734" title="Katharine Lee Bates" label="Katharine Lee Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281383" start="8752" end="8767" title="Joseph Bathanti" label="Joseph Bathanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242397" start="8785" end="8804" title="Dawn-Michelle Baude" label="Dawn-Michelle Baude"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908061" start="8822" end="8832" title="Bill Bauer (poet)" label="Bill Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341808" start="8852" end="8864" title="Edward Baugh" label="Edward Baugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075480" start="8881" end="8895" title="Charles Baxter (author)" label="Charles Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137045" start="8913" end="8928" title="James K. Baxter" label="James K. Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797953" start="8946" end="8960" title="Arthur Bayldon" label="Arthur Bayldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005229" start="8977" end="8996" title="William Baylebridge" label="William Baylebridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386107" start="9026" end="9036" title="Eric Beach" label="Eric Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787496" start="9053" end="9065" title="Thomas Beach (poet)" label="Thomas Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225581" start="9082" end="9097" title="John Beaglehole" label="John Beaglehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q539533" start="9115" end="9125" title="Anne Beale" label="Anne Beale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300284" start="9144" end="9158" title="Doug Beardsley" label="Doug Beardsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q915031" start="9175" end="9188" title="James Beattie (poet)" label="James Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148553" start="9205" end="9215" title="Jan Beatty" label="Jan Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261795" start="9233" end="9247" title="Derek Beaulieu" label="Derek Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q313932" start="9264" end="9280" title="Francis Beaumont" label="Francis Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977134" start="9297" end="9309" title="Bruce Beaver" label="Bruce Beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="9326" end="9340" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289659" start="9358" end="9372" title="Joshua Beckman" label="Joshua Beckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165597" start="9387" end="9408" title="Thomas Lovell Beddoes" label="Thomas Lovell Beddoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382892" start="9427" end="9439" title="Ruth Bedford" label="Ruth Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111230" start="9456" end="9467" title="Jack Bedson" label="Jack Bedson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145461" start="9484" end="9497" title="Patricia Beer" label="Patricia Beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7919511" start="9514" end="9527" title="Ven Begamudré" label="Ven Begamudré"/>
<link wikidata="Q313063" start="9544" end="9557" title="Brendan Behan" label="Brendan Behan"/>
<link wikidata="Q231886" start="9575" end="9585" title="Aphra Behn" label="Aphra Behn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7522011" start="9602" end="9617" title="Sinclair Beiles" label="Sinclair Beiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487796" start="9635" end="9648" title="Gerard Beirne" label="Gerard Beirne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606507" start="9668" end="9681" title="Henry Beissel" label="Henry Beissel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50825636" start="9700" end="9718" title="Billy-Ray Belcourt" label="Billy-Ray Belcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387311" start="9732" end="9743" title="Ken Belford" label="Ken Belford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389101" start="9760" end="9771" title="Erin Belieu" label="Erin Belieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949059" start="9789" end="9799" title="John Joy Bell" label="J. J. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q656200" start="9816" end="9827" title="Julian Bell" label="Julian Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778291" start="9844" end="9855" title="Marvin Bell" label="Marvin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557805" start="9873" end="9885" title="Lisa Bellear" label="Lisa Bellear"/>
<link wikidata="Q63699779" start="9902" end="9916" title="Lesley Belleau" label="Lesley Belleau"/>
<link wikidata="Q333106" start="9930" end="9944" title="Hilaire Belloc" label="Hilaire Belloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221485" start="9961" end="9973" title="John Bemrose" label="John Bemrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q53883981" start="9987" end="9999" title="Gwen Benaway" label="Gwen Benaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q109695110" start="10016" end="10034" title="Hester A. Benedict" label="Hester A. Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348138" start="10052" end="10073" title="Stephen Vincent Benét" label="Stephen Vincent Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580418" start="10091" end="10109" title="William Rose Benét" label="William Rose Benét"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362401" start="10127" end="10143" title="Elizabeth Benger" label="Elizabeth Benger"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780149" start="10160" end="10180" title="Gwendolyn B. Bennett" label="Gwendolyn B. Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193627" start="10198" end="10209" title="Jim Bennett (poet)" label="Jim Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q965821" start="10226" end="10249" title="Louise Bennett-Coverley" label="Louise Bennett-Coverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340845" start="10266" end="10279" title="Robbie Benoit" label="Robbie Benoit"/>
<link wikidata="Q708934" start="10296" end="10308" title="A. C. Benson" label="A. C. Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324472" start="10325" end="10344" title="Richard Berengarten" label="Richard Berengarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908126" start="10361" end="10373" title="Bill Berkson" label="Bill Berkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q966050" start="10391" end="10408" title="Charles Bernstein (poet)" label="Charles Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342067" start="10426" end="10439" title="Robert Berold" label="Robert Berold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770594" start="10457" end="10472" title="Anselm Berrigan" label="Anselm Berrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160089" start="10490" end="10505" title="Daniel Berrigan" label="Daniel Berrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399732" start="10523" end="10535" title="Ted Berrigan" label="Ted Berrigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129736" start="10553" end="10564" title="James Berry (poet)" label="James Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q533505" start="10583" end="10596" title="Wendell Berry" label="Wendell Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q522192" start="10614" end="10627" title="John Berryman" label="John Berryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075589" start="10645" end="10657" title="Charles Best (poet)" label="Charles Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780272" start="10674" end="10693" title="Mary Matilda Betham" label="Mary Matilda Betham"/>
<link wikidata="Q450610" start="10710" end="10732" title="Matilda Betham-Edwards" label="Matilda Betham-Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780874" start="10749" end="10763" title="Ursula Bethell" label="Ursula Bethell"/>
<link wikidata="Q962308" start="10781" end="10794" title="John Betjeman" label="John Betjeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182745" start="10811" end="10834" title="Craven Langstroth Betts" label="Craven Langstroth Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872959" start="10851" end="10869" title="Elizabeth Beverley" label="Elizabeth Beverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303294" start="10890" end="10906" title="Judith Beveridge" label="Judith Beveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5701885" start="10923" end="10938" title="Helen Bevington" label="Helen Bevington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014268" start="10956" end="10971" title="L. S. Bevington" label="L. S. Bevington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787618" start="10988" end="11000" title="Thomas Bibby" label="Thomas Bibby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382906" start="11018" end="11030" title="Ruth Bidgood" label="Ruth Bidgood"/>
<link wikidata="Q63969273" start="11047" end="11064" title="Lettie S. Bigelow" label="Lettie S. Bigelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941560" start="11082" end="11093" title="Vonani Bila" label="Vonani Bila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342103" start="11111" end="11126" title="Robert Billings" label="Robert Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q18531024" start="11143" end="11161" title="William Billington (poet)" label="William Billington"/>
<link wikidata="Q14328834" start="11178" end="11194" title="Margaret Bingham" label="Margaret Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807972" start="11211" end="11226" title="Laurence Binyon" label="Laurence Binyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30101230" start="11243" end="11260" title="Hera Lindsay Bird" label="Hera Lindsay Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046415" start="11278" end="11290" title="Earle Birney" label="Earle Birney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808745" start="11307" end="11319" title="Dora Birtles" label="Dora Birtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q235946" start="11336" end="11352" title="Elizabeth Bishop" label="Elizabeth Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913617" start="11370" end="11383" title="Morris Bishop" label="Morris Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410927" start="11401" end="11414" title="Samuel Bishop" label="Samuel Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911496" start="11431" end="11443" title="Bill Bissett" label="Bill Bissett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495462" start="11460" end="11474" title="Sherwin Bitsui" label="Sherwin Bitsui"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236999" start="11492" end="11511" title="David MacLeod Black" label="David MacLeod Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562971" start="11528" end="11546" title="Sophie Cabot Black" label="Sophie Cabot Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149388" start="11564" end="11578" title="Paul Blackburn (poet)" label="Paul Blackburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787665" start="11596" end="11612" title="Thomas Blacklock" label="Thomas Blacklock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519534" start="11629" end="11644" title="Leigh Blackmore" label="Leigh Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671208" start="11661" end="11675" title="R. P. Blackmur" label="R. P. Blackmur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172844" start="11693" end="11705" title="Peter Bladen" label="Peter Bladen"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711841" start="11722" end="11733" title="Isa Blagden" label="Isa Blagden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794585" start="11759" end="11768" title="Max Blagg" label="Max Blagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766749" start="11788" end="11801" title="Mark Blagrave" label="Mark Blagrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935232" start="11818" end="11830" title="Robert Blair (poet)" label="Robert Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536327" start="11847" end="11858" title="Lewis Blake" label="Lewis Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="11875" end="11888" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648643" start="11905" end="11920" title="Susanna Blamire" label="Susanna Blamire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123404" start="11937" end="11954" title="Paddy Blanchfield" label="Paddy Blanchfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836850" start="11972" end="11986" title="Richard Blanco" label="Richard Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292239" start="12004" end="12016" title="Don Blanding" label="Don Blanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115003" start="12034" end="12046" title="Robin Blaser" label="Robin Blaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766381" start="12063" end="12081" title="Ann Eliza Bleecker" label="Ann Eliza Bleecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684878" start="12099" end="12113" title="Adrian Blevins" label="Adrian Blevins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222222" start="12131" end="12142" title="John Blight" label="John Blight"/>
<link wikidata="Q526994" start="12159" end="12173" title="Mathilde Blind" label="Mathilde Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501508" start="12190" end="12202" title="Laurie Block" label="Laurie Block"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321810" start="12219" end="12233" title="E. D. Blodgett" label="E. D. Blodgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889098" start="12250" end="12269" title="Benjamin Paul Blood" label="Benjamin Paul Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911244" start="12287" end="12300" title="Valerie Bloom" label="Valerie Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434598" start="12319" end="12336" title="Robert Bloomfield" label="Robert Bloomfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q21062099" start="12353" end="12369" title="Elizabeth Blower" label="Elizabeth Blower"/>
<link wikidata="Q725559" start="12399" end="12413" title="Edmund Blunden" label="Edmund Blunden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372584" start="12430" end="12444" title="Roy Blumenthal" label="Roy Blumenthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q706891" start="12462" end="12482" title="Wilfrid Scawen Blunt" label="Wilfrid Scawen Blunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q472507" start="12499" end="12509" title="Robert Bly" label="Robert Bly"/>
<link wikidata="Q30106170" start="12527" end="12537" title="Ali Blythe" label="Ali Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4860006" start="12551" end="12565" title="Barcroft Boake (poet)" label="Barcroft Boake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342184" start="12582" end="12595" title="Robert Boates" label="Robert Boates"/>
<link wikidata="Q10950051" start="12612" end="12626" title="Merlinda Bobis" label="Merlinda Bobis"/>
<link wikidata="Q516180" start="12643" end="12655" title="Louise Bogan" label="Louise Bogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55993594" start="12673" end="12690" title="Michelle Boisseau" label="Michelle Boisseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109387" start="12708" end="12721" title="Christian Bök" label="Christian Bök"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105731" start="12738" end="12752" title="Osbern Bokenam" label="Osbern Bokenam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407942" start="12777" end="12795" title="George Henry Boker" label="George Henry Boker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5331464" start="12813" end="12825" title="Eavan Boland" label="Eavan Boland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706204" start="12843" end="12852" title="Alan Bold" label="Alan Bold"/>
<link wikidata="Q936734" start="12869" end="12882" title="Dermot Bolger" label="Dermot Bolger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608238" start="12900" end="12917" title="Stephanie Bolster" label="Stephanie Bolster"/>
<link wikidata="Q370537" start="12934" end="12947" title="Edmund Bolton" label="Edmund Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387349" start="12969" end="12979" title="Ken Bolton" label="Ken Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7357882" start="12996" end="13014" title="Roger Bonair-Agard" label="Roger Bonair-Agard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376133" start="13031" end="13045" title="Horatius Bonar" label="Horatius Bonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362438" start="13062" end="13079" title="Elizabeth Bonhôte" label="Elizabeth Bonhôte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440828" start="13096" end="13107" title="Sean Bonney" label="Sean Bonney"/>
<link wikidata="Q690103" start="13124" end="13145" title="Arna Wendell Bontemps" label="Arna Wendell Bontemps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23883710" start="13163" end="13173" title="Shane Book" label="Shane Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701815" start="13187" end="13198" title="Luke Booker" label="Luke Booker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446639" start="13215" end="13225" title="Kurt Boone" label="Kurt Boone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720878" start="13243" end="13261" title="Henry Ernest Boote" label="Henry Ernest Boote"/>
<link wikidata="Q11714306" start="13278" end="13290" title="Ivan Bootham" label="Ivan Bootham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143227" start="13308" end="13317" title="Pat Boran" label="Pat Boran"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179182" start="13335" end="13350" title="Jenny Bornholdt" label="Jenny Bornholdt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366105" start="13368" end="13378" title="Roo Borson" label="Roo Borson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384084" start="13395" end="13407" title="Keith Bosley" label="Keith Bosley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768571" start="13424" end="13440" title="Anne Lynch Botta" label="Anne Lynch Botta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537980" start="13458" end="13474" title="Gordon Bottomley" label="Gordon Bottomley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231581" start="13491" end="13504" title="David Bottoms" label="David Bottoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179186" start="13522" end="13533" title="Jenny Boult" label="Jenny Boult"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482785" start="13561" end="13587" title="Francis William Bourdillon" label="Francis William Bourdillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798051" start="13604" end="13619" title="Arthur Bourinot" label="Arthur Bourinot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252756" start="13636" end="13654" title="John Philip Bourke" label="John Philip Bourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151185" start="13671" end="13683" title="Jane Bowdler" label="Jane Bowdler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239280" start="13700" end="13715" title="George Bowering" label="George Bowering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898172" start="13732" end="13748" title="Marilyn Bowering" label="Marilyn Bowering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053495" start="13765" end="13783" title="Cathy Smith Bowers" label="Cathy Smith Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719044" start="13801" end="13813" title="Edgar Bowers" label="Edgar Bowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803202" start="13831" end="13842" title="Tim Bowling" label="Tim Bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716723" start="13859" end="13868" title="Alex Boyd (author)" label="Alex Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q30539347" start="13885" end="13911" title="Louise Esther Vickroy Boyd" label="Louise Esther Vickroy Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766519" start="13929" end="13948" title="Mark Alexander Boyd" label="Mark Alexander Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q529639" start="13965" end="13974" title="Kay Boyle" label="Kay Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172914" start="13992" end="14003" title="Peter Boyle (poet)" label="Peter Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7410967" start="14020" end="14032" title="Samuel Boyse" label="Samuel Boyse"/>
<link wikidata="Q98821960" start="14057" end="14078" title="Virginia Frazer Boyle" label="Virginia Frazer Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480309" start="14109" end="14125" title="Francis Brabazon" label="Francis Brabazon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7787810" start="14142" end="14156" title="Thomas Bracken" label="Thomas Bracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727032" start="14174" end="14192" title="Alison Brackenbury" label="Alison Brackenbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q63975260" start="14209" end="14220" title="Mrs. Findley Braden" label="Anna Braden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130122" start="14238" end="14251" title="James Bradley (Australian writer)" label="James Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q242332" start="14268" end="14283" title="Anne Bradstreet" label="Anne Bradstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342301" start="14304" end="14321" title="Robert Bradstreet" label="Robert Bradstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321935" start="14338" end="14349" title="E. J. Brady" label="E. J. Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375386" start="14366" end="14376" title="Kate Braid" label="Kate Braid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6504771" start="14393" end="14420" title="Lawrence Ytzhak Braithwaite" label="Lawrence Ytzhak Braithwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488835" start="14437" end="14451" title="Shannon Bramer" label="Shannon Bramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895520" start="14468" end="14491" title="Bertha Southey Brammall" label="Bertha Southey Brammall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130164" start="14508" end="14522" title="James Bramston" label="James Bramston"/>
<link wikidata="Q543625" start="14542" end="14554" title="Dionne Brand" label="Dionne Brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3706397" start="14571" end="14580" title="Di Brandt" label="Di Brandt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075749" start="14597" end="14611" title="Charles Brasch" label="Charles Brasch"/>
<link wikidata="Q452761" start="14629" end="14645" title="Giannina Braschi" label="Giannina Braschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722859" start="14663" end="14679" title="Kamau Brathwaite" label="Kamau Brathwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q357114" start="14696" end="14713" title="Richard Brautigan" label="Richard Brautigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241752" start="14731" end="14750" title="John Jefferson Bray" label="John Jefferson Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271107" start="14767" end="14780" title="Diana Brebner" label="Diana Brebner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170263" start="14797" end="14826" title="Jean &amp;quot;Binta&amp;quot; Breeze" label="Jean &amp;quot;Binta&amp;quot; Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q710300" start="14843" end="14862" title="Christopher Brennan" label="Christopher Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q364207" start="14879" end="14898" title="Breyten Breytenbach" label="Breyten Breytenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286148" start="14918" end="14938" title="Joseph Payne Brennan" label="Joseph Payne Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828823" start="14956" end="14971" title="Michael Brennan (poet)" label="Michael Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6151191" start="14988" end="15001" title="Jane Brereton" label="Jane Brereton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244275" start="15018" end="15038" title="John Le Gay Brereton" label="John Le Gay Brereton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984811" start="15055" end="15070" title="Nicholas Breton" label="Nicholas Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q911939" start="15087" end="15098" title="Brian Brett" label="Brian Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q548180" start="15115" end="15125" title="Lily Brett" label="Lily Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387375" start="15142" end="15152" title="Ken Brewer" label="Ken Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362468" start="15170" end="15188" title="Elizabeth Brewster" label="Elizabeth Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774591" start="15205" end="15230" title="Martha Wadsworth Brewster" label="Martha Wadsworth Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q364207" start="15253" end="15272" title="Breyten Breytenbach" label="Breyten Breytenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q55237326" start="15290" end="15302" title="Diana Bridge" label="Diana Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q925991" start="15320" end="15334" title="Robert Bridges" label="Robert Bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408392" start="15351" end="15364" title="Kim Bridgford" label="Kim Bridgford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662673" start="15382" end="15399" title="Robert Bringhurst" label="Robert Bringhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534476" start="15416" end="15430" title="Geoffrey Brock" label="Geoffrey Brock"/>
<link wikidata="Q69888772" start="15448" end="15461" title="Eve Brodlique" label="Eve Brodlique"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718430" start="15484" end="15499" title="Alexander Brome" label="Alexander Brome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231780" start="15516" end="15529" title="David Bromige" label="David Bromige"/>
<link wikidata="Q264694" start="15549" end="15562" title="William Bronk" label="William Bronk"/>
<link wikidata="Q44520" start="15580" end="15591" title="Anne Brontë" label="Anne Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q454616" start="15608" end="15623" title="Branwell Brontë" label="Branwell Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q127332" start="15640" end="15656" title="Charlotte Brontë" label="Charlotte Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q80137" start="15673" end="15685" title="Emily Brontë" label="Emily Brontë"/>
<link wikidata="Q366086" start="15702" end="15715" title="Rupert Brooke" label="Rupert Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231788" start="15732" end="15744" title="David Brooks (author)" label="David Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q270715" start="15761" end="15777" title="Gwendolyn Brooks" label="Gwendolyn Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q28380990" start="15795" end="15820" title="Alice Williams Brotherton" label="Alice Williams Brotherton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820092" start="15838" end="15860" title="Audrey Alexandra Brown" label="Audrey Alexandra Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q639647" start="15877" end="15896" title="George Mackay Brown" label="George Mackay Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104746" start="15913" end="15924" title="J B Selkirk" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440076" start="15956" end="15969" title="Jericho Brown" label="Jericho Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128920" start="15987" end="15996" title="Pam Brown" label="Pam Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498772" start="16013" end="16033" title="Sterling Allen Brown" label="Sterling Allen Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615736" start="16051" end="16064" title="Stewart Brown" label="Stewart Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789264" start="16081" end="16100" title="Thomas Edward Brown" label="Thomas Edward Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976062" start="16119" end="16130" title="Wayne Brown (author)" label="Wayne Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478537" start="16147" end="16161" title="Frances Browne" label="Frances Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076466" start="16179" end="16199" title="Isaac Hawkins Browne (poet)" label="Isaac Hawkins Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949135" start="16216" end="16228" title="Moses Browne" label="Moses Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q313925" start="16245" end="16262" title="Sir Thomas Browne" label="Sir Thomas Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3775720" start="16279" end="16293" title="William Browne (poet)" label="William Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q228494" start="16310" end="16336" title="Elizabeth Barrett Browning" label="Elizabeth Barrett Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q233265" start="16356" end="16371" title="Robert Browning" label="Robert Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q27178338" start="16391" end="16409" title="Charles Tory Bruce" label="Charles Tory Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779665" start="16426" end="16442" title="Mary Grant Bruce" label="Mary Grant Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243807" start="16459" end="16470" title="Julie Bruck" label="Julie Bruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189001" start="16484" end="16497" title="Dennis Brutus" label="Dennis Brutus"/>
<link wikidata="Q454840" start="16515" end="16536" title="William Cullen Bryant" label="William Cullen Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5144686" start="16554" end="16567" title="Colette Bryce" label="Colette Bryce"/>
<link wikidata="Q433560" start="16587" end="16593" title="Bryher (novelist)" label="Bryher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5312444" start="16635" end="16650" title="Dugald Buchanan" label="Dugald Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q715169" start="16667" end="16682" title="George Buchanan" label="George Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589250" start="16699" end="16723" title="Robert Williams Buchanan" label="Robert Williams Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7931698" start="16740" end="16755" title="Vincent Buckley" label="Vincent Buckley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075863" start="16772" end="16790" title="Charles Buckmaster" label="Charles Buckmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231867" start="16807" end="16820" title="David Budbill" label="David Budbill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991516" start="16838" end="16859" title="Andrea Hollander Budy" label="Andrea Hollander Budy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650785" start="16877" end="16891" title="Suzanne Buffam" label="Suzanne Buffam"/>
<link wikidata="Q76409" start="16905" end="16921" title="Charles Bukowski" label="Charles Bukowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782001" start="16939" end="16951" title="April Bulmer" label="April Bulmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320839" start="16968" end="16980" title="Rhoda Bulter" label="Rhoda Bulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886803" start="16997" end="17010" title="Basil Bunting" label="Basil Bunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q217619" start="17027" end="17042" title="Anthony Burgess" label="Anthony Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948891" start="17059" end="17074" title="Haldane Burgess" label="Haldane Burgess"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756482" start="17091" end="17103" title="Andrew Burke (poet)" label="Andrew Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185278" start="17120" end="17135" title="Murdoch Burnett" label="Murdoch Burnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206079" start="17152" end="17164" title="Joanne Burns" label="Joanne Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="17181" end="17193" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331651" start="17210" end="17226" title="Stanley Burnshaw" label="Stanley Burnshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q977057" start="17244" end="17257" title="John Burnside (writer)" label="John Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562856" start="17274" end="17288" title="Sophia Burrell" label="Sophia Burrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q188176" start="17305" end="17325" title="William S. Burroughs" label="William S. Burroughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6838082" start="17343" end="17353" title="Mick Burrs" label="Mick Burrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314279" start="17370" end="17381" title="Duncan Bush" label="Duncan Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088105" start="17400" end="17422" title="Olivia Ward Bush-Banks" label="Olivia Ward Bush-Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4661889" start="17440" end="17456" title="Aaron Bushkowsky" label="Aaron Bushkowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5590893" start="17473" end="17483" title="Guy Butler (poet)" label="Guy Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q258766" start="17501" end="17514" title="Samuel Butler (poet)" label="Samuel Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297276" start="17531" end="17544" title="Ray Buttigieg" label="Ray Buttigieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772188" start="17561" end="17574" title="Anthony Butts" label="Anthony Butts"/>
<link wikidata="Q232417" start="17592" end="17603" title="A. S. Byatt" label="A. S. Byatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377131" start="17620" end="17642" title="Kathryn Stripling Byer" label="Kathryn Stripling Byer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586777" start="17660" end="17673" title="Witter Bynner" label="Witter Bynner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5679" start="17707" end="17717" title="George Gordon Byron, 6th Baron Byron" label="Lord Byron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324585" start="17755" end="17769" title="Richard Caddel" label="Richard Caddel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045000" start="17786" end="17800" title="Caroline Caddy" label="Caroline Caddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22087937" start="17817" end="17833" title="Charmaine Cadeau" label="Charmaine Cadeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684913" start="17847" end="17860" title="Adrian Caesar" label="Adrian Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858975" start="17877" end="17889" title="Stephen Cain (poet)" label="Stephen Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436087" start="17906" end="17918" title="Scott Cairns" label="Scott Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727043" start="17936" end="17949" title="Alison Calder" label="Alison Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764075" start="17966" end="17978" title="Angus Calder" label="Angus Calder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4716777" start="17995" end="18008" title="Alex Caldiero" label="Alex Caldiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q15998797" start="18026" end="18043" title="Frank Oliver Call" label="Frank Oliver Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864071" start="18060" end="18075" title="Barry Callaghan" label="Barry Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830243" start="18092" end="18113" title="Michael Feeney Callan" label="Michael Feeney Callan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209191" start="18128" end="18152" title="Charles Stuart Calverley" label="Charles Stuart Calverley"/>
<link wikidata="Q426950" start="18169" end="18183" title="Robert Calvert" label="Robert Calvert"/>
<link wikidata="Q515261" start="18200" end="18212" title="Anne Cameron" label="Anne Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052035" start="18241" end="18255" title="Norman Cameron (poet)" label="Norman Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162905" start="18272" end="18284" title="Jason Camlot" label="Jason Camlot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648545" start="18301" end="18315" title="A. Y. Campbell" label="A. Y. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710978" start="18332" end="18349" title="Alistair Campbell (poet)" label="Alistair Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983057" start="18367" end="18387" title="Angus Peter Campbell" label="Angus Peter Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232123" start="18401" end="18415" title="David Campbell (poet)" label="David Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934946" start="18432" end="18450" title="Elizabeth Campbell (poet)" label="Elizabeth Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281968" start="18467" end="18482" title="Joseph Campbell (poet)" label="Joseph Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486174" start="18500" end="18512" title="Meg Campbell" label="Meg Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q68066" start="18530" end="18549" title="Paul-Henri Campbell" label="Paul-Henri Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2987397" start="18567" end="18579" title="Roy Campbell (poet)" label="Roy Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361189" start="18597" end="18612" title="Thomas Campbell (poet)" label="Thomas Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020362" start="18631" end="18655" title="William Wilfred Campbell" label="William Wilfred Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q455618" start="18672" end="18686" title="Thomas Campion" label="Thomas Campion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6813874" start="18703" end="18722" title="Melville Henry Cane" label="Melville Henry Cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796604" start="18740" end="18762" title="Mary Wedderburn Cannan" label="Mary Wedderburn Cannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6927568" start="18779" end="18790" title="Moya Cannon" label="Moya Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342203" start="18808" end="18821" title="Edward Capern" label="Edward Capern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7908660" start="18838" end="18852" title="Vahni Capildeo" label="Vahni Capildeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967982" start="18871" end="18884" title="Natalee Caple" label="Natalee Caple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2040910" start="18901" end="18913" title="Thomas Carew" label="Thomas Carew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606590" start="18930" end="18941" title="Henry Carey (writer)" label="Henry Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342758" start="18958" end="18973" title="Robert Carliell" label="Robert Carliell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3068116" start="18993" end="19005" title="Bliss Carman" label="Bliss Carman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5136885" start="19025" end="19035" title="Clyde Carr" label="Clyde Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q60194799" start="19053" end="19068" title="Fern G. Z. Carr" label="Fern G. Z. Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q444806" start="19085" end="19096" title="Jim Carroll" label="Jim Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="19114" end="19127" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357709" start="19144" end="19158" title="Hayden Carruth" label="Hayden Carruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033761" start="19176" end="19191" title="A.J. Carruthers" label="A.J. Carruthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766384" start="19205" end="19225" title="Ann Elizabeth Carson" label="Ann Elizabeth Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633699" start="19242" end="19253" title="Anne Carson" label="Anne Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q453932" start="19270" end="19283" title="Ciaran Carson" label="Ciaran Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216193" start="19301" end="19317" title="Elizabeth Carter" label="Elizabeth Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683467" start="19334" end="19346" title="Jared Carter (poet)" label="Jared Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782419" start="19364" end="19382" title="William Cartwright (dramatist)" label="William Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q219862" start="19399" end="19413" title="Raymond Carver" label="Raymond Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q606543" start="19431" end="19441" title="Alice Cary" label="Alice Cary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235042" start="19459" end="19470" title="Phoebe Cary" label="Phoebe Cary"/>
<link wikidata="Q64008593" start="19488" end="19509" title="Marietta Stanley Case" label="Marietta Stanley Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q65057460" start="19527" end="19538" title="James Casey (poet-priest)" label="James Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23071140" start="19556" end="19569" title="Juanita Casey" label="Juanita Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q167518" start="19586" end="19598" title="Neal Cassady" label="Neal Cassady"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699937" start="19616" end="19630" title="Cyrus Cassells" label="Cyrus Cassells"/>
<link wikidata="Q168269" start="19648" end="19660" title="Ana Castillo" label="Ana Castillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513206" start="19678" end="19689" title="Lee Cataldi" label="Lee Cataldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962593" start="19706" end="19716" title="Nancy Cato" label="Nancy Cato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076146" start="19733" end="19748" title="Charles Causley" label="Charles Causley"/>
<link wikidata="Q192668" start="19765" end="19774" title="Nick Cave" label="Nick Cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226237" start="19791" end="19807" title="George Cavendish (writer)" label="George Cavendish"/>
<link wikidata="Q242640" start="19829" end="19879" title="Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne" label="Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle-upon-Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277297" start="19896" end="19907" title="Kate Cayley" label="Kate Cayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q931103" start="19921" end="19938" title="Susanna Centlivre" label="Susanna Centlivre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788301" start="19965" end="19982" title="Thomas Centolella" label="Thomas Centolella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282051" start="19997" end="20012" title="Joseph Ceravolo" label="Joseph Ceravolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225633" start="20030" end="20044" title="John Chalkhill" label="John Chalkhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584956" start="20060" end="20074" title="Gordon Challis" label="Gordon Challis"/>
<link wikidata="Q74253937" start="20092" end="20103" title="Weyman Chan" label="Weyman Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949419" start="20120" end="20138" title="Catherine Chandler" label="Catherine Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q10271983" start="20155" end="20182" title="Elizabeth Margaret Chandler" label="Elizabeth Margaret Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271119" start="20200" end="20211" title="Diana Chang" label="Diana Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558572" start="20229" end="20252" title="William Ellery Channing (poet)" label="William Ellery Channing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798234" start="20270" end="20284" title="Arthur Chapman (poet)" label="Arthur Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q342720" start="20302" end="20316" title="George Chapman" label="George Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146228" start="20333" end="20348" title="Patrick Chapman" label="Patrick Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494816" start="20366" end="20379" title="Fred Chappell" label="Fred Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395392" start="20397" end="20410" title="Craig Charles" label="Craig Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131259" start="20427" end="20441" title="James Charlton (poet)" label="James Charlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q380509" start="20458" end="20475" title="Thomas Chatterton" label="Thomas Chatterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="20492" end="20508" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762698" start="20528" end="20543" title="Angelico Chavez" label="Angelico Chavez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760968" start="20561" end="20577" title="Syl Cheney-Coker" label="Syl Cheney-Coker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6795958" start="20596" end="20611" title="Maxine Chernoff" label="Maxine Chernoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385979" start="20629" end="20641" title="Kelly Cherry" label="Kelly Cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183167" start="20659" end="20675" title="G. K. Chesterton" label="G. K. Chesterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788383" start="20692" end="20706" title="Thomas Chestre" label="Thomas Chestre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145729" start="20726" end="20745" title="James Wm. Chichetto" label="James Wm. Chichetto"/>
<link wikidata="Q443132" start="20763" end="20780" title="Lydia Maria Child" label="Lydia Maria Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205922" start="20798" end="20825" title="Harriet L. Childe-Pemberton" label="Harriet L. Childe-Pemberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q863049" start="20842" end="20856" title="Billy Childish" label="Billy Childish"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763512" start="20873" end="20885" title="Marilyn Chin" label="Marilyn Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133599" start="20903" end="20917" title="Staceyann Chin" label="Staceyann Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349338" start="20934" end="20946" title="Eileen Chong" label="Eileen Chong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434798" start="20963" end="20979" title="Robert Choquette" label="Robert Choquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q15528060" start="20996" end="21009" title="Lesley Choyce" label="Lesley Choyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759269" start="21026" end="21045" title="Margaret Christakos" label="Margaret Christakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418370" start="21062" end="21075" title="Evie Christie" label="Evie Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365009" start="21089" end="21100" title="Ralph Chubb" label="Ralph Chubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470416" start="21117" end="21131" title="Mary Chudleigh" label="Mary Chudleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459834" start="21148" end="21176" title="Hubert Newman Wigmore Church" label="Hubert Newman Wigmore Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149230" start="21193" end="21207" title="Richard Church (poet)" label="Richard Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063958" start="21224" end="21241" title="Charles Churchill (satirist)" label="Charles Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q947519" start="21258" end="21269" title="John Ciardi" label="John Ciardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q918326" start="21287" end="21300" title="Colley Cibber" label="Colley Cibber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074586" start="21317" end="21331" title="Charl Cilliers (writer)" label="Charl Cilliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q434164" start="21349" end="21364" title="Sandra Cisneros" label="Sandra Cisneros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045432" start="21382" end="21397" title="Carson Cistulli" label="Carson Cistulli"/>
<link wikidata="Q128263" start="21425" end="21437" title="Amy Clampitt" label="Amy Clampitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375431" start="21454" end="21466" title="Kate Clanchy" label="Kate Clanchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226156" start="21483" end="21496" title="John Clanvowe" label="John Clanvowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q981572" start="21518" end="21528" title="John Clare" label="John Clare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228533" start="21545" end="21555" title="Dave Clark (Canadian musician)" label="Dave Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301332" start="21569" end="21582" title="Douglas Clark (poet)" label="Douglas Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205508" start="21599" end="21614" title="Joan Ure" label="Elizabeth Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052363" start="21631" end="21642" title="Emily Clark (novelist)" label="Emily Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369237" start="21663" end="21673" title="Ross Clark (poet)" label="Ross Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815330" start="21690" end="21699" title="Tom Clark (poet)" label="Tom Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q27832733" start="21717" end="21729" title="Thomas Clark (writer)" label="Thomas Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749139" start="21746" end="21760" title="Amy Key Clarke" label="Amy Key Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q781055" start="21777" end="21790" title="Austin Clarke (poet)" label="Austin Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507305" start="21808" end="21829" title="George Elliott Clarke" label="George Elliott Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562222" start="21846" end="21860" title="Gillian Clarke" label="Gillian Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226236" start="21877" end="21888" title="John Clarke (poet)" label="Jack Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481362" start="21906" end="21919" title="Marcus Clarke" label="Marcus Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454711" start="21936" end="21951" title="Brian P. Cleary" label="Brian P. Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960838" start="21969" end="21983" title="Brendan Cleary" label="Brendan Cleary"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006886" start="22001" end="22016" title="William Cleland (poet)" label="William Cleland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6317471" start="22033" end="22047" title="Justin Clemens" label="Justin Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203707" start="22064" end="22083" title="Benjamin Clementine" label="Benjamin Clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111711" start="22102" end="22112" title="Jack Clemo" label="Jack Clemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q740706" start="22129" end="22143" title="John Cleveland" label="John Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836968" start="22160" end="22174" title="Michelle Cliff" label="Michelle Cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976101" start="22194" end="22208" title="Wayne Clifford" label="Wayne Clifford"/>
<link wikidata="Q458750" start="22225" end="22240" title="Lucille Clifton" label="Lucille Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045022" start="22258" end="22272" title="Caroline Clive" label="Caroline Clive"/>
<link wikidata="Q709930" start="22289" end="22307" title="Arthur Hugh Clough" label="Arthur Hugh Clough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591382" start="22337" end="22355" title="Grace Stone Coates" label="Grace Stone Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460603" start="22373" end="22394" title="Florence Earle Coates" label="Florence Earle Coates"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932094" start="22412" end="22423" title="Bob Cobbing" label="Bob Cobbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q108424837" start="22440" end="22461" title="Ellen Melicent Cobden" label="Ellen Melicent Cobden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16910063" start="22478" end="22491" title="Robbie Coburn" label="Robbie Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727053" start="22508" end="22523" title="Alison Cockburn" label="Alison Cockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726069" start="22563" end="22579" title="Alice Rollit Coe" label="Alice Rollit Coe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303597" start="22597" end="22615" title="Judith Ortiz Cofer" label="Judith Ortiz Cofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963400" start="22633" end="22645" title="Brian Coffey" label="Brian Coffey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494855" start="22665" end="22678" title="Fred Cogswell" label="Fred Cogswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276" start="22695" end="22708" title="Leonard Cohen" label="Leonard Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909151" start="22725" end="22735" title="Matt Cohen (writer)" label="Matt Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732761" start="22752" end="22770" title="Allison Hedge Coke" label="Allison Hedge Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051655" start="22788" end="22798" title="Norma Cole" label="Norma Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640774" start="22818" end="22848" title="Hal Gibson Pateshall Colebatch" label="Hal Gibson Pateshall Colebatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872203" start="22865" end="22878" title="Aidan Coleman (poet)" label="Aidan Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882910" start="22895" end="22909" title="Victor Coleman" label="Victor Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7967107" start="22926" end="22939" title="Wanda Coleman" label="Wanda Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q960709" start="22957" end="22974" title="Hartley Coleridge" label="Hartley Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q433136" start="22991" end="23015" title="Mary Elizabeth Coleridge" label="Mary Elizabeth Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="23032" end="23055" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292438" start="23072" end="23081" title="Don Coles" label="Don Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19957074" start="23098" end="23113" title="Katharine Coles" label="Katharine Coles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342365" start="23131" end="23145" title="Edward Coletti" label="Edward Coletti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779237" start="23160" end="23172" title="Mary Collier" label="Mary Collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q863057" start="23192" end="23205" title="Billy Collins" label="Billy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226736" start="23223" end="23235" title="John Collins (poet)" label="John Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q919133" start="23252" end="23267" title="William Collins (poet)" label="William Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500544" start="23284" end="23302" title="Laurence Collinson" label="Laurence Collinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40896115" start="23319" end="23333" title="Stephen Collis" label="Stephen Collis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255094" start="23347" end="23366" title="John Robert Colombo" label="John Robert Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568735" start="23383" end="23398" title="Glenn Colquhoun" label="Glenn Colquhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q429440" start="23416" end="23429" title="Padraic Colum" label="Padraic Colum"/>
<link wikidata="Q69721216" start="23450" end="23470" title="Anna Olcott Commelin" label="Anna Olcott Commelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768241" start="23488" end="23500" title="Anne Compton" label="Anne Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975882" start="23517" end="23530" title="Wayde Compton" label="Wayde Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563104" start="23547" end="23562" title="Helen Gray Cone" label="Helen Gray Cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q366805" start="23580" end="23596" title="William Congreve" label="William Congreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148723" start="23613" end="23621" title="Jan Conn" label="Jan Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615756" start="23641" end="23653" title="Stewart Conn" label="Stewart Conn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7149928" start="23670" end="23684" title="Paul Conneally" label="Paul Conneally"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369569" start="23701" end="23715" title="Karen Connelly" label="Karen Connelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q15443030" start="23732" end="23746" title="Kevin Connolly (writer)" label="Kevin Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q57915952" start="23763" end="23777" title="Susan Connolly (poet)" label="Susan Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q379628" start="23795" end="23810" title="Robert Conquest" label="Robert Conquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704415" start="23827" end="23838" title="Tony Conran" label="Tony Conran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376497" start="23855" end="23870" title="Henry Constable" label="Henry Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232528" start="23889" end="23906" title="David Constantine" label="David Constantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245675" start="23923" end="23933" title="Eliza Cook" label="Eliza Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q544900" start="23950" end="23969" title="Elizabeth Cook-Lynn" label="Elizabeth Cook-Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562980" start="23987" end="23999" title="Sophie Cooke" label="Sophie Cooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3797509" start="24016" end="24029" title="Ina Coolbrith" label="Ina Coolbrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258298" start="24047" end="24060" title="Dennis Cooley" label="Dennis Cooley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127177" start="24077" end="24091" title="Clark Coolidge" label="Clark Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4690848" start="24109" end="24120" title="Afua Cooper" label="Afua Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960767" start="24139" end="24152" title="Thomas Cooper (poet)" label="Thomas Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602261" start="24169" end="24187" title="John Cooper Clarke" label="John Cooper Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6111827" start="24204" end="24213" title="Jack Cope" label="Jack Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q273995" start="24231" end="24241" title="Wendy Cope" label="Wendy Cope"/>
<link wikidata="Q58194804" start="24258" end="24275" title="Judith Copithorne" label="Judith Copithorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q266609" start="24292" end="24306" title="Robert Copland" label="Robert Copland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647724" start="24327" end="24340" title="A. E. Coppard" label="A. E. Coppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306320" start="24357" end="24368" title="Julia Copus" label="Julia Copus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4232680" start="24385" end="24399" title="Richard Corbet" label="Richard Corbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436364" start="24416" end="24426" title="Cid Corman" label="Cid Corman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4722486" start="24444" end="24455" title="Alfred Corn" label="Alfred Corn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678898" start="24473" end="24486" title="Adam Cornford" label="Adam Cornford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4233439" start="24503" end="24519" title="Frances Cornford" label="Frances Cornford"/>
<link wikidata="Q725999" start="24536" end="24555" title="F. M. Cornford" label="Francis M. Cornford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388817" start="24572" end="24585" title="John Cornford" label="John Cornford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6209252" start="24602" end="24612" title="Joe Corrie" label="Joe Corrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q470871" start="24629" end="24642" title="Gregory Corso" label="Gregory Corso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670154" start="24660" end="24672" title="Jayne Cortez" label="Jayne Cortez"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013691" start="24690" end="24710" title="William Johnson Cory" label="William Johnson Cory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235288" start="24727" end="24749" title="Louisa Stuart Costello" label="Louisa Stuart Costello"/>
<link wikidata="Q2958807" start="24769" end="24783" title="Charles Cotton" label="Charles Cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766930" start="24800" end="24811" title="Anna Couani" label="Anna Couani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768761" start="24828" end="24844" title="Anne Ross Cousin" label="Anne Ross Cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216223" start="24863" end="24875" title="Dani Couture" label="Dani Couture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788665" start="24892" end="24906" title="Thomas Cowherd" label="Thomas Cowherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q329896" start="24923" end="24937" title="Abraham Cowley" label="Abraham Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126838" start="24954" end="24967" title="Hannah Cowley (writer)" label="Hannah Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458319" start="24984" end="24998" title="Malcolm Cowley" label="Malcolm Cowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163995" start="25016" end="25030" title="Dorothy Cowlin" label="Dorothy Cowlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q315537" start="25047" end="25061" title="William Cowper" label="William Cowper"/>
<link wikidata="Q903516" start="25078" end="25091" title="George Crabbe" label="George Crabbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176354" start="25108" end="25123" title="Christine Craig" label="Christine Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325903" start="25140" end="25151" title="Helen Craik" label="Helen Craik"/>
<link wikidata="Q380723" start="25173" end="25183" title="Hart Crane" label="Hart Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q206534" start="25201" end="25214" title="Stephen Crane" label="Stephen Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q553900" start="25232" end="25247" title="Richard Crashaw" label="Richard Crashaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q537087" start="25264" end="25289" title="Isabella Valancy Crawford" label="Isabella Valancy Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343181" start="25306" end="25321" title="Robert Crawford (Australian poet)" label="Robert Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343182" start="25338" end="25353" title="Robert Crawford (Scottish poet)" label="Robert Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324958" start="25370" end="25385" title="Richard Crawley" label="Richard Crawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881102" start="25404" end="25416" title="Morri Creech" label="Morri Creech"/>
<link wikidata="Q918620" start="25434" end="25448" title="Robert Creeley" label="Robert Creeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q57195964" start="25466" end="25487" title="Caroline de Crespigny" label="Caroline de Crespigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964631" start="25506" end="25534" title="Walter D&amp;#x27;Arcy Cresswell" label="Walter D&amp;#x27;Arcy Cresswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688694" start="25552" end="25564" title="Louise Crisp" label="Louise Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q19037320" start="25581" end="25600" title="Ann Batten Cristall" label="Ann Batten Cristall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760562" start="25617" end="25627" title="Andy Croft" label="Andy Croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307087" start="25644" end="25656" title="Julian Croft" label="Julian Croft"/>
<link wikidata="Q535252" start="25673" end="25687" title="Alison Croggon" label="Alison Croggon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358028" start="25704" end="25717" title="Jeremy Cronin" label="Jeremy Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713186" start="25735" end="25750" title="M. T. C. Cronin" label="M. T. C. Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708985" start="25767" end="25779" title="Lynn Crosbie" label="Lynn Crosbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202224" start="25796" end="25819" title="Camilla Dufour Crosland" label="Camilla Dufour Crosland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074296" start="25836" end="25846" title="Zora Cross" label="Zora Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="25863" end="25879" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756724" start="25896" end="25910" title="Andrew Crozier" label="Andrew Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307945" start="25927" end="25940" title="Lorna Crozier" label="Lorna Crozier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511888" start="25969" end="25986" title="Helen Cruickshank" label="Helen Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q12960947" start="26003" end="26018" title="Michael Crummey" label="Michael Crummey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308106" start="26035" end="26048" title="Julie Crysler" label="Julie Crysler"/>
<link wikidata="Q112939074" start="26062" end="26086" title="Anne Virginia Culbertson" label="Anne Virginia Culbertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q69577565" start="26104" end="26124" title="Catherine Ann Cullen" label="Catherine Ann Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137066" start="26139" end="26153" title="Countee Cullen" label="Countee Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16202248" start="26171" end="26186" title="Nancy Jo Cullen" label="Nancy Jo Cullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146306" start="26200" end="26216" title="Patrick Cullinan" label="Patrick Cullinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298703" start="26234" end="26248" title="E. E. Cummings" label="E. E. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524921" start="26266" end="26280" title="Gary Cummiskey" label="Gary Cummiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062341" start="26298" end="26314" title="Allan Cunningham (author)" label="Allan Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107287" start="26333" end="26349" title="J. V. Cunningham" label="J. V. Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227903" start="26367" end="26382" title="John Cunningham (poet and dramatist)" label="John Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463635" start="26402" end="26414" title="Allen Curnow" label="Allen Curnow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759320" start="26432" end="26447" title="Margaret Curran (poet)" label="Margaret Curran"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563115" start="26464" end="26474" title="Jen Currin" label="Jen Currin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822155" start="26491" end="26502" title="Tony Curtis (Welsh poet)" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822154" start="26519" end="26530" title="Tony Curtis (Irish poet)" label="Tony Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497198" start="26548" end="26565" title="James Cuthbertson" label="James Cuthbertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073795" start="26582" end="26593" title="Ivor Cutler" label="Ivor Cutler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543684" start="26610" end="26626" title="Lidija Cvetkovic" label="Lidija Cvetkovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277479" start="26643" end="26654" title="Kayla Czaga" label="Kayla Czaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q236469" start="26689" end="26693" title="H.D." label="H.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q5200681" start="26728" end="26742" title="Cyril Dabydeen" label="Cyril Dabydeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267995" start="26759" end="26773" title="David Dabydeen" label="David Dabydeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6353778" start="26791" end="26802" title="Kalli Dakos" label="Kalli Dakos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156856" start="26816" end="26828" title="Victor Daley" label="Victor Daley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779289" start="26845" end="26856" title="Mary Dalton" label="Mary Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263997" start="26873" end="26888" title="Pádraig J. Daly" label="Pádraig J. Daly"/>
<link wikidata="Q85150323" start="26906" end="26932" title="Raymond Garfield Dandridge" label="Raymond Garfield Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209601" start="26955" end="26974" title="Joseph A. Dandurand" label="Joseph A. Dandurand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033816" start="26988" end="27001" title="Achmat Dangor" label="Achmat Dangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q954735" start="27019" end="27032" title="Samuel Daniel" label="Samuel Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232817" start="27049" end="27062" title="David Daniels (poet)" label="David Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175943" start="27080" end="27095" title="Jeffrey Daniels (author)" label="Jeffrey Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450149" start="27110" end="27123" title="George Darley" label="George Darley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807885" start="27141" end="27153" title="Tina Darragh" label="Tina Darragh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385369" start="27171" end="27188" title="Keki N. Daruwalla" label="Keki N. Daruwalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q234050" start="27206" end="27220" title="Erasmus Darwin" label="Erasmus Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362664" start="27237" end="27254" title="Elizabeth Daryush" label="Elizabeth Daryush"/>
<link wikidata="Q89491" start="27271" end="27293" title="Robert von Dassanowsky" label="Robert von Dassanowsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899399" start="27332" end="27347" title="Beverley Daurio" label="Beverley Daurio"/>
<link wikidata="Q450199" start="27364" end="27380" title="William Davenant" label="William Davenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q506069" start="27397" end="27410" title="Guy Davenport" label="Guy Davenport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443126" start="27428" end="27439" title="Frank Davey" label="Frank Davey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239798" start="27456" end="27471" title="Donald Davidson (poet)" label="Donald Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171981" start="27489" end="27502" title="John Davidson (poet)" label="John Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698105" start="27521" end="27544" title="Lucretia Maria Davidson" label="Lucretia Maria Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829733" start="27562" end="27578" title="Michael Davidson (poet)" label="Michael Davidson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294226" start="27596" end="27608" title="Donald Davie" label="Donald Davie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706482" start="27625" end="27636" title="Alan Davies (poet)" label="Alan Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181577" start="27654" end="27672" title="Deborah Kay Davies" label="Deborah Kay Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q56172" start="27686" end="27703" title="Hugh Sykes Davies" label="Hugh Sykes Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400605" start="27720" end="27732" title="Idris Davies" label="Idris Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529003" start="27749" end="27760" title="John Davies (poet, born 1569)" label="John Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q985138" start="27777" end="27789" title="W. H. Davies" label="W. H. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025406" start="27806" end="27826" title="Nicholas Flood Davin" label="Nicholas Flood Davin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18530533" start="27843" end="27853" title="Olive Dehn" label="Olive Dehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877142" start="27870" end="27893" title="Beatrice Deloitte Davis" label="Beatrice Deloitte Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270584" start="27910" end="27919" title="Jon Davis (poet)" label="Jon Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051659" start="27934" end="27945" title="Norma Davis" label="Norma Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515367" start="27962" end="27973" title="Tanya Davis" label="Tanya Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788880" start="27987" end="28007" title="Thomas Davis (Young Irelander)" label="Thomas Osborne Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342542" start="28025" end="28039" title="Edward Davison (poet)" label="Edward Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173576" start="28059" end="28072" title="Peter Davison (poet)" label="Peter Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977359" start="28090" end="28100" title="Bruce Dawe" label="Bruce Dawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6450075" start="28117" end="28128" title="Kwame Dawes" label="Kwame Dawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815538" start="28146" end="28154" title="Tom Dawe" label="Tom Dawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175754" start="28171" end="28182" title="Jeffery Day" label="Jeffery Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422243" start="28199" end="28208" title="Sarah Day" label="Sarah Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q954383" start="28225" end="28240" title="Cecil Day-Lewis" label="Cecil Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685531" start="28257" end="28274" title="Adriana de Barros" label="Adriana de Barros"/>
<link wikidata="Q7559928" start="28291" end="28308" title="Somerset de Chair" label="Somerset de Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171046" start="28325" end="28344" title="Jean Louis De Esque" label="Jean Louis De Esque"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727006" start="28362" end="28378" title="Madeline DeFrees" label="Madeline DeFrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058031" start="28396" end="28411" title="Celia de Fréine" label="Celia de Fréine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150990" start="28429" end="28442" title="Ingrid de Kok" label="Ingrid de Kok"/>
<link wikidata="Q981086" start="28460" end="28477" title="Walter de la Mare" label="Walter de la Mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110992" start="28494" end="28511" title="Christine De Luca" label="Christine De Luca"/>
<link wikidata="Q18685658" start="28528" end="28544" title="Sadiqa de Meijer" label="Sadiqa de Meijer"/>
<link wikidata="Q374210" start="28561" end="28596" title="Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford" label="Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196756" start="28613" end="28638" title="Phillippa Yaa de Villiers" label="Phillippa Yaa de Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680261" start="28656" end="28667" title="James Deahl" label="James Deahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313347" start="28684" end="28697" title="Dulcie Deamer" label="Dulcie Deamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232254" start="28714" end="28727" title="John F. Deane" label="John F. Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460285" start="28745" end="28755" title="Joel Deane" label="Joel Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146344" start="28772" end="28786" title="Patrick Deeley" label="Patrick Deeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727006" start="28804" end="28820" title="Madeline DeFrees" label="Madeline DeFrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q336189" start="28838" end="28851" title="Thomas Dekker (writer)" label="Thomas Dekker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605487" start="28868" end="28880" title="Greg Delanty" label="Greg Delanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q18764006" start="28901" end="28914" title="Kris Demeanor" label="Kris Demeanor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864161" start="28928" end="28942" title="Barry Dempster" label="Barry Dempster"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656455" start="28959" end="28969" title="Joe Denham" label="Joe Denham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248337" start="28983" end="28994" title="John Denham (poet)" label="John Denham"/>
<link wikidata="Q983348" start="29011" end="29023" title="C. J. Dennis" label="C. J. Dennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q114689016" start="29040" end="29053" title="John Dennison (poet)" label="John Dennison"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445231" start="29071" end="29080" title="Tory Dent" label="Tory Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378866" start="29098" end="29109" title="Enid Derham" label="Enid Derham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788950" start="29126" end="29140" title="Thomas Dermody" label="Thomas Dermody"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813322" start="29158" end="29172" title="Toi Derricotte" label="Toi Derricotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563251" start="29190" end="29208" title="Heather Derr-Smith" label="Heather Derr-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836991" start="29226" end="29244" title="Michelle Desbarats" label="Michelle Desbarats"/>
<link wikidata="Q797649" start="29258" end="29273" title="Babette Deutsch" label="Babette Deutsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132577" start="29291" end="29304" title="James Devaney" label="James Devaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q18534872" start="29321" end="29334" title="Mary Deverell" label="Mary Deverell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257200" start="29351" end="29363" title="Denis Devlin" label="Denis Devlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538731" start="29381" end="29396" title="George E. Dewar" label="George E. Dewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086632" start="29414" end="29433" title="Christopher Dewdney" label="Christopher Dewdney"/>
<link wikidata="Q539265" start="29450" end="29464" title="Imtiaz Dharker" label="Imtiaz Dharker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191723" start="29483" end="29504" title="Pier Giorgio Di Cicco" label="Pier Giorgio Di Cicco"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781024" start="29521" end="29536" title="Mary di Michele" label="Mary di Michele"/>
<link wikidata="Q438891" start="29553" end="29567" title="Diane di Prima" label="Diane di Prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766362" start="29585" end="29596" title="Ann Diamond" label="Ann Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974419" start="29610" end="29622" title="Natalie Diaz" label="Natalie Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353969" start="29640" end="29649" title="Anne Dick" label="Anne Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178486" start="29666" end="29681" title="Jennifer K Dick" label="Jennifer K Dick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377013" start="29699" end="29711" title="James Dickey" label="James Dickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q47508540" start="29729" end="29743" title="Adam Dickinson" label="Adam Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4441" start="29757" end="29772" title="Emily Dickinson" label="Emily Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790412" start="29790" end="29805" title="Matthew Dickman" label="Matthew Dickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829849" start="29823" end="29838" title="Michael Dickman" label="Michael Dickman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434973" start="29856" end="29870" title="Robert Dickson (writer)" label="Robert Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173670" start="29887" end="29901" title="Peter Didsbury" label="Peter Didsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706334" start="29918" end="29932" title="Modikwe Dikobe" label="Modikwe Dikobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263449" start="29947" end="29957" title="Des Dillon (writer)" label="Des Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504529" start="29971" end="29982" title="John Dillon" label="John Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834161" start="30000" end="30015" title="B. R. Dionysius" label="B. R. Dionysius"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297397" start="30032" end="30043" title="Ray DiPalma" label="Ray DiPalma"/>
<link wikidata="Q708581" start="30061" end="30076" title="Thomas M. Disch" label="Thomas M. Disch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627089" start="30094" end="30120" title="Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni" label="Chitra Banerjee Divakaruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085299" start="30141" end="30153" title="Isobel Dixon" label="Isobel Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576992" start="30173" end="30184" title="Sarah Dixon" label="Sarah Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q823245" start="30201" end="30223" title="William Hepworth Dixon" label="William Hepworth Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763236" start="30240" end="30253" title="Angifi Dladla" label="Angifi Dladla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803429" start="30271" end="30281" title="Tim Dlugos" label="Tim Dlugos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6406726" start="30299" end="30312" title="Kildare Dobbs" label="Kildare Dobbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595615" start="30329" end="30348" title="Henry Austin Dobson" label="Henry Austin Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474658" start="30365" end="30380" title="Rosemary Dobson" label="Rosemary Dobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609076" start="30397" end="30411" title="Stephen Dobyns" label="Stephen Dobyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180577" start="30429" end="30441" title="Jeramy Dodds" label="Jeramy Dodds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434980" start="30458" end="30472" title="Robert Dodsley" label="Robert Dodsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q311875" start="30489" end="30501" title="Pete Doherty" label="Pete Doherty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5275579" start="30518" end="30540" title="Digby Mackworth Dolben" label="Digby Mackworth Dolben"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691389" start="30557" end="30566" title="Joe Dolce" label="Joe Dolce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292530" start="30586" end="30598" title="Don Domanski" label="Don Domanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q6731074" start="30615" end="30628" title="Magie Dominic" label="Magie Dominic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6175757" start="30645" end="30662" title="Jeffery Donaldson" label="Jeffery Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16012229" start="30676" end="30690" title="John Donaldson (author)" label="John Donaldson"/>
<link wikidata="Q140412" start="30719" end="30729" title="John Donne" label="John Donne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233023" start="30746" end="30759" title="David Donnell" label="David Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807159" start="30776" end="30792" title="Timothy Donnelly" label="Timothy Donnelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q931954" start="30810" end="30824" title="Gerard Donovan" label="Gerard Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781444" start="30844" end="30855" title="Theo Dorgan" label="Theo Dorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5334756" start="30873" end="30880" title="Ed Dorn" label="Ed Dorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q17354161" start="30898" end="30918" title="Catherine Ann Dorset" label="Catherine Ann Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q187424" start="30935" end="30953" title="Candas Jane Dorsey" label="Candas Jane Dorsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563756" start="30970" end="30979" title="Mark Doty" label="Mark Doty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134548" start="30997" end="31009" title="Clive Doucet" label="Clive Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945138" start="31026" end="31039" title="Sarah Doudney" label="Sarah Doudney"/>
<link wikidata="Q54878255" start="31056" end="31067" title="Lucy Dougan" label="Lucy Dougan"/>
<link wikidata="Q981883" start="31084" end="31107" title="Charles Montagu Doughty" label="Charles Montagu Doughty"/>
<link wikidata="Q460660" start="31124" end="31143" title="Lord Alfred Douglas" label="Lord Alfred Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q55847665" start="31160" end="31177" title="Alice May Douglas" label="Alice May Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q389096" start="31195" end="31208" title="Gavin Douglas" label="Gavin Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537252" start="31228" end="31257" title="George Brisbane Scott Douglas" label="George Brisbane Scott Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384276" start="31274" end="31287" title="Keith Douglas" label="Keith Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105244" start="31304" end="31325" title="Orville Lloyd Douglas" label="Orville Lloyd Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q445740" start="31342" end="31351" title="Rita Dove" label="Rita Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q26179584" start="31369" end="31382" title="Basil Dowling" label="Basil Dowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450997" start="31400" end="31415" title="Finuala Dowling" label="Finuala Dowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585076" start="31433" end="31446" title="Gordon Downie" label="Gordon Downie"/>
<link wikidata="Q23419091" start="31463" end="31489" title="Ellen Mary Patrick Downing" label="Ellen Mary Patrick Downing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231493" start="31507" end="31520" title="Ernest Dowson" label="Ernest Dowson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481265" start="31537" end="31559" title="Francis Hastings Doyle" label="Francis Hastings Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414915" start="31576" end="31587" title="Kirby Doyle" label="Kirby Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829949" start="31618" end="31636" title="Michael Dransfield" label="Michael Dransfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152154" start="31653" end="31666" title="Jane Draycott" label="Jane Draycott"/>
<link wikidata="Q138540" start="31683" end="31698" title="Michael Drayton" label="Michael Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062205" start="31715" end="31736" title="John Swanwick Drennan" label="John Swanwick Drennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007996" start="31754" end="31769" title="William Drennan" label="William Drennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454078" start="31787" end="31798" title="Adam Drinan" label="Adam Drinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454078" start="31805" end="31819" title="Joseph Macleod" label="Joseph Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699846" start="31836" end="31851" title="John Drinkwater (playwright)" label="John Drinkwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q544953" start="31868" end="31899" title="William Drummond of Hawthornden" label="William Drummond of Hawthornden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020042" start="31916" end="31938" title="William Henry Drummond" label="William Henry Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q213355" start="31955" end="31966" title="John Dryden" label="John Dryden"/>
<link wikidata="Q158060" start="31983" end="31999" title="W. E. B. Du Bois" label="W. E. B. Du Bois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967958" start="32017" end="32033" title="I. D. du Plessis" label="I. D. du Plessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q64010045" start="32051" end="32067" title="Klara du Plessis" label="Klara du Plessis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7052170" start="32084" end="32096" title="Norman Dubie" label="Norman Dubie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609103" start="32114" end="32126" title="Stephen Duck" label="Stephen Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261787" start="32146" end="32157" title="Louis Dudek" label="Louis Dudek"/>
<link wikidata="Q237994" start="32174" end="32189" title="Carol Ann Duffy" label="Carol Ann Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167386" start="32206" end="32225" title="Charles Gavan Duffy (Australian politician)" label="Charles Gavan Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792669" start="32245" end="32258" title="Maureen Duffy" label="Maureen Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706542" start="32275" end="32285" title="Alan Dugan" label="Alan Dugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829974" start="32305" end="32318" title="Michael Dugan (poet)" label="Michael Dugan"/>
<link wikidata="Q56559900" start="32335" end="32348" title="Sasha Dugdale" label="Sasha Dugdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349355" start="32365" end="32378" title="Eileen Duggan" label="Eileen Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501557" start="32396" end="32409" title="Laurie Duggan" label="Laurie Duggan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6161355" start="32426" end="32437" title="Jas H. Duke" label="Jas H. Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325301" start="32454" end="32466" title="Richard Duke" label="Richard Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728692" start="32483" end="32493" title="Tug Dumbly" label="Tug Dumbly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763522" start="32524" end="32538" title="Marilyn Dumont" label="Marilyn Dumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q974678" start="32555" end="32575" title="Paul Laurence Dunbar" label="Paul Laurence Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348078" start="32593" end="32613" title="Robert Nugent Dunbar" label="Robert Nugent Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q647150" start="32631" end="32645" title="William Dunbar" label="William Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756850" start="32672" end="32685" title="Andrew Duncan (poet)" label="Andrew Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q964391" start="32702" end="32715" title="Robert Duncan (poet)" label="Robert Duncan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026639" start="32733" end="32746" title="Camille Dungy" label="Camille Dungy"/>
<link wikidata="Q462266" start="32764" end="32777" title="Helen Dunmore" label="Helen Dunmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252203" start="32794" end="32806" title="Douglas Dunn" label="Douglas Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794706" start="32823" end="32831" title="Max Dunn" label="Max Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973175" start="32848" end="32860" title="Stephen Dunn" label="Stephen Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q12025739" start="32878" end="32891" title="Joe Dunthorne" label="Joe Dunthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q73270" start="32908" end="32919" title="Paul Durcan" label="Paul Durcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q219784" start="32937" end="32953" title="Lawrence Durrell" label="Lawrence Durrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572248" start="32970" end="32981" title="Anne Dutton" label="Anne Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534574" start="32998" end="33013" title="Geoffrey Dutton" label="Geoffrey Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626494" start="33030" end="33042" title="Stuart Dybek" label="Stuart Dybek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342682" start="33060" end="33071" title="Edward Dyer" label="Edward Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397435" start="33088" end="33097" title="John Dyer" label="John Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="33114" end="33123" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342683" start="33141" end="33153" title="Edward Dyson" label="Edward Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q52395045" start="33177" end="33196" title="Joan Adeney Easdale" label="Joan Adeney Easdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416311" start="33213" end="33225" title="Evelyn Eaton" label="Evelyn Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q975736" start="33242" end="33258" title="Richard Eberhart" label="Richard Eberhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372152" start="33276" end="33286" title="Emily Eden" label="Emily Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q18911457" start="33303" end="33319" title="Helen Parry Eden" label="Helen Parry Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609128" start="33336" end="33349" title="Stephen Edgar" label="Stephen Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501847" start="33366" end="33379" title="Lauris Edmond" label="Lauris Edmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381485" start="33397" end="33410" title="Russell Edson" label="Russell Edson"/>
<link wikidata="Q712542" start="33428" end="33444" title="Richard Edwardes" label="Richard Edwardes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272314" start="33464" end="33475" title="Dic Edwards" label="Dic Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q18719387" start="33492" end="33508" title="Jonathan Edwards (poet)" label="Jonathan Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q23812726" start="33525" end="33538" title="Rhian Edwards (poet)" label="Rhian Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q71666522" start="33554" end="33575" title="Helen Merrill Egerton" label="Helen Merrill Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704341" start="33592" end="33603" title="Terry Ehret" label="Terry Ehret"/>
<link wikidata="Q7924784" start="33621" end="33630" title="Vic Elias" label="Vic Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768307" start="33650" end="33660" title="Anne Elder" label="Anne Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131333" start="33677" end="33689" title="George Eliot" label="George Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="33723" end="33734" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568715" start="33754" end="33772" title="Elizabeth F. Ellet" label="Elizabeth F. Ellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921793" start="33790" end="33806" title="Lady Charlotte Elliot" label="Charlotte Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233351" start="33823" end="33836" title="David Elliott (poet)" label="David Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q76320091" start="33853" end="33871" title="Julia Anne Elliott" label="Julia Anne Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946507" start="33888" end="33899" title="Jean Elliot" label="Jean Elliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q715338" start="33916" end="33932" title="Ebenezer Elliott" label="Ebenezer Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538967" start="33949" end="33961" title="George Ellis (poet)" label="George Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7375252" start="33978" end="33991" title="Royston Ellis" label="Royston Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106495" start="34008" end="34018" title="Chris Else" label="Chris Else"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301731" start="34036" end="34049" title="Rebecca Elson" label="Rebecca Elson"/>
<link wikidata="Q42307566" start="34066" end="34080" title="Crispin Elsted" label="Crispin Elsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339437" start="34094" end="34108" title="Edmund Elviden" label="Edmund Elviden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129165" start="34124" end="34139" title="Claudia Emerson" label="Claudia Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q48226" start="34157" end="34176" title="Ralph Waldo Emerson" label="Ralph Waldo Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106498" start="34194" end="34205" title="Chris Emery" label="Chris Emery"/>
<link wikidata="Q966870" start="34222" end="34236" title="William Empson" label="William Empson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150503" start="34253" end="34263" title="Paul Engle" label="Paul Engle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231816" start="34281" end="34291" title="John Ennis (poet)" label="John Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61986649" start="34309" end="34319" title="Karen Enns" label="Karen Enns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754030" start="34333" end="34346" title="D. J. Enright" label="D. J. Enright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333130" start="34363" end="34376" title="Riemke Ensing" label="Riemke Ensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781775" start="34394" end="34409" title="Theodore Enslin" label="Theodore Enslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q442679" start="34427" end="34441" title="Louise Erdrich" label="Louise Erdrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q598130" start="34459" end="34472" title="Ralph Erskine (preacher)" label="Ralph Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099278" start="34489" end="34505" title="Clayton Eshleman" label="Clayton Eshleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505943" start="34523" end="34536" title="Martín Espada" label="Martín Espada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320536" start="34554" end="34569" title="Rhina Espaillat" label="Rhina Espaillat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16123533" start="34587" end="34602" title="Ramabai Espinet" label="Ramabai Espinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563252" start="34619" end="34641" title="Jill Alexander Essbaum" label="Jill Alexander Essbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730226" start="34659" end="34671" title="Maggie Estep" label="Maggie Estep"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706750" start="34689" end="34702" title="Michael Estok" label="Michael Estok"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546081" start="34749" end="34764" title="George Etherege" label="George Etherege"/>
<link wikidata="Q19325085" start="34781" end="34791" title="Anne Evans (poet)" label="Anne Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111013" start="34808" end="34823" title="Christine Evans (poet)" label="Christine Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539027" start="34842" end="34860" title="George Essex Evans" label="George Essex Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760363" start="34877" end="34890" title="Margiad Evans" label="Margiad Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760894" start="34923" end="34933" title="Mari Evans" label="Mari Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q16037668" start="34951" end="34966" title="Sebastian Evans" label="Sebastian Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008716" start="34983" end="34998" title="William Everson (poet)" label="William Everson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528137" start="35035" end="35046" title="Gavin Ewart" label="Gavin Ewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242362" start="35063" end="35076" title="John K. Ewers" label="John K. Ewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384374" start="35093" end="35109" title="Elisabeth Eybers" label="Elisabeth Eybers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286149" start="35137" end="35160" title="Frederick William Faber" label="Frederick William Faber"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271448" start="35177" end="35188" title="Diane Fahey" label="Diane Fahey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382972" start="35205" end="35219" title="Ruth Fainlight" label="Ruth Fainlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413304" start="35239" end="35258" title="Kingsley Fairbridge" label="Kingsley Fairbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648282" start="35276" end="35293" title="A. R. D. Fairburn" label="A. R. D. Fairburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23816397" start="35311" end="35337" title="Maria and Harriet Falconar" label="Maria and Harriet Falconar"/>
<link wikidata="Q127226" start="35367" end="35383" title="William Falconer (poet)" label="William Falconer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123905" start="35400" end="35414" title="Padraic Fallon" label="Padraic Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052806" start="35432" end="35456" title="Catherine Maria Fanshawe" label="Catherine Maria Fanshawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395799" start="35473" end="35488" title="U. A. Fanthorpe" label="U. A. Fanthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145574" start="35505" end="35522" title="Patricia Fargnoli" label="Patricia Fargnoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q258669" start="35540" end="35555" title="Eleanor Farjeon" label="Eleanor Farjeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451043" start="35572" end="35585" title="Fiona Farrell" label="Fiona Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17795559" start="35603" end="35615" title="John Farrell (Australian poet)" label="John Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232766" start="35632" end="35644" title="John Farrell (poet)" label="John Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830220" start="35662" end="35677" title="Michael Farrell (poet)" label="Michael Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6377434" start="35694" end="35706" title="Katie Farris" label="Katie Farris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760104" start="35724" end="35743" title="Margaretta Faugères" label="Margaretta Faugères"/>
<link wikidata="Q465624" start="35761" end="35781" title="Jessie Redmon Fauset" label="Jessie Redmon Fauset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963726" start="35799" end="35812" title="Brian Fawcett" label="Brian Fawcett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353210" start="35829" end="35842" title="Elaine Feeney" label="Elaine Feeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353211" start="35857" end="35873" title="Elaine Feinstein" label="Elaine Feinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727070" start="35890" end="35901" title="Alison Fell" label="Alison Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077621" start="35918" end="35933" title="Charles Fenerty" label="Charles Fenerty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050995" start="35953" end="35966" title="Elijah Fenton" label="Elijah Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133826" start="35983" end="35995" title="James Fenton (Ulster Scots poet)" label="James Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q449235" start="36013" end="36025" title="James Fenton" label="James Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325647" start="36042" end="36056" title="Richard Fenton" label="Richard Fenton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620653" start="36073" end="36085" title="Gus Ferguson" label="Gus Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728252" start="36103" end="36118" title="Samuel Ferguson" label="Samuel Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q981990" start="36136" end="36152" title="Robert Fergusson" label="Robert Fergusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q314269" start="36169" end="36190" title="Lawrence Ferlinghetti" label="Lawrence Ferlinghetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q4493827" start="36208" end="36214" title="Ferron" label="Ferron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539254" start="36246" end="36263" title="George Fetherling" label="George Fetherling"/>
<link wikidata="Q839369" start="36280" end="36293" title="Michael Field (author)" label="Michael Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q34190" start="36358" end="36372" title="Henry Fielding" label="Henry Fielding"/>
<link wikidata="Q20676638" start="36389" end="36400" title="Connie Fife" label="Connie Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q527500" start="36417" end="36451" title="Anne Finch, Countess of Winchilsea" label="Anne Finch, Countess of Winchilsea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769281" start="36468" end="36479" title="Annie Finch" label="Annie Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173980" start="36497" end="36508" title="Peter Finch (poet)" label="Peter Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344336" start="36522" end="36534" title="Robert Finch (poet)" label="Robert Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q567547" start="36551" end="36570" title="Ian Hamilton Finlay" label="Ian Hamilton Finlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205047" start="36587" end="36600" title="Joan Finnigan" label="Joan Finnigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16728998" start="36617" end="36636" title="Jon Paul Fiorentino" label="Jon Paul Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q761573" start="36650" end="36666" title="Catherine Fisher" label="Catherine Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372803" start="36683" end="36693" title="Roy Fisher" label="Roy Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q532457" start="36710" end="36727" title="Edward FitzGerald (poet)" label="Edward FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303396" start="36744" end="36761" title="Judith Fitzgerald" label="Judith Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273560" start="36778" end="36794" title="R. D. Fitzgerald" label="R. D. Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344366" start="36811" end="36828" title="Robert Fitzgerald" label="Robert Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325687" start="36846" end="36865" title="Richard FitzPatrick" label="Richard FitzPatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356611" start="36885" end="36902" title="Roderick Flanagan" label="Roderick Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680343" start="36919" end="36938" title="James Elroy Flecker" label="James Elroy Flecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766264" start="36955" end="36971" title="Marjorie Fleming" label="Marjorie Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507984" start="36988" end="37002" title="Giles Fletcher" label="Giles Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4491060" start="37022" end="37047" title="Giles Fletcher, the Elder" label="Giles Fletcher, the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q312444" start="37067" end="37080" title="John Fletcher (playwright)" label="John Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444832" start="37097" end="37116" title="John Gould Fletcher" label="John Gould Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q64211932" start="37134" end="37152" title="Lisa Anne Fletcher" label="Lisa Anne Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745639" start="37170" end="37186" title="Phineas Fletcher" label="Phineas Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344395" start="37203" end="37218" title="Robert Fletcher (writer)" label="Robert Fletcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576693" start="37234" end="37249" title="Maria De Fleury" label="Maria De Fleury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424037" start="37274" end="37285" title="F. S. Flint" label="F. S. Flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q55233953" start="37302" end="37317" title="Alice Flowerdew" label="Alice Flowerdew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555636" start="37334" end="37348" title="Lionel Fogarty" label="Lionel Fogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112536" start="37365" end="37375" title="Jack Foley (poet)" label="Jack Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779711" start="37393" end="37410" title="Mary Hannay Foott" label="Mary Hannay Foott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700085" start="37427" end="37438" title="John Forbes (poet)" label="John Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045357" start="37455" end="37469" title="Carolyn Forché" label="Carolyn Forché"/>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="37487" end="37502" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Ford Madox Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q503798" start="37519" end="37528" title="John Ford (dramatist)" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q328949" start="37545" end="37557" title="John M. Ford" label="John M. Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586432" start="37575" end="37586" title="Robert Ford (Canadian diplomat)" label="Robert Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6721439" start="37603" end="37616" title="Mabel Forrest" label="Mabel Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945424" start="37633" end="37648" title="William Forrest (poet)" label="William Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922409" start="37664" end="37688" title="Veronica Forrest-Thomson" label="Veronica Forrest-Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525083" start="37705" end="37726" title="Gary Jeshel Forrester" label="Gary Jeshel Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568617" start="37744" end="37759" title="William Forster (Australian politician)" label="William Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233768" start="37776" end="37789" title="John Foulcher" label="John Foulcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365036" start="37806" end="37831" title="Ellen Thorneycroft Fowler" label="Ellen Thorneycroft Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009274" start="37848" end="37862" title="William Fowler (makar)" label="William Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q57596849" start="37882" end="37890" title="Kate Fox (writer)" label="Kate Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521768" start="37907" end="37914" title="Len Fox" label="Len Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q241215" start="37931" end="37942" title="Janet Frame" label="Janet Frame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382992" start="37960" end="37971" title="Ruth France" label="Ruth France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790522" start="37989" end="38004" title="Matthew Francis (poet)" label="Matthew Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344478" start="38023" end="38037" title="Robert Francis (poet)" label="Robert Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544967" start="38055" end="38079" title="George Sutherland Fraser" label="George Sutherland Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606915" start="38096" end="38110" title="Gregory Fraser" label="Gregory Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298784" start="38125" end="38139" title="Raymond Fraser" label="Raymond Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888679" start="38156" end="38171" title="Benjamin Frater" label="Benjamin Frater"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961692" start="38188" end="38203" title="Brentley Frazer" label="Brentley Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591001" start="38220" end="38241" title="Grace Beacham Freeman" label="Grace Beacham Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700131" start="38259" end="38271" title="John Freeman (poet)" label="John Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008374" start="38288" end="38305" title="Nicholas Freeston" label="Nicholas Freeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146531" start="38322" end="38337" title="Patrick Friesen" label="Patrick Friesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772548" start="38354" end="38369" title="Anthony Freston" label="Anthony Freston"/>
<link wikidata="Q168728" start="38387" end="38399" title="Robert Frost" label="Robert Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623414" start="38417" end="38429" title="Gwen Frostic" label="Gwen Frostic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531220" start="38447" end="38459" title="Gene Frumkin" label="Gene Frumkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767687" start="38477" end="38489" title="Mark Frutkin" label="Mark Frutkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395316" start="38509" end="38530" title="Sheila Meiring Fugard" label="Sheila Meiring Fugard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16003832" start="38548" end="38566" title="Ethel Romig Fuller" label="Ethel Romig Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234375" start="38584" end="38595" title="John Fuller (poet)" label="John Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2170828" start="38612" end="38622" title="Roy Fuller" label="Roy Fuller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779396" start="38639" end="38659" title="Mary Eliza Fullerton" label="Mary Eliza Fullerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725869" start="38676" end="38688" title="Alice Fulton" label="Alice Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352402" start="38706" end="38718" title="Robin Fulton" label="Robin Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879758" start="38735" end="38749" title="Ulpian Fulwell" label="Ulpian Fulwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325811" start="38780" end="38795" title="Richard Furness" label="Richard Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478590" start="38830" end="38854" title="Frances Dana Barker Gage" label="Frances Dana Barker Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q116547619" start="38872" end="38898" title="Georgie Starbuck Galbraith" label="Georgie Starbuck Galbraith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5315723" start="38916" end="38928" title="Dunstan Gale" label="Dunstan Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375500" start="38944" end="38953" title="Kate Gale" label="Kate Gale"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134459" start="38968" end="38980" title="James Galvin (poet)" label="James Galvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742217" start="38998" end="39012" title="Patrick Galvin" label="Patrick Galvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470470" start="39030" end="39044" title="Forrest Gander" label="Forrest Gander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157241" start="39062" end="39076" title="Robert Garioch" label="Robert Garioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q941794" start="39093" end="39107" title="Hamlin Garland" label="Hamlin Garland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298795" start="39125" end="39140" title="Raymond Garlick" label="Raymond Garlick"/>
<link wikidata="Q718512" start="39157" end="39172" title="Richard Garnett (writer)" label="Richard Garnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563263" start="39189" end="39202" title="Jean Garrigue" label="Jean Garrigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946620" start="39220" end="39232" title="Samuel Garth" label="Samuel Garth"/>
<link wikidata="Q333528" start="39249" end="39265" title="George Gascoigne" label="George Gascoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q176372" start="39282" end="39296" title="David Gascoyne" label="David Gascoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909105" start="39315" end="39326" title="Bill Gaston" label="Bill Gaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q321660" start="39343" end="39351" title="John Gay" label="John Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7369345" start="39368" end="39376" title="Ross Gay" label="Ross Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949076" start="39394" end="39405" title="William Gay (poet)" label="William Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718933" start="39424" end="39440" title="Alexander Geddes" label="Alexander Geddes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524646" start="39457" end="39469" title="Leon Gellert" label="Leon Gellert"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017260" start="39486" end="39501" title="W. R. P. George" label="W. R. P. George"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213556" start="39518" end="39528" title="Dan Gerber" label="Dan Gerber"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749206" start="39546" end="39558" title="Amy Gerstler" label="Amy Gerstler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777418" start="39576" end="39589" title="Marty Gervais" label="Marty Gervais"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078014" start="39603" end="39617" title="Charles Ghigna" label="Charles Ghigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900625" start="39635" end="39646" title="Monk Gibbon" label="Monk Gibbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308709" start="39664" end="39680" title="Reginald Gibbons" label="Reginald Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252645" start="39698" end="39712" title="Stella Gibbons" label="Stella Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6099839" start="39729" end="39738" title="Ivy Gibbs" label="Ivy Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q47737" start="39759" end="39772" title="Kahlil Gibran" label="Kahlil Gibran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512255" start="39792" end="39804" title="G. H. Gibson" label="G. H. Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571102" start="39831" end="39852" title="Wilfrid Wilson Gibson" label="Wilfrid Wilson Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367407" start="39869" end="39880" title="Elsa Gidlow" label="Elsa Gidlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764213" start="39897" end="39918" title="Angus Morrison Gidney (writer)" label="Angus Morrison Gidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552756" start="39935" end="39948" title="Gerry Gilbert" label="Gerry Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2793945" start="39965" end="39977" title="Jack Gilbert" label="Jack Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396362" start="39995" end="40008" title="Kevin Gilbert (author)" label="Kevin Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q348513" start="40025" end="40038" title="W. S. Gilbert" label="W. S. Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q546275" start="40055" end="40070" title="Ellen Gilchrist" label="Ellen Gilchrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539710" start="40088" end="40104" title="George Gilfillan" label="George Gilfillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q287752" start="40121" end="40145" title="Charlotte Perkins Gilman" label="Charlotte Perkins Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q455761" start="40163" end="40175" title="Mary Gilmore" label="Mary Gilmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="40192" end="40206" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214728" start="40224" end="40234" title="Dana Gioia" label="Dana Gioia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876879" start="40252" end="40266" title="Nikki Giovanni" label="Nikki Giovanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488574" start="40284" end="40295" title="Jesse Glass" label="Jesse Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235463" start="40316" end="40328" title="John Glassco" label="John Glassco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275805" start="40345" end="40361" title="Madeline Gleason" label="Madeline Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949051" start="40379" end="40390" title="Duncan Glen" label="Duncan Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009923" start="40407" end="40419" title="William Glen (poet)" label="William Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681718" start="40436" end="40455" title="Lorri Neilsen Glenn" label="Lorri Neilsen Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022704" start="40469" end="40481" title="Denis Glover" label="Denis Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344210" start="40499" end="40511" title="Louise Glück" label="Louise Glück"/>
<link wikidata="Q434735" start="40529" end="40541" title="Rumer Godden" label="Rumer Godden"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563269" start="40561" end="40578" title="Patricia Goedicke" label="Patricia Goedicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388518" start="40596" end="40619" title="Oliver St. John Gogarty" label="Oliver St. John Gogarty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4710318" start="40637" end="40653" title="Albert Goldbarth" label="Albert Goldbarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552568" start="40671" end="40688" title="Kenneth Goldsmith" label="Kenneth Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q236236" start="40706" end="40722" title="Oliver Goldsmith" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087567" start="40742" end="40758" title="Oliver Goldsmith (Canadian poet)" label="Oliver Goldsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763170" start="40775" end="40792" title="Peter Goldsworthy" label="Peter Goldsworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818927" start="40809" end="40818" title="Leona Gom" label="Leona Gom"/>
<link wikidata="Q18589065" start="40835" end="40847" title="W. T. Goodge" label="W. T. Goodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499660" start="40864" end="40878" title="Lorna Goodison" label="Lorna Goodison"/>
<link wikidata="Q943567" start="40895" end="40907" title="Paul Goodman" label="Paul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q734076" start="40925" end="40938" title="Barnabe Googe" label="Barnabe Googe"/>
<link wikidata="Q350313" start="40955" end="40974" title="Adam Lindsay Gordon" label="Adam Lindsay Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203083" start="40991" end="41010" title="Katherine L. Gordon" label="Katherine L. Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344875" start="41024" end="41049" title="Robert Gordon of Straloch" label="Robert Gordon of Straloch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3129340" start="41066" end="41079" title="Hedwig Gorski" label="Hedwig Gorski"/>
<link wikidata="Q742371" start="41097" end="41109" title="Edmund Gosse" label="Edmund Gosse"/>
<link wikidata="Q537306" start="41126" end="41141" title="Phyllis Gotlieb" label="Phyllis Gotlieb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384419" start="41158" end="41174" title="Keith Gottschalk" label="Keith Gottschalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706743" start="41192" end="41202" title="Alan Gould" label="Alan Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q41590922" start="41219" end="41229" title="Nora Gould" label="Nora Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q365133" start="41243" end="41253" title="John Gower" label="John Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647885" start="41273" end="41286" title="Susan Goyette" label="Susan Goyette"/>
<link wikidata="Q979180" start="41316" end="41354" title="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose" label="James Graham, 1st Marquess of Montrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q6278867" start="41371" end="41383" title="Jorie Graham" label="Jorie Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989537" start="41401" end="41413" title="Neile Graham" label="Neile Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344905" start="41430" end="41467" title="Robert Cunninghame Graham of Gartmore" label="Robert Cunninghame Graham of Gartmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945967" start="41484" end="41496" title="W. S. Graham" label="W. S. Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134848" start="41513" end="41526" title="James Grahame" label="James Grahame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6767795" start="41543" end="41555" title="Mark Granier" label="Mark Granier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150978" start="41575" end="41585" title="Paul Grano" label="Paul Grano"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717083" start="41602" end="41612" title="Alex Grant (poet)" label="Alex Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9069114" start="41627" end="41641" title="Richard Graves" label="Richard Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326298" start="41658" end="41678" title="Richard Harry Graves" label="Richard Harry Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q201732" start="41695" end="41708" title="Robert Graves" label="Robert Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544299" start="41725" end="41739" title="Alexander Gray (poet)" label="Alexander Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q19974201" start="41756" end="41784" title="Catherine Gray, Lady Manners" label="Catherine Gray, Lady Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q56452474" start="41802" end="41814" title="Kathryn Gray" label="Kathryn Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796103" start="41831" end="41843" title="Maxwell Gray" label="Maxwell Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157344" start="41881" end="41892" title="Robert Gray (poet)" label="Robert Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609348" start="41909" end="41921" title="Stephen Gray (writer)" label="Stephen Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q315516" start="41939" end="41950" title="Thomas Gray" label="Thomas Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298297" start="41967" end="41993" title="Dorothy Auchterlonie Green" label="Dorothy Auchterlonie Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628392" start="42010" end="42021" title="H. M. Green (journalist)" label="H. M. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q43076230" start="42038" end="42049" title="Paula Green (poet)" label="Paula Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326063" start="42067" end="42081" title="Richard Greene (writer)" label="Richard Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q433651" start="42098" end="42111" title="Robert Greene (16th century)" label="Robert Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149662" start="42128" end="42144" title="Lavinia Greenlaw" label="Lavinia Greenlaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5528161" start="42161" end="42176" title="Gavin Greenlees" label="Gavin Greenlees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530851" start="42193" end="42209" title="Leslie Greentree" label="Leslie Greentree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297408" start="42223" end="42237" title="Dora Greenwell" label="Dora Greenwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152313" start="42254" end="42264" title="Jane Greer (poet)" label="Jane Greer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551614" start="42282" end="42293" title="Linda Gregg" label="Linda Gregg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13891091" start="42311" end="42325" title="Horace Gregory" label="Horace Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757178" start="42343" end="42355" title="Andrew Greig" label="Andrew Greig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325519" start="42372" end="42385" title="Eamon Grennan" label="Eamon Grennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628642" start="42403" end="42416" title="H. W. Gretton" label="H. W. Gretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373798" start="42434" end="42466" title="Fulke Greville, 1st Baron Brooke" label="Fulke Greville, 1st Baron Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509898" start="42483" end="42497" title="Gerald Griffin" label="Gerald Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q66363209" start="42515" end="42534" title="Sarah Maria Griffin" label="Sarah Maria Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647892" start="42549" end="42562" title="Susan Griffin" label="Susan Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909226" start="42580" end="42594" title="Bill Griffiths (poet)" label="Bill Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980863" start="42611" end="42625" title="Bryn Griffiths (writer)" label="Bryn Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807006" start="42641" end="42655" title="Jane Griffiths (poet)" label="Jane Griffiths"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534642" start="42672" end="42688" title="Geoffrey Grigson" label="Geoffrey Grigson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246878" start="42705" end="42721" title="Nicholas Grimald" label="Nicholas Grimald"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849427" start="42738" end="42758" title="Angelina Weld Grimké" label="Angelina Weld Grimké"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085940" start="42776" end="42799" title="Charlotte Forten Grimké" label="Charlotte Forten Grimké"/>
<link wikidata="Q5362145" start="42817" end="42831" title="Eliza Griswold" label="Eliza Griswold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990139" start="42849" end="42870" title="Rufus Wilmot Griswold" label="Rufus Wilmot Griswold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183651" start="42888" end="42900" title="Philip Gross" label="Philip Gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151026" start="42917" end="42928" title="Paul Groves (poet)" label="Paul Groves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895492" start="42947" end="42965" title="Bertha Jane Grundy" label="Bertha Jane Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16966027" start="43000" end="43010" title="Jeff Guess" label="Jeff Guess"/>
<link wikidata="Q807448" start="43027" end="43040" title="Barbara Guest" label="Barbara Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337270" start="43058" end="43069" title="Edgar Guest" label="Edgar Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151033" start="43087" end="43097" title="Paul Guest" label="Paul Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20882463" start="43112" end="43125" title="Malcolm Guite" label="Malcolm Guite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798921" start="43142" end="43158" title="Arthur Guiterman" label="Arthur Guiterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533393" start="43176" end="43186" title="Genni Gunn" label="Genni Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141920" start="43203" end="43212" title="Thom Gunn" label="Thom Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6438366" start="43232" end="43249" title="Kristjana Gunnars" label="Kristjana Gunnars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137138" start="43266" end="43275" title="Lee Gurga" label="Lee Gurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q323048" start="43293" end="43304" title="Ivor Gurney" label="Ivor Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287572" start="43321" end="43336" title="Ralph Gustafson" label="Ralph Gustafson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729496" start="43353" end="43365" title="Mafika Gwala" label="Mafika Gwala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200745" start="43383" end="43394" title="Cyril Gwynn" label="Cyril Gwynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609373" start="43413" end="43426" title="Stephen Gwynn" label="Stephen Gwynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897506" start="43444" end="43454" title="Beth Gylys" label="Beth Gylys"/>
<link wikidata="Q917570" start="43472" end="43483" title="Brion Gysin" label="Brion Gysin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713698" start="43520" end="43537" title="William Habington" label="William Habington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3293094" start="43554" end="43568" title="Marilyn Hacker" label="Marilyn Hacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6237237" start="43586" end="43597" title="John Haines" label="John Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396268" start="43615" end="43626" title="Paul Haines (poet)" label="Paul Haines"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878493" start="43646" end="43661" title="Helen Hajnoczky" label="Helen Hajnoczky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790108" start="43678" end="43696" title="Thomas Gordon Hake" label="Thomas Gordon Hake"/>
<link wikidata="Q430639" start="43713" end="43731" title="Sarah Josepha Hale" label="Sarah Josepha Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892794" start="43749" end="43764" title="Bernadette Hall" label="Bernadette Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q976924" start="43782" end="43793" title="Donald Hall" label="Donald Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6808665" start="43811" end="43821" title="Megan Hall (poet)" label="Megan Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181956" start="43839" end="43848" title="Phil Hall (poet)" label="Phil Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q237639" start="43865" end="43879" title="Radclyffe Hall" label="Radclyffe Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161185" start="43896" end="43907" title="Rodney Hall (writer)" label="Rodney Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865138" start="43924" end="43937" title="Arthur Hallam" label="Arthur Hallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706797" start="43954" end="43965" title="Alan Halsey" label="Alan Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q67436" start="43984" end="44001" title="Michael Hamburger" label="Michael Hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q743543" start="44018" end="44030" title="Ian Hamilton (critic)" label="Ian Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152176" start="44047" end="44066" title="Jane Eaton Hamilton" label="Jane Eaton Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153384" start="44083" end="44097" title="Janet Hamilton" label="Janet Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183684" start="44114" end="44128" title="Philip Hammial" label="Philip Hammial"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486524" start="44145" end="44165" title="Robert Gavin Hampson" label="Robert Gavin Hampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15461556" start="44182" end="44195" title="Susan Hampton" label="Susan Hampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563004" start="44212" end="44225" title="Sophie Hannah" label="Sophie Hannah"/>
<link wikidata="Q62728968" start="44242" end="44251" title="Bilal Haq" label="Bilal Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q124041814" start="44268" end="44285" title="Caroline Hardaker" label="Caroline Hardaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q22957995" start="44302" end="44314" title="Kerry Hardie" label="Kerry Hardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="44332" end="44344" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530228" start="44361" end="44375" title="Lesbia Harford" label="Lesbia Harford"/>
<link wikidata="Q292180" start="44392" end="44401" title="Joy Harjo" label="Joy Harjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010888" start="44419" end="44433" title="William Harmon" label="William Harmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478699" start="44451" end="44465" title="Frances Harper" label="Frances Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834064" start="44483" end="44500" title="Michael S. Harper" label="Michael S. Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064745" start="44517" end="44531" title="Charles Harpur" label="Charles Harpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725902" start="44548" end="44562" title="Alice Harriman" label="Alice Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343327" start="44580" end="44597" title="Edward Harrington (poet)" label="Edward Harrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125223" start="44614" end="44627" title="Claire Harris (poet)" label="Claire Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6283821" start="44644" end="44657" title="Joseph Harris (Gomer)" label="Joseph Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6794837" start="44674" end="44684" title="Max Harris (poet)" label="Max Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830970" start="44701" end="44715" title="Michael Harris (poet)" label="Michael Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345287" start="44732" end="44745" title="Robert Harris (poet)" label="Robert Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q964765" start="44762" end="44775" title="Wilson Harris" label="Wilson Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178412" start="44795" end="44812" title="Jennifer Harrison" label="Jennifer Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178822" start="44829" end="44841" title="Jim Harrison" label="Jim Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775633" start="44859" end="44874" title="Martin Harrison (poet)" label="Martin Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326293" start="44891" end="44914" title="Richard Harrison (poet)" label="Richard Harrison (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q932152" start="44928" end="44941" title="Tony Harrison" label="Tony Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529571" start="44958" end="44968" title="Les Harrop" label="Les Harrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q131528557" start="44987" end="45014" title="Kingsley O. Harrop-Williams" label="Kingsley O. Harrop-Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6896588" start="45033" end="45047" title="Molly Harrower" label="Molly Harrower"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107028" start="45064" end="45075" title="J. S. Harry" label="J. S. Harry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041063" start="45092" end="45106" title="Carla Harryman" label="Carla Harryman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234762" start="45124" end="45137" title="David Harsent" label="David Harsent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740168" start="45154" end="45164" title="Kevin Hart (poet)" label="Kevin Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060000" start="45181" end="45192" title="Paul Hartal" label="Paul Hartal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18205110" start="45212" end="45237" title="Anne Le Marquand Hartigan" label="Anne Le Marquand Hartigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192860" start="45252" end="45264" title="Jill Hartman" label="Jill Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q81807" start="45281" end="45299" title="Sadakichi Hartmann" label="Sadakichi Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q742288" start="45317" end="45333" title="Michael Hartnett" label="Michael Hartnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208827" start="45351" end="45363" title="Diana Hartog" label="Diana Hartog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8010964" start="45380" end="45398" title="William Hart-Smith" label="William Hart-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424072" start="45416" end="45428" title="F. W. Harvey" label="F. W. Harvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361469" start="45445" end="45461" title="Elisabeth Harvor" label="Elisabeth Harvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557822" start="45478" end="45490" title="Gwen Harwood" label="Gwen Harwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6513832" start="45507" end="45518" title="Lee Harwood" label="Lee Harwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705908" start="45535" end="45549" title="Alamgir Hashmi" label="Alamgir Hashmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105874" start="45566" end="45578" title="J. H. Haslam" label="J. H. Haslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494301" start="45596" end="45612" title="Nicholas Hasluck" label="Nicholas Hasluck"/>
<link wikidata="Q370513" start="45629" end="45640" title="Robert Hass" label="Robert Hass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376402" start="45658" end="45676" title="Katherine Hastings" label="Katherine Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766446" start="45691" end="45701" title="Ann Hatton" label="Ann Hatton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919718" start="45718" end="45731" title="Stephen Hawes" label="Stephen Hawes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158892" start="45748" end="45769" title="Robert Stephen Hawker" label="Robert Stephen Hawker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376739" start="45786" end="45802" title="Kathleen Hawkins" label="Kathleen Hawkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078573" start="45820" end="45839" title="George Campbell Hay" label="George Campbell Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560962" start="45856" end="45867" title="Gilbert Hay (poet)" label="Gilbert Hay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454409" start="45887" end="45902" title="Myfanwy Haycock" label="Myfanwy Haycock"/>
<link wikidata="Q931747" start="45921" end="45934" title="Robert Hayden" label="Robert Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q74936" start="45952" end="45966" title="William Hayley" label="William Hayley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345342" start="45983" end="45996" title="Robert Hayman" label="Robert Hayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822548" start="46014" end="46025" title="Tony Haynes (American musician)" label="Tony Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180243" start="46043" end="46055" title="Joel Hayward" label="Joel Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559438" start="46073" end="46086" title="Eliza Haywood" label="Eliza Haywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q236469" start="46106" end="46110" title="H.D." label="H.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q4497558" start="46144" end="46158" title="Randolph Healy" label="Randolph Healy"/>
<link wikidata="Q93356" start="46176" end="46189" title="Seamus Heaney" label="Seamus Heaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288341" start="46207" end="46225" title="Josephine D. Heard" label="Josephine D. Heard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700407" start="46248" end="46265" title="John Heath-Stubbs" label="John Heath-Stubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5078880" start="46282" end="46299" title="Charles Heavysege" label="Charles Heavysege"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135825" start="46316" end="46335" title="James Hebblethwaite" label="James Hebblethwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3618497" start="46352" end="46365" title="Anthony Hecht" label="Anthony Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q433913" start="46383" end="46405" title="Jennifer Michael Hecht" label="Jennifer Michael Hecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q348920" start="46423" end="46434" title="John Hegley" label="John Hegley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001944" start="46451" end="46470" title="Wilfrid Heighington" label="Wilfrid Heighington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614805" start="46487" end="46502" title="Steven Heighton" label="Steven Heighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765544" start="46519" end="46530" title="Anita Heiss" label="Anita Heiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708326" start="46547" end="46559" title="Lyn Hejinian" label="Lyn Hejinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192862" start="46577" end="46589" title="Jill Hellyer" label="Jill Hellyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234885" start="46606" end="46618" title="David Helwig" label="David Helwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730247" start="46635" end="46648" title="Maggie Helwig" label="Maggie Helwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q272537" start="46665" end="46679" title="Felicia Hemans" label="Felicia Hemans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437184" start="46696" end="46710" title="Kris Hemensley" label="Kris Hemensley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399735" start="46727" end="46741" title="Essex Hemphill" label="Essex Hemphill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964020" start="46759" end="46774" title="Brian Henderson (poet)" label="Brian Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349386" start="46791" end="46807" title="Hamish Henderson" label="Hamish Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19282276" start="46824" end="46840" title="Philip Henderson" label="Philip Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795146" start="46857" end="46877" title="Thomas William Heney" label="Thomas William Heney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238667" start="46894" end="46905" title="John Henley (priest)" label="John Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q552617" start="46922" end="46943" title="William Ernest Henley" label="William Ernest Henley"/>
<link wikidata="Q373134" start="46960" end="46972" title="Adrian Henri" label="Adrian Henri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7151248" start="46989" end="46999" title="Paul Henry (poet)" label="Paul Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q428771" start="47016" end="47031" title="Robert Henryson" label="Robert Henryson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792747" start="47052" end="47073" title="Thomas Nicoll Hepburn" label="Thomas Nicoll Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298244" start="47115" end="47131" title="Dorothea Herbert" label="Dorothea Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q713004" start="47152" end="47197" title="Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury" label="Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q317887" start="47216" end="47230" title="George Herbert" label="George Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q469059" start="47247" end="47281" title="Mary Sidney" label="Mary Herbert, Countess of Pembroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4136974" start="47311" end="47324" title="W. N. Herbert" label="W. N. Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q112044855" start="47341" end="47353" title="Jason Heroux" label="Jason Heroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q553554" start="47370" end="47384" title="Robert Herrick (poet)" label="Robert Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614809" start="47401" end="47415" title="Steven Herrick" label="Steven Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591808" start="47432" end="47448" title="Benjamin Hertwig" label="Benjamin Hertwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791515" start="47462" end="47482" title="Thomas Kibble Hervey" label="Thomas Kibble Hervey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186673" start="47499" end="47513" title="Phoebe Hesketh" label="Phoebe Hesketh"/>
<link wikidata="Q28968128" start="47530" end="47547" title="Paul Hetherington" label="Paul Hetherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015269" start="47564" end="47592" title="William Maxwell Hetherington" label="William Maxwell Hetherington"/>
<link wikidata="Q201433" start="47609" end="47623" title="Dorothy Hewett" label="Dorothy Hewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239151" start="47640" end="47651" title="John Hewitt (poet)" label="John Hewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300924" start="47669" end="47684" title="Maurice Hewlett" label="Maurice Hewlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012297" start="47701" end="47714" title="William Heyen" label="William Heyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073027" start="47732" end="47746" title="Thomas Heywood" label="Thomas Heywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932787" start="47782" end="47791" title="Bob Hicok" label="Bob Hicok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209700" start="47809" end="47821" title="Dick Higgins" label="Dick Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424011" start="47839" end="47852" title="F. R. Higgins" label="F. R. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396502" start="47870" end="47883" title="Kevin Higgins (poet)" label="Kevin Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336468" start="47901" end="47917" title="Rita Ann Higgins" label="Rita Ann Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146258" start="47935" end="47948" title="Colleen Higgs" label="Colleen Higgs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959362" start="47966" end="47980" title="Charles Higham (biographer)" label="Charles Higham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436499" start="47997" end="48012" title="Scott Hightower" label="Scott Hightower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162534" start="48030" end="48045" title="Conrad Hilberry" label="Conrad Hilberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q28337995" start="48063" end="48073" title="Fiona Hile" label="Fiona Hile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864306" start="48087" end="48097" title="Barry Hill (Australian writer)" label="Barry Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343453" start="48114" end="48125" title="Edward Hill (painter)" label="Edward Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q649280" start="48143" end="48156" title="Geoffrey Hill" label="Geoffrey Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345513" start="48176" end="48189" title="Robert Hilles" label="Robert Hilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326465" start="48206" end="48221" title="Richard Hillman (poet)" label="Richard Hillman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364880" start="48238" end="48250" title="Ellen Hinsey" label="Ellen Hinsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152382" start="48268" end="48283" title="Jane Hirshfield" label="Jane Hirshfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540635" start="48301" end="48317" title="George Hitchcock (poet)" label="George Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628353" start="48335" end="48344" title="H. L. Hix" label="H. L. Hix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227741" start="48362" end="48377" title="Thomas Hoccleve" label="Thomas Hoccleve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183741" start="48397" end="48411" title="Philip Hodgins" label="Philip Hodgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858252" start="48428" end="48441" title="Ralph Hodgson" label="Ralph Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945845" start="48461" end="48474" title="W. N. Hodgson" label="W. N. Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858983" start="48491" end="48506" title="Barbara Hofland" label="Barbara Hofland"/>
<link wikidata="Q101170" start="48523" end="48538" title="Michael Hofmann" label="Michael Hofmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q941810" start="48558" end="48568" title="James Hogg" label="James Hogg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235087" start="48585" end="48599" title="David Holbrook" label="David Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q27454843" start="48616" end="48630" title="Susan Holbrook" label="Susan Holbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114941" start="48644" end="48659" title="Thomas Holcroft" label="Thomas Holcroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134599" start="48676" end="48688" title="Clive Holden" label="Clive Holden"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066354" start="48702" end="48718" title="Margaret Holford" label="Margaret Holford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990051" start="48735" end="48750" title="Abraham Holland" label="Abraham Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858987" start="48767" end="48782" title="Barbara Holland" label="Barbara Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12407875" start="48800" end="48812" title="Hugh Holland" label="Hugh Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152388" start="48829" end="48841" title="Jane Holland" label="Jane Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452389" start="48858" end="48870" title="John Holland (poet)" label="John Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q18912372" start="48887" end="48903" title="Norah M. Holland" label="Norah M. Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422397" start="48920" end="48938" title="Sarah Holland-Batt" label="Sarah Holland-Batt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809343" start="48955" end="48969" title="John Hollander" label="John Hollander"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790691" start="48987" end="49001" title="Matthew Hollis" label="Matthew Hollis"/>
<link wikidata="Q252476" start="49018" end="49030" title="Anselm Hollo" label="Anselm Hollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6962747" start="49048" end="49060" title="Nancy Holmes" label="Nancy Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="49077" end="49102" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q722533" start="49120" end="49131" title="Thomas Hood" label="Thomas Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171167" start="49148" end="49165" title="Cornelia Hoogland" label="Cornelia Hoogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365026" start="49179" end="49199" title="Ellen Sturgis Hooper" label="Ellen Sturgis Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q70374412" start="49217" end="49233" title="Hilda Mary Hooke" label="Hilda Mary Hooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15522118" start="49250" end="49262" title="Harry Hooton" label="Harry Hooton"/>
<link wikidata="Q325890" start="49279" end="49289" title="A. D. Hope" label="A. D. Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086761" start="49306" end="49322" title="Christopher Hope (novelist)" label="Christopher Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q313693" start="49340" end="49361" title="Gerard Manley Hopkins" label="Gerard Manley Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q24661807" start="49378" end="49390" title="Leah Horlick" label="Leah Horlick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441085" start="49404" end="49415" title="Sean Horlor" label="Sean Horlor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5478720" start="49432" end="49448" title="Frances Horovitz" label="Frances Horovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856183" start="49465" end="49481" title="Michael Horovitz" label="Michael Horovitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681668" start="49498" end="49508" title="Peter Horn (poet)" label="Peter Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542654" start="49526" end="49545" title="George Moses Horton" label="George Moses Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730755" start="49563" end="49583" title="Allan Kolski Horwitz" label="Allan Kolski Horwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452800" start="49601" end="49619" title="Sylvester Houédard" label="Sylvester Houédard"/>
<link wikidata="Q72017543" start="49637" end="49648" title="Karen Houle" label="Karen Houle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205145" start="49662" end="49675" title="Joan Houlihan" label="Joan Houlihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q351410" start="49690" end="49703" title="Alfred Edward Housman" label="A. E. Housman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343517" start="49720" end="49733" title="Edward Howard (novelist)" label="Edward Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q372211" start="49751" end="49779" title="Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey" label="Henry Howard, Earl of Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q24232726" start="49796" end="49806" title="Liz Howard (writer)" label="Liz Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636383" start="49820" end="49834" title="Richard Howard" label="Richard Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345010" start="49852" end="49870" title="Robert Guy Howarth" label="Robert Guy Howarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434040" start="49887" end="49897" title="Fanny Howe" label="Fanny Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540788" start="49915" end="49926" title="George Howe (printer)" label="George Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q241299" start="49943" end="49958" title="Julia Ward Howe" label="Julia Ward Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647974" start="49976" end="49986" title="Susan Howe" label="Susan Howe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678303" start="50004" end="50021" title="Ada Verdun Howell" label="Ada Verdun Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772752" start="50038" end="50052" title="Anthony Howell (performance artist)" label="Anthony Howell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669846" start="50069" end="50081" title="Harry Howith" label="Harry Howith"/>
<link wikidata="Q521991" start="50098" end="50109" title="Mary Howitt" label="Mary Howitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326571" start="50126" end="50140" title="Richard Howitt (poet)" label="Richard Howitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412583" start="50157" end="50171" title="William Howitt" label="William Howitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481348" start="50188" end="50202" title="Francis Hubert" label="Francis Hubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790872" start="50219" end="50232" title="Thomas Hudson (poet)" label="Thomas Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q70529550" start="50250" end="50272" title="Annie Campbell Huestis" label="Annie Campbell Huestis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061744" start="50289" end="50302" title="Frieda Hughes" label="Frieda Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q188093" start="50319" end="50334" title="Langston Hughes" label="Langston Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q302433" start="50352" end="50366" title="Richard Hughes (British writer)" label="Richard Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q272194" start="50385" end="50395" title="Ted Hughes" label="Ted Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430884" start="50412" end="50424" title="Richard Hugo" label="Richard Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169469" start="50442" end="50452" title="Coral Hull" label="Coral Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708553" start="50469" end="50479" title="Lynda Hull" label="Lynda Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624836" start="50497" end="50508" title="T. E. Hulme" label="T. E. Hulme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719176" start="50525" end="50539" title="Alexander Hume" label="Alexander Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767095" start="50559" end="50568" title="Anna Hume" label="Anna Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018107" start="50584" end="50607" title="David Hume of Godscroft" label="David Hume of Godscroft"/>
<link wikidata="Q734221" start="50624" end="50639" title="Barry Humphries" label="Barry Humphries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406160" start="50658" end="50672" title="Emyr Humphreys" label="Emyr Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497562" start="50689" end="50704" title="Helen Humphreys" label="Helen Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q655213" start="50721" end="50731" title="James Henry Leigh Hunt" label="Leigh Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407670" start="50748" end="50756" title="Sam Hunt (poet)" label="Sam Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699212" start="50774" end="50788" title="Aislinn Hunter" label="Aislinn Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704071" start="50802" end="50811" title="Al Hunter (writer)" label="Al Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527919" start="50825" end="50837" title="Bruce Hunter (poet)" label="Bruce Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052739" start="50854" end="50870" title="Catherine Hunter (poet)" label="Catherine Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319222" start="50887" end="50897" title="Rex Hunter" label="Rex Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163546" start="50915" end="50932" title="Constance Hunting" label="Constance Hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200085" start="50950" end="50968" title="Cynthia Huntington" label="Cynthia Huntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5106961" start="50986" end="51002" title="Chris Hutchinson (poet)" label="Chris Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327727" start="51019" end="51036" title="Pearse Hutchinson" label="Pearse Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568723" start="51054" end="51068" title="William Hutton (historian)" label="William Hutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q81447" start="51085" end="51098" title="Aldous Huxley" label="Aldous Huxley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301983" start="51115" end="51136" title="Douglas Smith Huyghue" label="Douglas Smith Huyghue"/>
<link wikidata="Q237951" start="51155" end="51167" title="Douglas Hyde" label="Douglas Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352557" start="51185" end="51195" title="Robin Hyde" label="Robin Hyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703478" start="51241" end="51263" title="Helen von Kolnitz Hyer" label="Helen von Kolnitz Hyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203779" start="51281" end="51294" title="Maureen Hynes" label="Maureen Hynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240743" start="51315" end="51325" title="John Imlah" label="John Imlah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319223" start="51342" end="51355" title="Rex Ingamells" label="Rex Ingamells"/>
<link wikidata="Q467915" start="51372" end="51384" title="Jean Ingelow" label="Jean Ingelow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15492277" start="51401" end="51409" title="P. Inman" label="P. Inman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949576" start="51427" end="51440" title="Susan Ioannou" label="Susan Ioannou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584572" start="51457" end="51475" title="Valentin Iremonger" label="Valentin Iremonger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386777" start="51493" end="51503" title="Eric Irvin" label="Eric Irvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440805" start="51520" end="51533" title="Frances Itani" label="Frances Itani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5702515" start="51550" end="51561" title="Helen Ivory" label="Helen Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706959" start="51585" end="51597" title="Alan Jackson (poet)" label="Alan Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q543788" start="51614" end="51626" title="Violet Jacob" label="Violet Jacob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288385" start="51643" end="51661" title="Josephine Jacobsen" label="Josephine Jacobsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q116450630" start="51679" end="51693" title="Ethel Jacobson" label="Ethel Jacobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326806" start="51711" end="51723" title="Richard Jago" label="Richard Jago"/>
<link wikidata="Q235234" start="51740" end="51759" title="James I of Scotland" label="James I of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q79972" start="51776" end="51790" title="James VI and I" label="James VI and I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706964" start="51809" end="51819" title="Alan James (poet)" label="Alan James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979432" start="51834" end="51845" title="Clive James" label="Clive James"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459489" start="51862" end="51872" title="John James (British poet)" label="John James"/>
<link wikidata="Q30706107" start="51891" end="51902" title="Maria James (poet)" label="Maria James"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376757" start="51922" end="51936" title="Kathleen Jamie" label="Kathleen Jamie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341398" start="51953" end="51973" title="Robert Alan Jamieson" label="Robert Alan Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7145655" start="51990" end="52004" title="Patricia Janus" label="Patricia Janus"/>
<link wikidata="Q282787" start="52022" end="52034" title="Derek Jarman" label="Derek Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768234" start="52051" end="52062" title="Mark Jarman" label="Mark Jarman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558122" start="52080" end="52091" title="Lisa Jarnot" label="Lisa Jarnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q972676" start="52109" end="52124" title="Randall Jarrell" label="Randall Jarrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706970" start="52142" end="52156" title="Alan Jefferies" label="Alan Jefferies"/>
<link wikidata="Q734955" start="52173" end="52189" title="Robinson Jeffers" label="Robinson Jeffers"/>
<link wikidata="Q120096447" start="52207" end="52225" title="Isadore G. Jeffery" label="Isadore G. Jeffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356244" start="52243" end="52254" title="Rod Jellema" label="Rod Jellema"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203885" start="52272" end="52278" title="Jemeni (singer)" label="Jemeni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592950" start="52312" end="52325" title="Graham Jenkin" label="Graham Jenkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6241788" start="52342" end="52354" title="John Jenkins (poet)" label="John Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284379" start="52371" end="52385" title="Joseph Jenkins (diarist)" label="Joseph Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847395" start="52404" end="52416" title="Mike Jenkins (poet)" label="Mike Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q10970620" start="52433" end="52446" title="Nigel Jenkins" label="Nigel Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885251" start="52463" end="52481" title="Elizabeth Jennings (poet)" label="Elizabeth Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375565" start="52498" end="52511" title="Kate Jennings" label="Kate Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034120" start="52528" end="52540" title="Wopko Jensma" label="Wopko Jensma"/>
<link wikidata="Q22018757" start="52567" end="52582" title="Sydney Jephcott" label="Sydney Jephcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154854" start="52599" end="52613" title="Paulette Jiles" label="Paulette Jiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544332" start="52633" end="52645" title="Liesl Jobson" label="Liesl Jobson"/>
<link wikidata="Q431416" start="52660" end="52668" title="Rita Joe" label="Rita Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339590" start="52685" end="52696" title="Edmund John" label="Edmund John"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576469" start="52713" end="52725" title="Godfrey John" label="Godfrey John"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716914" start="52739" end="52757" title="E. Pauline Johnson" label="E. Pauline Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443623" start="52774" end="52788" title="Fenton Johnson" label="Fenton Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547461" start="52806" end="52829" title="Georgia Douglas Johnson" label="Georgia Douglas Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601979" start="52847" end="52861" title="Helene Johnson" label="Helene Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q478450" start="52879" end="52899" title="James Weldon Johnson" label="James Weldon Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q557775" start="52917" end="52937" title="Linton Kwesi Johnson" label="Linton Kwesi Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q326311" start="52954" end="52968" title="Lionel Johnson" label="Lionel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q183266" start="52985" end="52999" title="Samuel Johnson" label="Samuel Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422460" start="53016" end="53029" title="Sarah Johnson (poet)" label="Sarah Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536912" start="53047" end="53069" title="George Benson Johnston" label="George Benson Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775827" start="53086" end="53101" title="Martin Johnston" label="Martin Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q41656" start="53118" end="53130" title="Amanda Jones (inventor)" label="Amanda Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203595" start="53148" end="53159" title="D. G. Jones" label="D. G. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q725689" start="53176" end="53187" title="David Jones (artist-poet)" label="David Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516739" start="53204" end="53218" title="Ebenezer Jones" label="Ebenezer Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28935078" start="53235" end="53243" title="El Jones" label="El Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372867" start="53257" end="53267" title="Emma Jones (poet)" label="Emma Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q24557952" start="53284" end="53294" title="Evan Jones (Australian poet)" label="Evan Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5572857" start="53311" end="53321" title="Glyn Jones (Welsh writer)" label="Glyn Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q25189322" start="53338" end="53348" title="Jack Jones (Welsh musician)" label="Jack Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6192895" start="53365" end="53375" title="Jill Jones (poet)" label="Jill Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242172" start="53392" end="53409" title="John Joseph Jones (writer)" label="John Joseph Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057711" start="53426" end="53439" title="Patrick Jones (poet)" label="Patrick Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281914" start="53456" end="53473" title="Rae Desmond Jones" label="Rae Desmond Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326939" start="53490" end="53503" title="Richard Jones (poet)" label="Richard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q166159" start="53518" end="53529" title="Terry Jones" label="Terry Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q236950" start="53548" end="53558" title="Erica Jong" label="Erica Jong"/>
<link wikidata="Q193857" start="53576" end="53586" title="Ben Jonson" label="Ben Jonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18631194" start="53603" end="53616" title="Julie Joosten" label="Julie Joosten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242077" start="53636" end="53647" title="John Jordan (poet)" label="John Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312325" start="53665" end="53676" title="June Jordan" label="June Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772848" start="53696" end="53710" title="Anthony Joseph" label="Anthony Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416176" start="53729" end="53739" title="Eve Joseph" label="Eve Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160372" start="53756" end="53768" title="Jenny Joseph" label="Jenny Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219610" start="53785" end="53803" title="Danilo Jovanovitch" label="Danilo Jovanovitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="53820" end="53831" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967566" start="53851" end="53863" title="Trevor Joyce" label="Trevor Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487608" start="53881" end="53892" title="Frank Judge" label="Frank Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831363" start="53907" end="53919" title="Michael J. Astrue" label="A. M. Juster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294615" start="53937" end="53951" title="Donald Justice" label="Donald Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195979" start="53976" end="53986" title="Jim Kacian" label="Jim Kacian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802644" start="54004" end="54017" title="Aryan Kaganof" label="Aryan Kaganof"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093626" start="54035" end="54050" title="Chester Kallman" label="Chester Kallman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646394" start="54068" end="54082" title="Surjeet Kalsey" label="Surjeet Kalsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543814" start="54096" end="54112" title="Smaro Kamboureli" label="Smaro Kamboureli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6001433" start="54126" end="54139" title="Ilya Kaminsky" label="Ilya Kaminsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308299" start="54157" end="54167" title="Julie Kane" label="Julie Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681502" start="54185" end="54200" title="Adeena Karasick" label="Adeena Karasick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598388" start="54220" end="54229" title="Mary Karr" label="Mary Karr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228654" start="54247" end="54260" title="Julia Kasdorf" label="Julia Kasdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218695" start="54278" end="54293" title="Laura Kasischke" label="Laura Kasischke"/>
<link wikidata="Q888034" start="54311" end="54322" title="Bob Kaufman" label="Bob Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7498789" start="54340" end="54355" title="Shirley Kaufman" label="Shirley Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662918" start="54373" end="54382" title="Rupi Kaur" label="Rupi Kaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q73418" start="54399" end="54415" title="Patrick Kavanagh" label="Patrick Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116451" start="54433" end="54443" title="Jackie Kay" label="Jackie Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167874" start="54460" end="54478" title="Jayne Fenton Keane" label="Jayne Fenton Keane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6555690" start="54492" end="54505" title="Lionel Kearns" label="Lionel Kearns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769327" start="54522" end="54533" title="Annie Keary" label="Annie Keary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27449971" start="54550" end="54563" title="Diane Keating" label="Diane Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q82083" start="54577" end="54587" title="John Keats" label="John Keats"/>
<link wikidata="Q955187" start="54604" end="54614" title="John Keble" label="John Keble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6154266" start="54631" end="54650" title="Janice Kulyk Keefer" label="Janice Kulyk Keefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7980910" start="54667" end="54678" title="Weldon Kees" label="Weldon Kees"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497177" start="54696" end="54709" title="Nancy Keesing" label="Nancy Keesing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774762" start="54726" end="54741" title="Antigone Kefala" label="Antigone Kefala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112661" start="54758" end="54775" title="Christopher Kelen" label="Christopher Kelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28810412" start="54792" end="54803" title="S. K. Kelen" label="S. K. Kelen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768497" start="54820" end="54831" title="Anne Kellas" label="Anne Kellas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078021" start="54851" end="54865" title="Isabella Kelly" label="Isabella Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713191" start="54884" end="54895" title="M. T. Kelly" label="M. T. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799341" start="54912" end="54925" title="Arthur Kelton" label="Arthur Kelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163196" start="54947" end="54956" title="Penn Kemp" label="Penn Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q918350" start="54973" end="54986" title="Henry Kendall (poet)" label="Henry Kendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481617" start="55003" end="55016" title="Francis Kenna" label="Francis Kenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051781" start="55033" end="55045" title="Cate Kennedy" label="Cate Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q267178" start="55062" end="55087" title="Geoffrey Studdert Kennedy" label="Geoffrey Studdert Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014905" start="55132" end="55143" title="Leo Kennedy" label="Leo Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872823" start="55160" end="55175" title="Miranda Kennedy" label="Miranda Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965336" start="55193" end="55207" title="Walter Kennedy (poet)" label="Walter Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8041616" start="55232" end="55245" title="X. J. Kennedy" label="X. J. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149155" start="55263" end="55272" title="Jean Kent (poet)" label="Jean Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152444" start="55289" end="55300" title="Jane Kenyon" label="Jane Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346390" start="55318" end="55343" title="Robert Kirkland Kernighan" label="Robert Kirkland Kernighan"/>
<link wikidata="Q160534" start="55360" end="55372" title="Jack Kerouac" label="Jack Kerouac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281939" start="55390" end="55402" title="Sidney Keyes" label="Sidney Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1657674" start="55419" end="55440" title="Keorapetse Kgositsile" label="Keorapetse Kgositsile"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460699" start="55461" end="55474" title="Mimi Khalvati" label="Mimi Khalvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079785" start="55491" end="55506" title="Charles Kickham" label="Charles Kickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768505" start="55524" end="55538" title="Anne Killigrew" label="Anne Killigrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q762223" start="55555" end="55567" title="Joyce Kilmer" label="Joyce Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799036" start="55585" end="55602" title="Arthur Henry King" label="Arthur Henry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724347" start="55622" end="55632" title="Henry King (poet)" label="Henry King"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568764" start="55649" end="55661" title="William King (poet)" label="William King"/>
<link wikidata="Q353238" start="55678" end="55694" title="Charles Kingsley" label="Charles Kingsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264643" start="55711" end="55729" title="Barbara Kingsolver" label="Barbara Kingsolver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425705" start="55747" end="55761" title="Galway Kinnell" label="Galway Kinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243174" start="55779" end="55792" title="John Kinsella (poet)" label="John Kinsella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568611" start="55809" end="55824" title="Thomas Kinsella" label="Thomas Kinsella"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="55842" end="55857" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3067012" start="55874" end="55885" title="Olga Kirsch" label="Olga Kirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445789" start="55906" end="55917" title="Roy Kiyooka" label="Roy Kiyooka"/>
<link wikidata="Q440064" start="55934" end="55947" title="Carolyn Kizer" label="Carolyn Kizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22005850" start="55965" end="55977" title="Barbara Klar" label="Barbara Klar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499603" start="55994" end="56007" title="Sarah Klassen" label="Sarah Klassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778027" start="56024" end="56035" title="A. M. Klein" label="A. M. Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4820749" start="56052" end="56070" title="August Kleinzahler" label="August Kleinzahler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3733741" start="56088" end="56104" title="Etheridge Knight" label="Etheridge Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433564" start="56122" end="56136" title="Stephen Knight (poet)" label="Stephen Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298933" start="56155" end="56170" title="Raymond Knister" label="Raymond Knister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708628" start="56187" end="56199" title="Kenneth Koch" label="Kenneth Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382969" start="56217" end="56234" title="Ruth Ellen Kocher" label="Ruth Ellen Kocher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297172" start="56252" end="56262" title="Joy Kogawa" label="Joy Kogawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428444" start="56279" end="56287" title="Komninos Zervos" label="komninos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601996" start="56304" end="56320" title="Yusef Komunyakaa" label="Yusef Komunyakaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q140196" start="56338" end="56348" title="Ted Kooser" label="Ted Kooser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483777" start="56366" end="56379" title="Shane Koyczan" label="Shane Koyczan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382556" start="56396" end="56409" title="Rustum Kozain" label="Rustum Kozain"/>
<link wikidata="Q88630" start="56427" end="56441" title="Rudi Krausmann" label="Rudi Krausmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177671" start="56458" end="56469" title="Ruth Krauss" label="Ruth Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045401" start="56487" end="56510" title="Carolyn Kreiter-Foronda" label="Carolyn Kreiter-Foronda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2236474" start="56528" end="56537" title="Uys Krige" label="Uys Krige"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091150" start="56555" end="56570" title="Robert Kroetsch" label="Robert Kroetsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q260604" start="56587" end="56598" title="Antjie Krog" label="Antjie Krog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4775975" start="56616" end="56636" title="Anton Robert Krueger" label="Anton Robert Krueger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763565" start="56654" end="56667" title="Marilyn Krysl" label="Marilyn Krysl"/>
<link wikidata="Q487760" start="56685" end="56705" title="Anatoly Kudryavitsky" label="Anatoly Kudryavitsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667334" start="56723" end="56734" title="Abhay Kumar" label="Abhay Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q733294" start="56752" end="56765" title="Mazisi Kunene" label="Mazisi Kunene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348546" start="56783" end="56798" title="Tuli Kupferberg" label="Tuli Kupferberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2714693" start="56816" end="56828" title="Maxine Kumin" label="Maxine Kumin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974852" start="56846" end="56860" title="Stanley Kunitz" label="Stanley Kunitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487772" start="56878" end="56891" title="Frank Kuppner" label="Frank Kuppner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609717" start="56908" end="56924" title="Stephen Kuusisto" label="Stephen Kuusisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913779" start="56942" end="56955" title="Morris Kyffin" label="Morris Kyffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179678" start="56977" end="56989" title="Joanne Kyger" label="Joanne Kyger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481650" start="57007" end="57023" title="Francis Kynaston" label="Francis Kynaston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243769" start="57058" end="57070" title="John La Rose" label="John La Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561958" start="57089" end="57107" title="Sonnet L&amp;#x27;Abbé" label="Sonnet L&amp;#x27;Abbé"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013462" start="57124" end="57139" title="Edward A. Lacey" label="Edward A. Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847594" start="57156" end="57165" title="Mike Ladd (poet)" label="Mike Ladd"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664301" start="57182" end="57195" title="Ben Ladouceur" label="Ben Ladouceur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354867" start="57212" end="57222" title="Nick Laird" label="Nick Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236295" start="57240" end="57250" title="David Lake (writer)" label="David Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353665" start="57267" end="57282" title="Philip Lamantia" label="Philip Lamantia"/>
<link wikidata="Q130798" start="57300" end="57314" title="Kendrick Lamar" label="Kendrick Lamar"/>
<link wikidata="Q372984" start="57332" end="57344" title="Charles Lamb" label="Charles Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228698" start="57361" end="57378" title="Archibald Lampman" label="Archibald Lampman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803799" start="57395" end="57405" title="Tim Lander" label="Tim Lander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760518" start="57422" end="57446" title="Letitia Elizabeth Landon" label="Letitia Elizabeth Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q645138" start="57463" end="57483" title="Walter Savage Landor" label="Walter Savage Landor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713217" start="57500" end="57514" title="M. Travis Lane" label="M. Travis Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369586" start="57534" end="57546" title="Patrick Lane (poet)" label="Patrick Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q505827" start="57563" end="57574" title="Andrew Lang" label="Andrew Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q56037466" start="57591" end="57601" title="D.L. Lang" label="D. L. Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q467672" start="57619" end="57635" title="William Langland" label="William Langland"/>
<link wikidata="Q659003" start="57660" end="57671" title="Eve Langley" label="Eve Langley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3656783" start="57688" end="57701" title="Emilia Lanier" label="Emilia Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q773736" start="57718" end="57731" title="Sidney Lanier" label="Sidney Lanier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6698403" start="57749" end="57760" title="Lucy Larcom" label="Lucy Larcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301758" start="57778" end="57798" title="Rebecca Hammond Lard" label="Rebecca Hammond Lard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977839" start="57816" end="57828" title="Bruce Larkin" label="Bruce Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q313758" start="57846" end="57859" title="Philip Larkin" label="Philip Larkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327264" start="57876" end="57891" title="Richard Latewar" label="Richard Latewar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416366" start="57909" end="57919" title="Evelyn Lau" label="Evelyn Lau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12429201" start="57936" end="57950" title="James Laughlin" label="James Laughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766499" start="57968" end="57982" title="Ann Lauterbach" label="Ann Lauterbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5297809" start="58000" end="58013" title="Dorianne Laux" label="Dorianne Laux"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372256" start="58031" end="58044" title="Emily Lawless" label="Emily Lawless"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772923" start="58062" end="58078" title="Anthony Lawrence (poet)" label="Anthony Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q34970" start="58095" end="58109" title="D. H. Lawrence" label="D. H. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q453577" start="58126" end="58138" title="Henry Lawson" label="Henry Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q541929" start="58155" end="58168" title="Louisa Lawson" label="Louisa Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157996" start="58185" end="58195" title="Robert Lax" label="Robert Lax"/>
<link wikidata="Q713727" start="58213" end="58220" title="Layamon" label="Layamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673289" start="58253" end="58266" title="Irving Layton" label="Irving Layton"/>
<link wikidata="Q240959" start="58283" end="58295" title="Emma Lazarus" label="Emma Lazarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871718" start="58313" end="58336" title="Augustus Asplet Le Gros" label="Augustus Asplet Le Gros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974145" start="58354" end="58365" title="Bronwyn Lea" label="Bronwyn Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493900" start="58379" end="58390" title="Mary Leapor" label="Mary Leapor"/>
<link wikidata="Q309759" start="58407" end="58418" title="Edward Lear" label="Edward Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16107389" start="58435" end="58451" title="Lesley Lebkowicz" label="Lesley Lebkowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387970" start="58468" end="58484" title="Francis Ledwidge" label="Francis Ledwidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236434" start="58502" end="58511" title="David Lee (poet)" label="David Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258640" start="58529" end="58539" title="Dennis Lee (author)" label="Dennis Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15501739" start="58556" end="58567" title="John B. Lee" label="John B. Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935577" start="58584" end="58592" title="Muna Lee (writer)" label="Muna Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1825274" start="58610" end="58628" title="Lily Alice Lefevre" label="Lily Alice Lefevre"/>
<link wikidata="Q84607382" start="58645" end="58664" title="Anne Brydges Lefroy" label="Anne Brydges Lefroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6297180" start="58683" end="58693" title="Joy Leftow" label="Joy Leftow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660952" start="58711" end="58724" title="Sylvia Legris" label="Sylvia Legris"/>
<link wikidata="Q181659" start="58741" end="58758" title="Ursula K. Le Guin" label="Ursula K. Le Guin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257814" start="58776" end="58788" title="David Lehman" label="David Lehman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534740" start="58806" end="58822" title="Geoffrey Lehmann" label="Geoffrey Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q896817" start="58839" end="58854" title="Brad Leithauser" label="Brad Leithauser"/>
<link wikidata="Q680327" start="58872" end="58882" title="Mark Lemon" label="Mark Lemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15070087" start="58899" end="58909" title="Sue Lenier" label="Sue Lenier"/>
<link wikidata="Q441757" start="58926" end="58942" title="Charlotte Lennox" label="Charlotte Lennox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244568" start="58964" end="58973" title="John Lent" label="John Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244593" start="58987" end="58999" title="John Leonard (poet)" label="John Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816566" start="59016" end="59027" title="Tom Leonard (poet)" label="Tom Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485047" start="59044" end="59066" title="William Ellery Leonard" label="William Ellery Leonard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301721" start="59084" end="59097" title="Douglas LePan" label="Douglas LePan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1836356" start="59114" end="59124" title="Ben Lerner" label="Ben Lerner"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204852" start="59142" end="59153" title="Alex Leslie" label="Alex Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q13582561" start="59167" end="59178" title="Rika Lesser" label="Rika Lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q77746829" start="59196" end="59212" title="Lilian Leveridge" label="Lilian Leveridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q272042" start="59229" end="59244" title="Denise Levertov" label="Denise Levertov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214775" start="59264" end="59274" title="Dana Levin (poet)" label="Dana Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q531273" start="59292" end="59305" title="Philip Levine (poet)" label="Philip Levine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6490699" start="59323" end="59334" title="Larry Levis" label="Larry Levis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203474" start="59352" end="59362" title="D. A. Levy" label="D. A. Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2114845" start="59380" end="59392" title="William Levy (author)" label="William Levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372886" start="59413" end="59421" title="Emma Lew" label="Emma Lew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422716" start="59438" end="59453" title="Oswald LeWinter" label="Oswald LeWinter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399847" start="59471" end="59481" title="Alun Lewis (poet)" label="Alun Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9204" start="59498" end="59509" title="C. S. Lewis" label="C. S. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400851" start="59529" end="59542" title="Gwyneth Lewis" label="Gwyneth Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106743" start="59559" end="59575" title="J. Patrick Lewis" label="J. Patrick Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q780102" start="59593" end="59606" title="Wyndham Lewis" label="Wyndham Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23855457" start="59623" end="59631" title="Anne Ley" label="Anne Ley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803838" start="59651" end="59662" title="Tim Liardet" label="Tim Liardet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783709" start="59679" end="59698" title="Isabella Lickbarrow" label="Isabella Lickbarrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138047" start="59715" end="59726" title="James Liddy" label="James Liddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803839" start="59744" end="59755" title="Tim Lilburn" label="Tim Lilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065342" start="59772" end="59787" title="Charles Lillard" label="Charles Lillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375602" start="59804" end="59815" title="Kate Lilley" label="Kate Lilley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567898" start="59832" end="59839" title="Tao Lin" label="Tao Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4678276" start="59857" end="59866" title="Ada Limón" label="Ada Limón"/>
<link wikidata="Q6113686" start="59884" end="59897" title="Jack Lindeman" label="Jack Lindeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21557371" start="59912" end="59924" title="Eddie Linden" label="Eddie Linden"/>
<link wikidata="Q443096" start="59943" end="59964" title="Anne Morrow Lindbergh" label="Anne Morrow Lindbergh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378541" start="59982" end="59994" title="Jack Lindsay (writer)" label="Jack Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793301" start="60013" end="60028" title="Maurice Lindsay (broadcaster)" label="Maurice Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422537" start="60045" end="60058" title="Sarah Lindsay" label="Sarah Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197667" start="60076" end="60090" title="Vachel Lindsay" label="Vachel Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187738" start="60108" end="60125" title="Jessie Litchfield" label="Jessie Litchfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250325" start="60142" end="60157" title="Dorothy Livesay" label="Dorothy Livesay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4911866" start="60174" end="60191" title="Billie Livingston" label="Billie Livingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301735" start="60205" end="60224" title="Douglas Livingstone (poet)" label="Douglas Livingstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301737" start="60255" end="60271" title="Douglas Lochhead" label="Douglas Lochhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660222" start="60288" end="60300" title="Liz Lochhead" label="Liz Lochhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704691" start="60317" end="60328" title="Terry Locke" label="Terry Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q562652" start="60346" end="60358" title="Thomas Lodge" label="Thomas Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485579" start="60375" end="60385" title="John Logan (minister)" label="John Logan"/>
<link wikidata="Q542468" start="60404" end="60421" title="Christopher Logue" label="Christopher Logue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138205" start="60438" end="60454" title="James Longenbach" label="James Longenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q152513" start="60469" end="60495" title="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow" label="Henry Wadsworth Longfellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q962873" start="60513" end="60528" title="Michael Longley" label="Michael Longley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245220" start="60546" end="60559" title="John Longmuir (poet)" label="John Longmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q463319" start="60576" end="60587" title="Audre Lorde" label="Audre Lorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q43082325" start="60605" end="60623" title="LindaAnn Loschiavo" label="LindaAnn Loschiavo"/>
<link wikidata="Q63441354" start="60638" end="60662" title="Marguerite St. Leon Loud" label="Marguerite St. Leon Loud"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296206" start="60680" end="60696" title="Mary Stanley Low" label="Mary Stanley Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999519" start="60719" end="60737" title="Jennifer LoveGrove" label="Jennifer LoveGrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016121" start="60751" end="60767" title="Richard Lovelace (poet)" label="Richard Lovelace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239897" start="60784" end="60798" title="Henry Lovelich" label="Henry Lovelich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946632" start="60821" end="60833" title="Samuel Lover" label="Samuel Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q265841" start="60853" end="60863" title="Amy Lowell" label="Amy Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q449670" start="60881" end="60901" title="James Russell Lowell" label="James Russell Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761651" start="60919" end="60937" title="Maria White Lowell" label="Maria White Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q981448" start="60955" end="60968" title="Robert Lowell" label="Robert Lowell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143674" start="60986" end="60997" title="Pat Lowther" label="Pat Lowther"/>
<link wikidata="Q470063" start="61014" end="61022" title="Mina Loy" label="Mina Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q563549" start="61042" end="61060" title="Edward Lucie-Smith" label="Edward Lucie-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q320460" start="61077" end="61093" title="Fitz Hugh Ludlow" label="Fitz Hugh Ludlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688158" start="61111" end="61124" title="Tatjana Lukić" label="Tatjana Lukić"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650907" start="61141" end="61155" title="Suzanne Lummis" label="Suzanne Lummis"/>
<link wikidata="Q53379122" start="61170" end="61180" title="Laura Lush" label="Laura Lush"/>
<link wikidata="Q21598253" start="61197" end="61209" title="Richard Lush (writer)" label="Richard Lush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791985" start="61226" end="61236" title="Thomas Lux" label="Thomas Lux"/>
<link wikidata="Q662063" start="61254" end="61266" title="John Lydgate" label="John Lydgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q261627" start="61283" end="61292" title="John Lyly" label="John Lyly"/>
<link wikidata="Q29561424" start="61309" end="61322" title="Michael Lynch (professor)" label="Michael Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q723850" start="61342" end="61355" title="David Lyndsay" label="David Lyndsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690029" start="61380" end="61393" title="P. H. B. Lyon" label="P. H. B. Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606761" start="61410" end="61428" title="Henry Francis Lyte" label="Henry Francis Lyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q336899" start="61445" end="61461" title="George Lyttelton, 1st Baron Lyttelton" label="George Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779721" start="61512" end="61524" title="Rozena Maart" label="Rozena Maart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826227" start="61544" end="61558" title="Lindiwe Mabuza" label="Lindiwe Mabuza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498337" start="61579" end="61598" title="Frederick Macartney" label="Frederick Macartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q315989" start="61615" end="61640" title="Thomas Babington Macaulay" label="Thomas Babington Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q705588" start="61657" end="61671" title="George MacBeth" label="George MacBeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343801" start="61688" end="61702" title="Norman MacCaig" label="Norman MacCaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257239" start="61719" end="61743" title="Denis Florence MacCarthy" label="Denis Florence MacCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369842" start="61761" end="61778" title="Karen Mac Cormack" label="Karen Mac Cormack"/>
<link wikidata="Q981981" start="61798" end="61813" title="Hugh MacDiarmid" label="Hugh MacDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239629" start="61830" end="61846" title="Donagh MacDonagh" label="Donagh MacDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3319082" start="61864" end="61880" title="Thomas MacDonagh" label="Thomas MacDonagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730806" start="61898" end="61913" title="Allan MacDonald (poet)" label="Allan MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q83190683" start="61930" end="61957" title="Elizabeth Roberts MacDonald" label="Elizabeth Roberts MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q368519" start="61974" end="61990" title="George Macdonald" label="George Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931590" start="62007" end="62021" title="Hugh MacDonald (poet)" label="Hugh MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023127" start="62038" end="62054" title="Wilson MacDonald" label="Wilson MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147066" start="62071" end="62088" title="Patrick MacDonogh" label="Patrick MacDonogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4276487" start="62106" end="62123" title="Gwendolyn MacEwen" label="Gwendolyn MacEwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459549" start="62140" end="62154" title="Seán Mac Falls" label="Seán Mac Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966104" start="62172" end="62195" title="Walter Scott MacFarlane" label="Walter Scott MacFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147067" start="62212" end="62227" title="Patrick MacGill" label="Patrick MacGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708420" start="62245" end="62269" title="Alasdair Alpin MacGregor" label="Alasdair Alpin MacGregor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364723" start="62286" end="62308" title="Ronald Campbell Macfie" label="Ronald Campbell Macfie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141311" start="62325" end="62355" title="James Pittendrigh Macgillivray" label="James Pittendrigh Macgillivray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525384" start="62372" end="62388" title="Thomas MacGreevy" label="Thomas MacGreevy"/>
<link wikidata="Q540166" start="62406" end="62419" title="Arthur Machen" label="Arthur Machen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992499" start="62438" end="62450" title="Tom MacInnes" label="Tom MacInnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6688835" start="62467" end="62478" title="Louise Mack" label="Louise Mack"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264214" start="62495" end="62515" title="John William Mackail" label="John William Mackail"/>
<link wikidata="Q18672009" start="62532" end="62543" title="John Macken" label="John Macken"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945444" start="62564" end="62581" title="Lachlan Mackinnon" label="Lachlan Mackinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122051" start="62598" end="62615" title="Compton Mackenzie" label="Compton Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440415" start="62632" end="62649" title="Kenneth Mackenzie (author)" label="Kenneth Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q633354" start="62686" end="62704" title="Archibald MacLeish" label="Archibald MacLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q963058" start="62722" end="62740" title="Dorothea Mackellar" label="Dorothea Mackellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293050" start="62757" end="62770" title="Don Maclennan" label="Don Maclennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15454078" start="62788" end="62802" title="Joseph Macleod" label="Joseph Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462925" start="62819" end="62835" title="Nathaniel Mackey" label="Nathaniel Mackey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293050" start="62853" end="62866" title="Don Maclennan" label="Don Maclennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117237" start="62884" end="62899" title="Jackson Mac Low" label="Jackson Mac Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353378" start="62917" end="62931" title="Louis MacNeice" label="Louis MacNeice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814830" start="62951" end="62964" title="Kevin MacNeil" label="Kevin MacNeil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696799" start="62978" end="62993" title="Hector Macneill" label="Hector Macneill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945444" start="63010" end="63027" title="Lachlan Mackinnon" label="Lachlan Mackinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708435" start="63044" end="63060" title="Alasdair Maclean" label="Alasdair Maclean"/>
<link wikidata="Q633354" start="63077" end="63095" title="Archibald MacLeish" label="Archibald MacLeish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755161" start="63113" end="63130" title="Andrea MacPherson" label="Andrea MacPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q312562" start="63144" end="63160" title="James Macpherson" label="James Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166887" start="63177" end="63191" title="Jay Macpherson" label="Jay Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864456" start="63208" end="63224" title="Barry MacSweeney" label="Barry MacSweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640451" start="63241" end="63258" title="Haki R. Madhubuti" label="Haki R. Madhubuti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700222" start="63276" end="63300" title="John Gillespie Magee Jr." label="John Gillespie Magee Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7983725" start="63317" end="63326" title="Wes Magee" label="Wes Magee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5886890" start="63343" end="63360" title="Jayanta Mahapatra" label="Jayanta Mahapatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595809" start="63378" end="63396" title="Sitakant Mahapatra" label="Sitakant Mahapatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6949471" start="63414" end="63424" title="Mzi Mahola" label="Mzi Mahola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200073" start="63442" end="63453" title="Derek Mahon" label="Derek Mahon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178586" start="63471" end="63486" title="Jennifer Maiden" label="Jennifer Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485260" start="63503" end="63517" title="Keith Maillard" label="Keith Maillard"/>
<link wikidata="Q447235" start="63537" end="63549" title="Charles Mair" label="Charles Mair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725982" start="63566" end="63577" title="Alice Major" label="Alice Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126659" start="63594" end="63608" title="Clarence Major" label="Clarence Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347292" start="63626" end="63640" title="Robert Majzels" label="Robert Majzels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973239" start="63657" end="63668" title="Taylor Mali" label="Taylor Mali"/>
<link wikidata="Q137534" start="63686" end="63698" title="David Mallet (writer)" label="David Mallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="63718" end="63731" title="Thomas Malory" label="Thomas Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q506430" start="63751" end="63763" title="David Malouf" label="David Malouf"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409105" start="63780" end="63791" title="Kim Maltman" label="Kim Maltman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050883" start="63808" end="63818" title="Eli Mandel" label="Eli Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816702" start="63835" end="63845" title="Tom Mandel (poet)" label="Tom Mandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4695041" start="63863" end="63883" title="Ahdri Zhina Mandiela" label="Ahdri Zhina Mandiela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680164" start="63902" end="63923" title="James Clarence Mangan" label="James Clarence Mangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910026" start="63941" end="63953" title="Bill Manhire" label="Bill Manhire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237088" start="63971" end="63984" title="David Manicom" label="David Manicom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246568" start="64001" end="64014" title="John Manifold" label="John Manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525536" start="64031" end="64043" title="Leonard Mann (writer)" label="Leonard Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485039" start="64060" end="64073" title="Emily Manning" label="Emily Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252799" start="64090" end="64106" title="Frederic Manning" label="Frederic Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793329" start="64123" end="64138" title="Maurice Manning (poet)" label="Maurice Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965445" start="64156" end="64176" title="Ruth Manning-Sanders" label="Ruth Manning-Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347321" start="64193" end="64207" title="Robert Mannyng" label="Robert Mannyng"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107331" start="64224" end="64237" title="Chris Mansell" label="Chris Mansell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175648" start="64254" end="64266" title="Peter Manson" label="Peter Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514469" start="64283" end="64294" title="Lee Maracle" label="Lee Maracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923958" start="64311" end="64326" title="Blaine Marchand" label="Blaine Marchand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914914" start="64343" end="64356" title="Morton Marcus (poet)" label="Morton Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152198" start="64374" end="64386" title="Paul Mariani" label="Paul Mariani"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321697" start="64404" end="64417" title="E. A. Markham" label="E. A. Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346648" start="64437" end="64450" title="Edwin Markham" label="Edwin Markham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030116" start="64468" end="64483" title="Nicole Markotic" label="Nicole Markotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165505" start="64500" end="64514" title="Daphne Marlatt" label="Daphne Marlatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28975" start="64531" end="64550" title="Christopher Marlowe" label="Christopher Marlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q321378" start="64567" end="64578" title="Don Marquis" label="Don Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343069" start="64596" end="64616" title="Edward Garrard Marsh" label="Edward Garrard Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816721" start="64633" end="64645" title="Tom Marshall (poet)" label="Tom Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q918279" start="64662" end="64674" title="John Marston (playwright)" label="John Marston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217642" start="64691" end="64704" title="Garth Martens" label="Garth Martens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026660" start="64718" end="64732" title="Camille Martin" label="Camille Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q768289" start="64749" end="64761" title="David Martin (poet)" label="David Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4282538" start="64780" end="64793" title="Philip Martin (poet)" label="Philip Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404813" start="64810" end="64825" title="Theodore Martin" label="Theodore Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507843" start="64842" end="64851" title="Sid Marty" label="Sid Marty"/>
<link wikidata="Q365935" start="64868" end="64882" title="Andrew Marvell" label="Andrew Marvell"/>
<link wikidata="Q471413" start="64899" end="64913" title="John Masefield" label="John Masefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811184" start="64930" end="64946" title="Lebogang Mashile" label="Lebogang Mashile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273434" start="64964" end="64978" title="R. A. K. Mason" label="R. A. K. Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q468247" start="64996" end="65013" title="Edgar Lee Masters" label="Edgar Lee Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247125" start="65031" end="65042" title="John Mateer (poet)" label="John Mateer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297795" start="65059" end="65069" title="Ray Mathew" label="Ray Mathew"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352640" start="65086" end="65099" title="Robin Mathews (poet)" label="Robin Mathews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360342" start="65116" end="65130" title="Roland Mathias" label="Roland Mathias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5131740" start="65147" end="65163" title="Cleopatra Mathis" label="Cleopatra Mathis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239293" start="65181" end="65192" title="Don Mattera" label="Don Mattera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5979722" start="65210" end="65224" title="James Matthews (writer)" label="James Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978555" start="65242" end="65254" title="Glyn Maxwell" label="Glyn Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892800" start="65271" end="65287" title="Bernadette Mayer" label="Bernadette Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q27862075" start="65305" end="65321" title="Micheline Maylor" label="Micheline Maylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7459207" start="65338" end="65351" title="Seymour Mayne" label="Seymour Mayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071296" start="65368" end="65381" title="Chandra Mayor" label="Chandra Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22006747" start="65398" end="65407" title="Ben Mazer" label="Ben Mazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957002" start="65425" end="65438" title="Mzwakhe Mbuli" label="Mzwakhe Mbuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680781" start="65456" end="65469" title="James McAuley" label="James McAuley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347458" start="65486" end="65500" title="Robert McBride (poet)" label="Robert McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q24004568" start="65525" end="65537" title="Neil McBride (poet)" label="Neil McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982246" start="65555" end="65566" title="Ian McBryde" label="Ian McBryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964650" start="65583" end="65595" title="Brian McCabe (author)" label="Brian McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615033" start="65612" end="65625" title="Steven McCabe" label="Steven McCabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613310" start="65639" end="65654" title="Steve McCaffery" label="Steve McCaffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41591345" start="65671" end="65685" title="Julia McCarthy" label="Julia McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16117356" start="65699" end="65713" title="Susan McCaslin" label="Susan McCaslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q915445" start="65730" end="65745" title="J. D. McClatchy" label="J. D. McClatchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409110" start="65763" end="65778" title="Kim McClenaghan" label="Kim McClenaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390054" start="65798" end="65813" title="Michael McClure" label="Michael McClure"/>
<link wikidata="Q63699804" start="65831" end="65849" title="Kathleen McConnell" label="Kathleen McConnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237302" start="65874" end="65887" title="David McCooey" label="David McCooey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539816" start="65904" end="65924" title="George Gordon McCrae" label="George Gordon McCrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q470812" start="65941" end="65952" title="John McCrae" label="John McCrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488159" start="65969" end="65981" title="Shane McCrae" label="Shane McCrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q29840969" start="65999" end="66017" title="Kathleen McCracken" label="Kathleen McCracken"/>
<link wikidata="Q470812" start="66034" end="66045" title="John McCrae" label="John McCrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998385" start="66062" end="66076" title="Ronald McCuaig" label="Ronald McCuaig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790946" start="66093" end="66110" title="Matthew McDiarmid" label="Matthew McDiarmid"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452764" start="66127" end="66139" title="Nan McDonald" label="Nan McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358624" start="66156" end="66170" title="Roger McDonald" label="Roger McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373142" start="66187" end="66199" title="Roy McDonald (poet)" label="Roy McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964025" start="66216" end="66229" title="Walt McDonald" label="Walt McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237344" start="66247" end="66261" title="David McFadden (poet)" label="David McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5931781" start="66278" end="66291" title="Hugh McFadden (poet)" label="Hugh McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237360" start="66306" end="66321" title="David McGimpsey" label="David McGimpsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188601" start="66335" end="66351" title="Phyllis McGinley" label="Phyllis McGinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368206" start="66369" end="66385" title="Elvis McGonagall" label="Elvis McGonagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q981978" start="66402" end="66420" title="William McGonagall" label="William McGonagall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741508" start="66437" end="66450" title="Roger McGough" label="Roger McGough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837152" start="66467" end="66483" title="Michelle McGrane" label="Michelle McGrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028114" start="66503" end="66519" title="Campbell McGrath" label="Campbell McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792306" start="66537" end="66551" title="Thomas McGrath (poet)" label="Thomas McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982722" start="66569" end="66582" title="Wendy McGrath" label="Wendy McGrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805169" start="66596" end="66611" title="Medbh McGuckian" label="Medbh McGuckian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5693988" start="66629" end="66643" title="Heather McHugh" label="Heather McHugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q320327" start="66661" end="66679" title="William McIlvanney" label="William McIlvanney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957805" start="66696" end="66710" title="Nadine McInnis" label="Nadine McInnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139403" start="66727" end="66741" title="James McIntyre (poet)" label="James McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096967" start="66760" end="66772" title="Claude McKay" label="Claude McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3035848" start="66792" end="66801" title="Don McKay (poet)" label="Don McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q809072" start="66818" end="66832" title="Barry McKinnon" label="Barry McKinnon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341627" start="66849" end="66859" title="Rod McKuen" label="Rod McKuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605999" start="66877" end="66889" title="Greg McLaren" label="Greg McLaren"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452658" start="66906" end="66920" title="Isaac McLellan" label="Isaac McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6248084" start="66938" end="66951" title="John McLellan (songwriter)" label="John McLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960999" start="66977" end="66991" title="Brendan McLeod" label="Brendan McLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7032542" start="67008" end="67024" title="Nigel McLoughlin" label="Nigel McLoughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64907458" start="67042" end="67062" title="Emily Julian McManus" label="Emily Julian McManus"/>
<link wikidata="Q15486520" start="67079" end="67093" title="Rhyll McMaster" label="Rhyll McMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648172" start="67110" end="67124" title="Susan McMaster" label="Susan McMaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137617" start="67141" end="67159" title="James L. McMichael" label="James L. McMichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982347" start="67177" end="67189" title="Ian McMillan (poet)" label="Ian McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5407533" start="67206" end="67221" title="Eugene McNamara" label="Eugene McNamara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773077" start="67241" end="67256" title="Anthony McNeill" label="Anthony McNeill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757992" start="67273" end="67289" title="Andrew McNeillie" label="Andrew McNeillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560748" start="67308" end="67321" title="Hollie McNish" label="Hollie McNish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062315" start="67338" end="67353" title="Bernard McNulty" label="Bernard McNulty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613347" start="67371" end="67385" title="Steve McOrmond" label="Steve McOrmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q27927244" start="67399" end="67413" title="Dionyse McTair" label="Dionyse McTair"/>
<link wikidata="Q55760783" start="67430" end="67445" title="Máighréad Medbh" label="Máighréad Medbh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426061" start="67463" end="67476" title="Thomas Medwin" label="Thomas Medwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15039964" start="67493" end="67505" title="Paula Meehan" label="Paula Meehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175840" start="67523" end="67535" title="Peter Meinke" label="Peter Meinke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780334" start="67553" end="67563" title="Mary Melfi" label="Mary Melfi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363204" start="67580" end="67598" title="Elizabeth Melville" label="Elizabeth Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985" start="67623" end="67638" title="Herman Melville" label="Herman Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112865" start="67656" end="67676" title="Christopher Meredith" label="Christopher Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q90238" start="67693" end="67708" title="George Meredith" label="George Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q531358" start="67725" end="67745" title="Louisa Anne Meredith" label="Louisa Anne Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368437" start="67764" end="67777" title="James Merrill" label="James Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087491" start="67795" end="67809" title="Stuart Merrill" label="Stuart Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6003239" start="67827" end="67838" title="Iman Mersal" label="Iman Mersal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335011" start="67855" end="67868" title="Thomas Merton" label="Thomas Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q680368" start="67886" end="67898" title="W. S. Merwin" label="W. S. Merwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422603" start="67916" end="67928" title="Sarah Messer" label="Sarah Messer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643187" start="67946" end="67962" title="Joan Metelerkamp" label="Joan Metelerkamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q458169" start="67980" end="67993" title="Charlotte Mew" label="Charlotte Mew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978011" start="68010" end="68021" title="Bruce Meyer" label="Bruce Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611689" start="68038" end="68051" title="Alice Meynell" label="Alice Meynell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2527389" start="68068" end="68081" title="Viola Meynell" label="Viola Meynell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138096" start="68098" end="68118" title="James Lionel Michael" label="James Lionel Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q469135" start="68137" end="68150" title="Anne Michaels" label="Anne Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013808" start="68167" end="68188" title="William Julius Mickle" label="William Julius Mickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q69523793" start="68205" end="68220" title="Marianne Micros" label="Marianne Micros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112872" start="68237" end="68258" title="Christopher Middleton (d. 1628)" label="Christopher Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112874" start="68278" end="68299" title="Christopher Middleton (poet)" label="Christopher Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304386" start="68316" end="68340" title="Richard Barham Middleton" label="Richard Barham Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q344865" start="68357" end="68373" title="Thomas Middleton" label="Thomas Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373171" start="68390" end="68398" title="Roy Miki" label="Roy Miki"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298551" start="68415" end="68428" title="Dorothy Miles" label="Dorothy Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288420" start="68448" end="68463" title="Josephine Miles" label="Josephine Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178617" start="68481" end="68499" title="Jennifer Militello" label="Jennifer Militello"/>
<link wikidata="Q62134" start="68514" end="68537" title="Edna St. Vincent Millay" label="Edna St. Vincent Millay"/>
<link wikidata="Q533042" start="68555" end="68572" title="Alice Duer Miller" label="Alice Duer Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152569" start="68590" end="68601" title="Jane Miller" label="Jane Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690875" start="68619" end="68633" title="Joaquin Miller" label="Joaquin Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530591" start="68651" end="68673" title="Leslie Adrienne Miller" label="Leslie Adrienne Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383129" start="68691" end="68702" title="Ruth Miller (poet)" label="Ruth Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792465" start="68720" end="68733" title="Thomas Miller (poet)" label="Thomas Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916913" start="68750" end="68763" title="Vassar Miller" label="Vassar Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q16088963" start="68781" end="68793" title="John Millett (poet)" label="John Millett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347685" start="68810" end="68826" title="Robert Millhouse" label="Robert Millhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726009" start="68843" end="68857" title="Alice Milligan" label="Alice Milligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q561401" start="68878" end="68892" title="Spike Milligan" label="Spike Milligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390121" start="68912" end="68928" title="Kenneth G. Mills" label="Kenneth G. Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004076" start="68945" end="68965" title="Roswell George Mills" label="Roswell George Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q79759" start="68982" end="68993" title="John Milton" label="John Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347710" start="69010" end="69027" title="Robert Minhinnick" label="Robert Minhinnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q64010479" start="69044" end="69061" title="Matthew Minicucci" label="Matthew Minicucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525601" start="69079" end="69091" title="Gary Miranda" label="Gary Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633713" start="69109" end="69122" title="Sudesh Mishra" label="Sudesh Mishra"/>
<link wikidata="Q373566" start="69139" end="69154" title="Adrian Mitchell" label="Adrian Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q30121955" start="69171" end="69184" title="Paul Mitchell (writer)" label="Paul Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283916" start="69201" end="69220" title="Silas Weir Mitchell (physician)" label="Silas Weir Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610010" start="69238" end="69254" title="Stephen Mitchell (translator)" label="Stephen Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958982" start="69272" end="69287" title="Waddie Mitchell" label="Waddie Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q461571" start="69305" end="69320" title="Naomi Mitchison" label="Naomi Mitchison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746913" start="69337" end="69350" title="Amitabh Mitra" label="Amitabh Mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762004" start="69365" end="69376" title="Ange Mlinko" label="Ange Mlinko"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237008" start="69407" end="69425" title="David Macbeth Moir" label="David Macbeth Moir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765282" start="69442" end="69454" title="Anis Mojgani" label="Anis Mojgani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249099" start="69472" end="69481" title="John Mole (poet)" label="John Mole"/>
<link wikidata="Q43375447" start="69498" end="69515" title="Natalia Molebatsi" label="Natalia Molebatsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870266" start="69530" end="69544" title="Dorothy Molloy" label="Dorothy Molloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549776" start="69562" end="69576" title="Geraldine Monk" label="Geraldine Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q970245" start="69593" end="69605" title="Harold Monro" label="Harold Monro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586150" start="69622" end="69636" title="Harriet Monroe" label="Harriet Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q333772" start="69654" end="69690" title="Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Charles Montagu, 1st Earl of Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182109" start="69707" end="69720" title="John Montague (poet)" label="John Montague"/>
<link wikidata="Q235121" start="69738" end="69763" title="Lady Mary Wortley Montagu" label="Lady Mary Wortley Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302000" start="69780" end="69801" title="Alexander Montgomerie" label="Alexander Montgomerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269483" start="69821" end="69837" title="James Montgomery (poet)" label="James Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q273034" start="69854" end="69874" title="Lucy Maud Montgomery" label="Lucy Maud Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765180" start="69909" end="69925" title="Marion E. Moodie" label="Marion E. Moodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396169" start="69942" end="69956" title="Susanna Moodie" label="Susanna Moodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424522" start="69975" end="69988" title="Kobus Moolman" label="Kobus Moolman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118992" start="70003" end="70024" title="Jacob McArthur Mooney" label="Jacob McArthur Mooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707358" start="70041" end="70051" title="Alan Moore (poet)" label="Alan Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q278495" start="70069" end="70083" title="Marianne Moore" label="Marianne Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459090" start="70101" end="70114" title="Merrill Moore" label="Merrill Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383136" start="70132" end="70142" title="Ruth Moore" label="Ruth Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q21538928" start="70160" end="70175" title="T. Inglis Moore" label="T. Inglis Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q315346" start="70192" end="70204" title="Thomas Moore" label="Thomas Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q506813" start="70224" end="70243" title="Thomas Sturge Moore" label="Thomas Sturge Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q321574" start="70260" end="70270" title="Dom Moraes" label="Dom Moraes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859171" start="70288" end="70302" title="Barbara Moraff" label="Barbara Moraff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092562" start="70320" end="70334" title="Cherríe Moraga" label="Cherríe Moraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048842" start="70352" end="70376" title="Edythe Morahan de Lauzon" label="Edythe Morahan de Lauzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129220" start="70401" end="70416" title="Pamela Mordecai" label="Pamela Mordecai"/>
<link wikidata="Q25880" start="70435" end="70446" title="Hannah More" label="Hannah More"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318014" start="70463" end="70476" title="Dwayne Morgan" label="Dwayne Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q638783" start="70493" end="70505" title="Edwin Morgan (poet)" label="Edwin Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54358520" start="70522" end="70534" title="J. O. Morgan" label="J. O. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176179" start="70551" end="70565" title="Jeffrey Morgan (writer)" label="Jeffrey Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16014457" start="70579" end="70589" title="Mal Morgan" label="Mal Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q450796" start="70606" end="70618" title="Robin Morgan" label="Robin Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17486589" start="70636" end="70657" title="Lorin Morgan-Richards" label="Lorin Morgan-Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q55713221" start="70675" end="70687" title="A. F. Moritz" label="A. F. Moritz"/>
<link wikidata="Q123956493" start="70707" end="70722" title="Eliza F. Morris" label="Eliza F. Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306702" start="70739" end="70752" title="Mervyn Morris" label="Mervyn Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490160" start="70769" end="70782" title="Sharon Morris" label="Sharon Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q182589" start="70798" end="70812" title="William Morris" label="William Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5238840" start="70829" end="70846" title="David R. Morrison (author)" label="David R. Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="70863" end="70875" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q202246" start="70893" end="70902" title="Morrissey" label="Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527681" start="70919" end="70932" title="Kim Morrissey" label="Kim Morrissey"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656212" start="70960" end="70978" title="Garry Thomas Morse" label="Garry Thomas Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q171363" start="70992" end="71007" title="Viggo Mortensen" label="Viggo Mortensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5145433" start="71028" end="71040" title="Colin Morton" label="Colin Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488541" start="71057" end="71069" title="Frank Morton (journalist)" label="Frank Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398262" start="71086" end="71095" title="Twm Morys" label="Twm Morys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216920" start="71112" end="71130" title="Daniel David Moses" label="Daniel David Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q5920463" start="71147" end="71158" title="Howard Moss" label="Howard Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990983" start="71176" end="71188" title="Thylias Moss" label="Thylias Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078046" start="71206" end="71226" title="Isabella Motadinyane" label="Isabella Motadinyane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020110" start="71244" end="71262" title="William Motherwell" label="William Motherwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q506410" start="71279" end="71292" title="Andrew Motion" label="Andrew Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q15452661" start="71309" end="71326" title="Seitlhamo Motsapi" label="Seitlhamo Motsapi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048552" start="71344" end="71357" title="Casey Motsisi" label="Casey Motsisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387142" start="71375" end="71387" title="Eric Mottram" label="Eric Mottram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398327" start="71404" end="71414" title="Erín Moure" label="Erín Moure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799507" start="71431" end="71455" title="Oswald Mbuyiseni Mtshali" label="Oswald Mbuyiseni Mtshali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982459" start="71473" end="71482" title="Ian Mudie" label="Ian Mudie"/>
<link wikidata="Q923682" start="71499" end="71508" title="Mudrooroo" label="Mudrooroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558751" start="71547" end="71560" title="Lisel Mueller" label="Lisel Mueller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827981" start="71578" end="71596" title="Micere Githae Mugo" label="Micere Githae Mugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q304752" start="71615" end="71625" title="Edwin Muir" label="Edwin Muir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061388" start="71644" end="71656" title="Paul Muldoon" label="Paul Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982737" start="71677" end="71690" title="Wendy Mulford" label="Wendy Mulford"/>
<link wikidata="Q737209" start="71709" end="71725" title="Harryette Mullen" label="Harryette Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499240" start="71743" end="71755" title="Laura Mullen" label="Laura Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154120" start="71773" end="71787" title="Anthony Munday" label="Anthony Munday"/>
<link wikidata="Q20204858" start="71807" end="71817" title="Jane Munro" label="Jane Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q29017454" start="71834" end="71850" title="Sachiko Murakami" label="Sachiko Murakami"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015933" start="71867" end="71882" title="William Murdoch (poet)" label="William Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346465" start="71901" end="71924" title="Edwin Greenslade Murphy" label="Edwin Greenslade Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686353" start="71952" end="71965" title="Hayden Murphy" label="Hayden Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327955" start="71983" end="71997" title="Richard Murphy (poet)" label="Richard Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493114" start="72019" end="72032" title="Sheila Murphy" label="Sheila Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081168" start="72050" end="72064" title="Charles Murray (poet)" label="Charles Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542721" start="72081" end="72094" title="George Murray (poet)" label="George Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205318" start="72111" end="72122" title="Joan Murray" label="Joan Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q259841" start="72140" end="72150" title="Les Murray (poet)" label="Les Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237854" start="72167" end="72181" title="David Musgrave" label="David Musgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648222" start="72198" end="72212" title="Susan Musgrave" label="Susan Musgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813036" start="72229" end="72247" title="Togara Muzanenhamo" label="Togara Muzanenhamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591" start="72272" end="72288" title="Vladimir Nabokov" label="Vladimir Nabokov"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163570" start="72309" end="72324" title="Constance Naden" label="Constance Naden"/>
<link wikidata="Q250165" start="72341" end="72355" title="Sarojini Naidu" label="Sarojini Naidu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044865" start="72373" end="72388" title="Carolina Nairne" label="Carolina Nairne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659912" start="72405" end="72426" title="Sydney Elliott Napier" label="Sydney Elliott Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4700813" start="72443" end="72457" title="Akhtar Naraghi" label="Akhtar Naraghi"/>
<link wikidata="Q719228" start="72471" end="72481" title="Ogden Nash" label="Ogden Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358708" start="72499" end="72509" title="Roger Nash" label="Roger Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q443042" start="72528" end="72540" title="Thomas Nashe" label="Thomas Nashe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345564" start="72557" end="72566" title="John Neal" label="John Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081216" start="72584" end="72598" title="Charles Neaves" label="Charles Neaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321307" start="72615" end="72626" title="Henry Neele" label="Henry Neele"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493495" start="72643" end="72652" title="Lyle Neff" label="Lyle Neff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250218" start="72669" end="72682" title="John Neihardt" label="John Neihardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016060" start="72700" end="72713" title="William Neill (poet)" label="William Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184130" start="72730" end="72744" title="Philip Neilsen" label="Philip Neilsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491185" start="72758" end="72770" title="Shaw Neilson" label="Shaw Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3611679" start="72787" end="72806" title="Alice Dunbar Nelson" label="Alice Dunbar Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882200" start="72824" end="72836" title="Holly Nelson" label="Holly Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763605" start="72853" end="72867" title="Marilyn Nelson" label="Marilyn Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q429011" start="72885" end="72899" title="Howard Nemerov" label="Howard Nemerov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389490" start="72917" end="72929" title="Kenn Nesbitt" label="Kenn Nesbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945656" start="72947" end="72956" title="W. H. New" label="W. H. New"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402352" start="72973" end="72986" title="Henry Newbolt" label="Henry Newbolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250356" start="73003" end="73015" title="John Newlove (poet)" label="John Newlove"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="73032" end="73049" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q22957980" start="73066" end="73078" title="Kate Newmann" label="Kate Newmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016112" start="73099" end="73113" title="William Newton (poet)" label="William Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697145" start="73130" end="73151" title="Aimee Nezhukumatathil" label="Aimee Nezhukumatathil"/>
<link wikidata="Q14415871" start="73169" end="73187" title="Nuala Ní Chonchúir" label="Nuala Ní Chonchúir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349540" start="73205" end="73227" title="Eiléan Ní Chuilleanáin" label="Eiléan Ní Chuilleanáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q467612" start="73245" end="73264" title="Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill" label="Nuala Ní Dhomhnaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697006" start="73282" end="73303" title="Ailbhe Ní Ghearbhuigh" label="Ailbhe Ní Ghearbhuigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15494756" start="73321" end="73340" title="Doireann Ní Ghríofa" label="Doireann Ní Ghríofa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087097" start="73358" end="73379" title="The Owl and the Nightingale" label="Nicholas of Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953105" start="73402" end="73423" title="Barrie Phillip Nichol" label="Barrie Phillip Nichol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591324" start="73450" end="73463" title="Grace Nichols" label="Grace Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158366" start="73483" end="73497" title="Robert Nichols (poet)" label="Robert Nichols"/>
<link wikidata="Q58010145" start="73514" end="73530" title="Cecily Nicholson" label="Cecily Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q13593014" start="73544" end="73560" title="Norman Nicholson" label="Norman Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077838" start="73577" end="73593" title="Lorine Niedecker" label="Lorine Niedecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q63862912" start="73611" end="73625" title="Emilia Nielsen" label="Emilia Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488701" start="73639" end="73650" title="Hume Nisbet" label="Hume Nisbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q224912" start="73669" end="73686" title="Christopher Nolan (author)" label="Christopher Nolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q457278" start="73704" end="73722" title="Oodgeroo Noonuccal" label="Oodgeroo Noonuccal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13643306" start="73739" end="73752" title="Leslie Norris" label="Leslie Norris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783517" start="73772" end="73785" title="Harry Northup" label="Harry Northup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799846" start="73803" end="73816" title="Arthur Nortje" label="Arthur Nortje"/>
<link wikidata="Q850141" start="73834" end="73849" title="Caroline Norton" label="Caroline Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726035" start="73866" end="73878" title="Alice Notley" label="Alice Notley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713563" start="73896" end="73908" title="Alden Nowlan" label="Alden Nowlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390604" start="73925" end="73937" title="Alfred Noyes" label="Alfred Noyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743320" start="73954" end="73966" title="Jeff Nuttall" label="Jeff Nuttall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896906" start="73983" end="73999" title="Naomi Shihab Nye" label="Naomi Shihab Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q523086" start="74017" end="74027" title="Robert Nye" label="Robert Nye"/>
<link wikidata="Q217557" start="74051" end="74068" title="Joyce Carol Oates" label="Joyce Carol Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146872" start="74086" end="74103" title="John O&amp;#x27;Brien (poet)" label="John O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441306" start="74145" end="74162" title="Sean O&amp;#x27;Brien (writer)" label="Sean O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147367" start="74179" end="74201" title="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Connell (poet)" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769069" start="74218" end="74236" title="Mark O&amp;#x27;Connor (poet)" label="Mark O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3379056" start="74253" end="74273" title="Philip O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Philip O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958048" start="74290" end="74309" title="Mary O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Mary O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893487" start="74327" end="74350" title="Bernard O&amp;#x27;Donoghue" label="Bernard O&amp;#x27;Donoghue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607090" start="74368" end="74391" title="Gregory O&amp;#x27;Donoghue" label="Gregory O&amp;#x27;Donoghue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893489" start="74409" end="74428" title="Bernard O&amp;#x27;Dowd" label="Bernard O&amp;#x27;Dowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258804" start="74445" end="74467" title="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Driscoll" label="Dennis O&amp;#x27;Driscoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q15440492" start="74485" end="74506" title="Ernest O&amp;#x27;Ferrall" label="Ernest O&amp;#x27;Ferrall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364225" start="74523" end="74532" title="Ron Offen" label="Ron Offen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329577" start="74550" end="74571" title="William Henry Ogilvie" label="William Henry Ogilvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q951010" start="74588" end="74605" title="Frank O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Frank O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6221670" start="74623" end="74647" title="John Bernard O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="John Bernard O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781931" start="74664" end="74684" title="Theodore O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Theodore O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199739" start="74702" end="74721" title="Pixie O&amp;#x27;Harris" label="Pixie O&amp;#x27;Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180469" start="74738" end="74749" title="Sharon Olds" label="Sharon Olds"/>
<link wikidata="Q22279479" start="74767" end="74783" title="Alexandra Oliver" label="Alexandra Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q454836" start="74797" end="74808" title="Mary Oliver" label="Mary Oliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305730" start="74826" end="74838" title="Redell Olsen" label="Redell Olsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q922978" start="74855" end="74868" title="Charles Olson" label="Charles Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494796" start="74886" end="74902" title="Sheree-Lee Olson" label="Sheree-Lee Olson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23419093" start="74919" end="74938" title="Nessa O&amp;#x27;Mahony" label="Nessa O&amp;#x27;Mahony"/>
<link wikidata="Q313593" start="74953" end="74969" title="Michael Ondaatje" label="Michael Ondaatje"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694028" start="74990" end="75010" title="Heather O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Heather O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q18810760" start="75027" end="75049" title="Henrietta O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Henrietta O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779316" start="75067" end="75094" title="Mary Devenport O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Mary Devenport O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101810" start="75112" end="75124" title="George Oppen" label="George Oppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563280" start="75142" end="75152" title="Mary Oppen" label="Mary Oppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661222" start="75170" end="75189" title="Antoine Ó Raifteiri" label="Antoine Ó Raifteiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344704" start="75207" end="75233" title="Edward Otho Cresap Ord, II" label="Edward Otho Cresap Ord, II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302679" start="75251" end="75271" title="Dowell O&amp;#x27;Reilly" label="Dowell O&amp;#x27;Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983102" start="75288" end="75302" title="Peter Orlovsky" label="Peter Orlovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6251311" start="75320" end="75331" title="John Ormond" label="John Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488811" start="75348" end="75360" title="Frank Ormsby" label="Frank Ormsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607095" start="75378" end="75389" title="Gregory Orr (poet)" label="Gregory Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q710896" start="75407" end="75432" title="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Shaughnessy" label="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Shaughnessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6836226" start="75449" end="75472" title="Micheal O&amp;#x27;Siadhail" label="Micheal O&amp;#x27;Siadhail"/>
<link wikidata="Q21623" start="75490" end="75505" title="Alicia Ostriker" label="Alicia Ostriker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730292" start="75523" end="75545" title="Maggie O&amp;#x27;Sullivan" label="Maggie O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457028" start="75562" end="75584" title="Seumas O&amp;#x27;Sullivan" label="Seumas O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3362899" start="75602" end="75615" title="Niyi Osundare" label="Niyi Osundare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4726044" start="75636" end="75648" title="Alice Oswald" label="Alice Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182229" start="75665" end="75676" title="John Oswald (activist)" label="John Oswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3327732" start="75693" end="75710" title="Eoghan Ó Tuairisc" label="Eoghan Ó Tuairisc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328206" start="75728" end="75742" title="Richard Outram" label="Richard Outram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113160" start="75759" end="75768" title="Ouyang Yu" label="Ouyang Yu"/>
<link wikidata="Q21064320" start="75790" end="75804" title="Catherine Owen (writer)" label="Catherine Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149658" start="75818" end="75826" title="Jan Owen (poet)" label="Jan Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212719" start="75843" end="75855" title="Wilfred Owen" label="Wilfred Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29189037" start="75879" end="75891" title="Susan Paddon" label="Susan Paddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q299836" start="75905" end="75915" title="Ruth Padel" label="Ruth Padel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165516" start="75932" end="75943" title="Ron Padgett" label="Ron Padgett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077720" start="75961" end="75973" title="Isabel Pagan" label="Isabel Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101056" start="75993" end="76003" title="Geoff Page" label="Geoff Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755960" start="76020" end="76030" title="P. K. Page" label="P. K. Page"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153536" start="76047" end="76060" title="Janet Paisley" label="Janet Paisley"/>
<link wikidata="Q443966" start="76077" end="76088" title="Grace Paley" label="Grace Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q516497" start="76105" end="76128" title="Francis Turner Palgrave" label="Francis Turner Palgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833368" start="76145" end="76159" title="Michael Palmer (poet)" label="Michael Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19118258" start="76177" end="76190" title="Nettie Palmer" label="Nettie Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q19118257" start="76207" end="76219" title="Vance Palmer" label="Vance Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q298213" start="76236" end="76252" title="Sylvia Pankhurst" label="Sylvia Pankhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3397600" start="76269" end="76296" title="William Williams Pantycelyn" label="William Williams Pantycelyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790989" start="76302" end="76322" title="Aristides Paradissis" label="Aristides Paradissis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18211269" start="76339" end="76350" title="Arleen Paré" label="Arleen Paré"/>
<link wikidata="Q270707" start="76367" end="76381" title="Dorothy Parker" label="Dorothy Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q83493863" start="76399" end="76412" title="Amy Parkinson" label="Amy Parkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783425" start="76429" end="76443" title="Thomas Parnell" label="Thomas Parnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348749" start="76463" end="76475" title="Robert Parry (poet)" label="Robert Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308210" start="76492" end="76503" title="Lisa Pasold" label="Lisa Pasold"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252017" start="76517" end="76526" title="John Pass (poet)" label="John Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909266" start="76543" end="76555" title="Linda Pastan" label="Linda Pastan"/>
<link wikidata="Q595662" start="76573" end="76588" title="Kenneth Patchen" label="Kenneth Patchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q436699" start="76606" end="76620" title="Banjo Paterson" label="Banjo Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239398" start="76637" end="76649" title="Don Paterson" label="Don Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q716197" start="76666" end="76682" title="Coventry Patmore" label="Coventry Patmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q912893" start="76699" end="76711" title="Brian Patten" label="Brian Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q30062960" start="76728" end="76741" title="Ian Patterson (poet)" label="Ian Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519422" start="76758" end="76775" title="Philip Kevin Paul" label="Philip Kevin Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358515" start="76789" end="76799" title="Tom Paulin" label="Tom Paulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108405" start="76819" end="76836" title="Ricardo Pau-Llosa" label="Ricardo Pau-Llosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141084" start="76854" end="76864" title="James Payn" label="James Payn"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563281" start="76883" end="76896" title="Molly Peacock" label="Molly Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q561408" start="76916" end="76935" title="Thomas Love Peacock" label="Thomas Love Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q274143" start="76952" end="76966" title="Patrick Pearse" label="Patrick Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q23816424" start="76984" end="76999" title="Soraya Peerbaye" label="Soraya Peerbaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792099" start="77013" end="77023" title="Pearl Poet" label="Pearl Poet"/>
<link wikidata="Q274143" start="77038" end="77052" title="Patrick Pearse" label="Patrick Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15459034" start="77070" end="77090" title="James Larkin Pearson" label="James Larkin Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313668" start="77108" end="77118" title="Neil Peart" label="Neil Peart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376881" start="77135" end="77150" title="Kathleen Peirce" label="Kathleen Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978854" start="77168" end="77183" title="J. D. C. Pellow" label="J. D. C. Pellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969284" start="77200" end="77217" title="Nathan Penlington" label="Nathan Penlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572258" start="77233" end="77243" title="Anne Penny" label="Anne Penny"/>
<link wikidata="Q18528972" start="77262" end="77279" title="Margaret Pennyman" label="Margaret Pennyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5760944" start="77305" end="77332" title="Hilary Douglas Clark Pepler" label="Hilary Douglas Clark Pepler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408014" start="77349" end="77360" title="Sam Pereira" label="Sam Pereira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696663" start="77378" end="77391" title="Lucia Perillo" label="Lucia Perillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089565" start="77409" end="77420" title="Grace Perry" label="Grace Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q65504440" start="77437" end="77460" title="Alice E. Heckler Peters" label="Alice E. Heckler Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q576088" start="77478" end="77491" title="Lenrie Peters" label="Lenrie Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348853" start="77509" end="77522" title="Robert Peters (playwright)" label="Robert Peters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972650" start="77540" end="77553" title="Pascale Petit (poet)" label="Pascale Petit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1119963" start="77570" end="77584" title="Mario Petrucci" label="Mario Petrucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946011" start="77601" end="77616" title="W. T. Pfefferle" label="W. T. Pfefferle"/>
<link wikidata="Q112768299" start="77633" end="77666" title="Anna Augusta Von Helmholtz-Phelan" label="Anna Augusta Von Helmholtz-Phelan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15491880" start="77684" end="77702" title="M. NourbeSe Philip" label="M. NourbeSe Philip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404968" start="77721" end="77736" title="Ambrose Philips" label="Ambrose Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172000" start="77753" end="77770" title="Katherine Philips" label="Katherine Philips"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283557" start="77823" end="77838" title="Eden Phillpotts" label="Eden Phillpotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727162" start="77855" end="77866" title="Alison Pick" label="Alison Pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817236" start="77883" end="77894" title="Tom Pickard" label="Tom Pickard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509219" start="77911" end="77943" title="Leah Lakshmi Piepzna-Samarasinha" label="Leah Lakshmi Piepzna-Samarasinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q273385" start="77963" end="77975" title="Marge Piercy" label="Marge Piercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471151" start="77993" end="78012" title="Laetitia Pilkington" label="Laetitia Pilkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780516" start="78035" end="78050" title="Mary Pilkington" label="Mary Pilkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q52366433" start="78067" end="78079" title="Sarah Pinder" label="Sarah Pinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167322" start="78093" end="78115" title="Percy Edward Pinkerton" label="Percy Edward Pinkerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q588807" start="78132" end="78145" title="Robert Pinsky" label="Robert Pinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543434" start="78163" end="78175" title="George Pirie (publisher)" label="George Pirie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113071" start="78192" end="78208" title="Christopher Pitt" label="Christopher Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762989" start="78225" end="78235" title="Marie Pitt" label="Marie Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q531951" start="78252" end="78263" title="Ruth Pitter" label="Ruth Pitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704604" start="78280" end="78290" title="Al Pittman" label="Al Pittman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453172" start="78307" end="78321" title="Marjorie Pizer" label="Marjorie Pizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q133054" start="78338" end="78350" title="Sylvia Plath" label="Sylvia Plath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282985" start="78370" end="78384" title="William Plomer" label="William Plomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q458658" start="78404" end="78442" title="Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany" label="Edward Plunkett, 18th Baron of Dunsany"/>
<link wikidata="Q284156" start="78462" end="78477" title="Joseph Plunkett" label="Joseph Plunkett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="78495" end="78510" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372324" start="78528" end="78544" title="Emily Pohl-Weary" label="Emily Pohl-Weary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205647" start="78561" end="78572" title="Craig Poile" label="Craig Poile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17150957" start="78586" end="78599" title="Suman Pokhrel" label="Suman Pokhrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756365" start="78617" end="78632" title="Marcella Polain" label="Marcella Polain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759919" start="78649" end="78673" title="Margaret Steuart Pollard" label="Margaret Steuart Pollard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5344876" start="78690" end="78704" title="Edward Pollock" label="Edward Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348957" start="78722" end="78735" title="Robert Pollok (poet)" label="Robert Pollok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253129" start="78755" end="78767" title="John Pomfret (poet)" label="John Pomfret"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762991" start="78784" end="78796" title="Marie Ponsot" label="Marie Ponsot"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253147" start="78814" end="78823" title="John Pook" label="John Pook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417426" start="78842" end="78852" title="Sandy Pool" label="Sandy Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762991" start="78866" end="78878" title="Marie Ponsot" label="Marie Ponsot"/>
<link wikidata="Q164047" start="78896" end="78910" title="Alexander Pope" label="Alexander Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303615" start="78927" end="78940" title="Judith Pordon" label="Judith Pordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850561" start="78958" end="78975" title="Anna Maria Porter" label="Anna Maria Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298596" start="78992" end="79006" title="Dorothy Porter" label="Dorothy Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640891" start="79023" end="79033" title="Hal Porter" label="Hal Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528113" start="79050" end="79062" title="Peter Porter (poet)" label="Peter Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25686653" start="79079" end="79094" title="Rochelle Potkar" label="Rochelle Potkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348992" start="79112" end="79125" title="Robert Potter (translator)" label="Robert Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081720" start="79142" end="79155" title="Charles Potts" label="Charles Potts"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="79173" end="79183" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834255" start="79201" end="79211" title="B. W. Powe" label="B. W. Powe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181340" start="79228" end="79240" title="Craig Powell (poet)" label="Craig Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230504" start="79257" end="79281" title="Winthrop Mackworth Praed" label="Winthrop Mackworth Praed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125287" start="79298" end="79310" title="Claire Pratt" label="Claire Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045744" start="79327" end="79338" title="E. J. Pratt" label="E. J. Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114667" start="79355" end="79369" title="Jack Prelutsky" label="Jack Prelutsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q961702" start="79387" end="79398" title="Karen Press" label="Karen Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793283" start="79416" end="79430" title="Thomas Preston (writer)" label="Thomas Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105468" start="79447" end="79457" title="Ron Pretty" label="Ron Pretty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257757" start="79474" end="79487" title="Frank Prewett" label="Frank Prewett"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157611" start="79504" end="79515" title="Nancy Price" label="Nancy Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328508" start="79532" end="79545" title="Richard Price (poet)" label="Richard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349038" start="79564" end="79577" title="Robert Priest" label="Robert Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424055" start="79594" end="79606" title="F. T. Prince" label="F. T. Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q380383" start="79623" end="79637" title="Thomas Pringle" label="Thomas Pringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256302" start="79657" end="79670" title="Matthew Prior" label="Matthew Prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155077" start="79687" end="79705" title="Pauline Prior-Pitt" label="Pauline Prior-Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681673" start="79719" end="79740" title="Adelaide Anne Procter" label="Adelaide Anne Procter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980322" start="79757" end="79770" title="Bryan Procter" label="Bryan Procter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740239" start="79787" end="79799" title="Kevin Prufer" label="Kevin Prufer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057287" start="79817" end="79829" title="J. H. Prynne" label="J. H. Prynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492394" start="79846" end="79859" title="Sheenagh Pugh" label="Sheenagh Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704621" start="79878" end="79886" title="Al Purdy" label="Al Purdy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761201" start="79910" end="79919" title="Andy Quan" label="Andy Quan"/>
<link wikidata="Q585489" start="79938" end="79953" title="Francis Quarles" label="Francis Quarles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077666" start="79970" end="79984" title="Peter Quennell" label="Peter Quennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521631" start="80001" end="80013" title="Sina Queyras" label="Sina Queyras"/>
<link wikidata="Q19666339" start="80027" end="80040" title="Roderic Quinn" label="Roderic Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8017319" start="80075" end="80089" title="William Radice" label="William Radice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19665269" start="80106" end="80118" title="Kenneth Radu" label="Kenneth Radu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408040" start="80135" end="80144" title="Sam Ragan" label="Sam Ragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q21066696" start="80162" end="80176" title="Jennifer Rahim" label="Jennifer Rahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138630" start="80193" end="80204" title="Craig Raine" label="Craig Raine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460183" start="80221" end="80235" title="Kathleen Raine" label="Kathleen Raine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040682" start="80253" end="80264" title="Carl Rakosi" label="Carl Rakosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q189144" start="80282" end="80296" title="Walter Raleigh" label="Walter Raleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141793" start="80321" end="80332" title="James Ralph" label="James Ralph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299094" start="80352" end="80371" title="Raymond Ramcharitar" label="Raymond Ramcharitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6062570" start="80385" end="80403" title="Lesego Rampolokeng" label="Lesego Rampolokeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q654775" start="80420" end="80432" title="Allan Ramsay (poet)" label="Allan Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485903" start="80449" end="80470" title="Theodore Harding Rand" label="Theodore Harding Rand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902529" start="80487" end="80501" title="Dudley Randall" label="Dudley Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15506082" start="80519" end="80532" title="Julia Randall" label="Julia Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114379" start="80550" end="80565" title="Thomas Randolph (poet)" label="Thomas Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178730" start="80582" end="80597" title="Jennifer Rankin" label="Jennifer Rankin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978433" start="80614" end="80629" title="Claudia Rankine" label="Claudia Rankine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337955" start="80646" end="80663" title="John Crowe Ransom" label="John Crowe Ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522876" start="80681" end="80695" title="Lennox Raphael" label="Lennox Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610331" start="80712" end="80729" title="Stephen Ratcliffe" label="Stephen Ratcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762531" start="80747" end="80762" title="Angela Rawlings" label="Angela Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817338" start="80779" end="80790" title="Tom Raworth" label="Tom Raworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q460061" start="80807" end="80819" title="Herbert Read" label="Herbert Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762535" start="80836" end="80850" title="Angela Readman" label="Angela Readman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754121" start="80867" end="80879" title="James Reaney" label="James Reaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5543759" start="80896" end="80909" title="George Reavey" label="George Reavey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077769" start="80927" end="80941" title="Peter Redgrove" label="Peter Redgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833780" start="80958" end="80973" title="Michael Redhill" label="Michael Redhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q108193563" start="80990" end="81006" title="Beatrice Redpath" label="Beatrice Redpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727450" start="81023" end="81033" title="Henry Reed (poet)" label="Henry Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q983544" start="81050" end="81062" title="Ishmael Reed" label="Ishmael Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181814" start="81080" end="81091" title="Jeremy Reed (writer)" label="Jeremy Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q65582558" start="81109" end="81127" title="Kerry Reed-Gilbert" label="Kerry Reed-Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379192" start="81144" end="81154" title="Ennis Rees" label="Ennis Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660609" start="81172" end="81195" title="Lizette Woodworth Reese" label="Lizette Woodworth Reese"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263402" start="81213" end="81229" title="Deryn Rees-Jones" label="Deryn Rees-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141932" start="81245" end="81257" title="James Reeves (writer)" label="James Reeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303388" start="81274" end="81284" title="Nell Regan" label="Nell Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708767" start="81302" end="81315" title="Alastair Reid (poet)" label="Alastair Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q523229" start="81332" end="81348" title="Christopher Reid (writer)" label="Christopher Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203533" start="81365" end="81375" title="D. C. Reid" label="D. C. Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681416" start="81392" end="81402" title="Jamie Reid (Canadian poet)" label="Jamie Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832576" start="81419" end="81443" title="Azila Talit Reisenberger" label="Azila Talit Reisenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141970" start="81458" end="81469" title="James Reiss" label="James Reiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286541" start="81487" end="81499" title="Joseph Relph" label="Joseph Relph"/>
<link wikidata="Q15488936" start="81516" end="81530" title="Robert Rendall" label="Robert Rendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q516447" start="81547" end="81562" title="Kenneth Rexroth" label="Kenneth Rexroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087790" start="81580" end="81595" title="Oliver Reynolds" label="Oliver Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065911" start="81612" end="81629" title="Charles Reznikoff" label="Charles Reznikoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488246" start="81647" end="81659" title="Shane Rhodes" label="Shane Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393735" start="81673" end="81684" title="Ernest Rhys" label="Ernest Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727508" start="81703" end="81713" title="Henry Rice (writer)" label="Henry Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q941337" start="81740" end="81749" title="Stan Rice" label="Stan Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q270705" start="81767" end="81780" title="Adrienne Rich" label="Adrienne Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q447268" start="81798" end="81816" title="Dorothy Richardson" label="Dorothy Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783775" start="81833" end="81848" title="John Richardson (poet)" label="John Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q22208205" start="81865" end="81882" title="Robert Richardson (poet)" label="Robert Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337779" start="81899" end="81914" title="Edgell Rickword" label="Edgell Rickword"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363426" start="81931" end="81948" title="Elizabeth Riddell" label="Elizabeth Riddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258772" start="81965" end="81975" title="Lola Ridge" label="Lola Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312332" start="81993" end="82005" title="Laura Riding" label="Laura Riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617459" start="82023" end="82037" title="Elijah Ridings" label="Elijah Ridings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768745" start="82051" end="82062" title="Anne Ridler" label="Anne Ridler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023093" start="82079" end="82091" title="Denise Riley" label="Denise Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q770177" start="82108" end="82128" title="James Whitcomb Riley" label="James Whitcomb Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1311302" start="82146" end="82156" title="John Riley (poet)" label="John Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176603" start="82173" end="82184" title="Peter Riley" label="Peter Riley"/>
<link wikidata="Q460366" start="82201" end="82222" title="Mary Roberts Rinehart" label="Mary Roberts Rinehart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793440" start="82240" end="82255" title="Maurice Riordan" label="Maurice Riordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712189" start="82273" end="82285" title="Alberto Ríos" label="Alberto Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q27881294" start="82316" end="82327" title="E. M. Roach" label="E. M. Roach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077925" start="82360" end="82381" title="Charles G. D. Roberts" label="Charles G. D. Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372941" start="82398" end="82410" title="Emma Roberts (author)" label="Emma Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833912" start="82427" end="82442" title="Michael Roberts (writer)" label="Michael Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338491" start="82459" end="82479" title="Edith Anne Robertson" label="Edith Anne Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6142265" start="82496" end="82511" title="James Robertson (novelist)" label="James Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558368" start="82528" end="82542" title="Lisa Robertson" label="Lisa Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352748" start="82559" end="82574" title="Robin Robertson" label="Robin Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1294394" start="82591" end="82615" title="Edwin Arlington Robinson" label="Edwin Arlington Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522877" start="82633" end="82648" title="Lennox Robinson" label="Lennox Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q532255" start="82666" end="82679" title="Mary Robinson (poet)" label="Mary Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789253" start="82696" end="82709" title="Matt Robinson (poet)" label="Matt Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7360412" start="82726" end="82741" title="Roland Robinson (poet)" label="Roland Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3877840" start="82758" end="82768" title="Ajmer Rode" label="Ajmer Rode"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585746" start="82782" end="82796" title="Gordon Rodgers" label="Gordon Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945918" start="82813" end="82826" title="W. R. Rodgers" label="W. R. Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043564" start="82844" end="82860" title="Carmen Rodríguez" label="Carmen Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303644" start="82879" end="82895" title="Judith Rodriguez" label="Judith Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151763" start="82912" end="82928" title="Theodore Roethke" label="Theodore Roethke"/>
<link wikidata="Q25374484" start="82946" end="82960" title="January Rogers" label="January Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551929" start="82977" end="82989" title="Linda Rogers" label="Linda Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471218" start="83006" end="83019" title="Samuel Rogers" label="Samuel Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q55978894" start="83036" end="83063" title="Isabella Whiteford Rogerson" label="Isabella Whiteford Rogerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791152" start="83103" end="83117" title="Matthew Rohrer" label="Matthew Rohrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18593358" start="83135" end="83145" title="Mary Rolls" label="Mary Rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q15999189" start="83162" end="83180" title="Ethel Rolt Wheeler" label="Ethel Rolt Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239195" start="83197" end="83211" title="David Romtvedt" label="David Romtvedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707701" start="83226" end="83236" title="Dilys Rose" label="Dilys Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176669" start="83253" end="83263" title="Peter Rose (poet)" label="Peter Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299118" start="83280" end="83296" title="Raymond Roseliep" label="Raymond Roseliep"/>
<link wikidata="Q441809" start="83314" end="83331" title="Franklin Rosemont" label="Franklin Rosemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162582" start="83349" end="83366" title="Penelope Rosemont" label="Penelope Rosemont"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673451" start="83384" end="83399" title="Isaac Rosenberg" label="Isaac Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691575" start="83416" end="83430" title="Joe Rosenblatt" label="Joe Rosenblatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q740838" start="83447" end="83465" title="Gabriel Rosenstock" label="Gabriel Rosenstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6474140" start="83483" end="83496" title="Laisha Rosnau" label="Laisha Rosnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707666" start="83513" end="83522" title="Alan Ross" label="Alan Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978227" start="83539" end="83549" title="Bruce Ross" label="Bruce Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627047" start="83563" end="83574" title="Stuart Ross" label="Stuart Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945255" start="83591" end="83604" title="W. W. E. Ross" label="W. W. E. Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q236596" start="83621" end="83639" title="Christina Rossetti" label="Christina Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q186748" start="83656" end="83678" title="Dante Gabriel Rossetti" label="Dante Gabriel Rossetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775056" start="83695" end="83712" title="Jerome Rothenberg" label="Jerome Rothenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q20710923" start="83730" end="83748" title="Nancy-Gay Rotstein" label="Nancy-Gay Rotstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768759" start="83762" end="83772" title="Anne Rouse" label="Anne Rouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176396" start="83792" end="83807" title="David Rowbotham" label="David Rowbotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051267" start="83824" end="83845" title="Elizabeth Singer Rowe" label="Elizabeth Singer Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382306" start="83862" end="83875" title="Nicholas Rowe (writer)" label="Nicholas Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047194" start="83892" end="83901" title="Noel Rowe" label="Noel Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610412" start="83918" end="83930" title="Stephen Rowe (poet)" label="Stephen Rowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593200" start="83947" end="83962" title="Graham Rowlands" label="Graham Rowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q656317" start="83979" end="83995" title="Richard Rowlands" label="Richard Rowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412517" start="84015" end="84030" title="Samuel Rowlands" label="Samuel Rowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27813769" start="84050" end="84066" title="Rosemarie Rowley" label="Rosemarie Rowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q458822" start="84084" end="84098" title="Susanna Rowson" label="Susanna Rowson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648691" start="84118" end="84132" title="Susanna Roxman" label="Susanna Roxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679703" start="84150" end="84161" title="Adam Rudden" label="Adam Rudden"/>
<link wikidata="Q65589126" start="84179" end="84198" title="Ellen Sergeant Rude" label="Ellen Sergeant Rude"/>
<link wikidata="Q735177" start="84216" end="84231" title="Muriel Rukeyser" label="Muriel Rukeyser"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="84249" end="84265" title="James Runcie#Personal life" label="Charlotte Runcie"/>
<link wikidata="Q65589184" start="84282" end="84304" title="Jenny Terrill Ruprecht" label="Jenny Terrill Ruprecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q366070" start="84322" end="84344" title="George William Russell" label="George William Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q708172" start="84364" end="84378" title="Nipsey Russell" label="Nipsey Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q17026756" start="84396" end="84408" title="Brendan Ryan (poet)" label="Brendan Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560139" start="84425" end="84433" title="Gig Ryan" label="Gig Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q276423" start="84450" end="84458" title="Kay Ryan" label="Kay Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834055" start="84476" end="84488" title="Michael Ryan (poet)" label="Michael Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831839" start="84506" end="84516" title="Tracy Ryan (writer)" label="Tracy Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q431174" start="84533" end="84545" title="Thomas Rymer" label="Thomas Rymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q337761" start="84583" end="84600" title="Charles Sackville, 6th Earl of Dorset" label="Charles Sackville"/>
<link wikidata="Q670967" start="84617" end="84633" title="Thomas Sackville, 1st Earl of Dorset" label="Thomas Sackville"/>
<link wikidata="Q235505" start="84650" end="84669" title="Vita Sackville-West" label="Vita Sackville-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264253" start="84686" end="84706" title="Benjamin Alire Sáenz" label="Benjamin Alire Sáenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q18752813" start="84724" end="84743" title="Maria Grace Saffery" label="Maria Grace Saffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477605" start="84760" end="84772" title="Lake Sagaris" label="Lake Sagaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6963341" start="84792" end="84804" title="Nandini Sahu" label="Nandini Sahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791517" start="84822" end="84837" title="Arja Salafranca" label="Arja Salafranca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844000" start="84855" end="84866" title="Trish Salah" label="Trish Salah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16546677" start="84880" end="84892" title="Nina Salaman" label="Nina Salaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924739" start="84909" end="84924" title="Blanaid Salkeld" label="Blanaid Salkeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184340" start="84942" end="84954" title="Philip Salom" label="Philip Salom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256556" start="84971" end="84985" title="John Salusbury (poet)" label="John Salusbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529259" start="85004" end="85020" title="Sir Thomas Salusbury, 2nd Baronet" label="Thomas Salusbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451111" start="85039" end="85052" title="Fiona Sampson" label="Fiona Sampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307926" start="85069" end="85082" title="Sonia Sanchez" label="Sonia Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q193608" start="85100" end="85113" title="Carl Sandburg" label="Carl Sandburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176774" start="85131" end="85143" title="Peter Sanger" label="Peter Sanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066014" start="85160" end="85176" title="Charles Sangster" label="Charles Sangster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766657" start="85193" end="85203" title="Ann Sansom" label="Ann Sansom"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134664" start="85217" end="85229" title="Clive Sansom" label="Clive Sansom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758502" start="85248" end="85259" title="Andrew Sant" label="Andrew Sant"/>
<link wikidata="Q21104280" start="85276" end="85287" title="Robyn Sarah" label="Robyn Sarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q31440654" start="85304" end="85319" title="Jaydeep Sarangi" label="Jaydeep Sarangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280123" start="85340" end="85359" title="Dipti Saravanamuttu" label="Dipti Saravanamuttu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587411" start="85376" end="85386" title="May Sarton" label="May Sarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q363729" start="85404" end="85421" title="Siegfried Sassoon" label="Siegfried Sassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q878523" start="85438" end="85455" title="K. Satchidanandan" label="K. Satchidanandan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52295182" start="85473" end="85488" title="Esther Saunders" label="Esther Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6177315" start="85506" end="85518" title="Jen Saunders" label="Jen Saunders"/>
<link wikidata="Q522436" start="85535" end="85549" title="Richard Savage (poet)" label="Richard Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167420" start="85569" end="85580" title="Jaya Savige" label="Jaya Savige"/>
<link wikidata="Q6531123" start="85597" end="85613" title="Leslie Scalapino" label="Leslie Scalapino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611198" start="85631" end="85655" title="Herman George Scheffauer" label="Herman George Scheffauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6119235" start="85673" end="85686" title="Jacob Scheier" label="Jacob Scheier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540460" start="85703" end="85716" title="Libby Scheier" label="Libby Scheier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881744" start="85736" end="85746" title="Bel Schenk" label="Bel Schenk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258932" start="85763" end="85777" title="Dennis Schmitz" label="Dennis Schmitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563100" start="85795" end="85808" title="Pat Schneider" label="Pat Schneider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028529" start="85826" end="85851" title="Jane Johnston Schoolcraft" label="Jane Johnston Schoolcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755619" start="85869" end="85886" title="Andreas Schroeder" label="Andreas Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184353" start="85903" end="85917" title="Philip Schultz" label="Philip Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5406329" start="85935" end="85949" title="James Schuyler" label="James Schuyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184545" start="85967" end="85983" title="Delmore Schwartz" label="Delmore Schwartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610489" start="86001" end="86015" title="Stephen Scobie" label="Stephen Scobie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16196687" start="86032" end="86048" title="Gregory Scofield" label="Gregory Scofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756183" start="86065" end="86080" title="Alexander Scott (16th-century poet)" label="Alexander Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720040" start="86105" end="86120" title="Alexander Scott (20th-century poet)" label="Alexander Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258937" start="86137" end="86149" title="Dennis Scott (writer)" label="Dennis Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265363" start="86166" end="86187" title="Duncan Campbell Scott" label="Duncan Campbell Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081656" start="86204" end="86215" title="F. R. Scott" label="F. R. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497847" start="86232" end="86254" title="Frederick George Scott" label="Frederick George Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760229" start="86271" end="86285" title="Geoffrey Scott (architectural historian)" label="Geoffrey Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217940" start="86302" end="86315" title="John A. Scott" label="John A. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759876" start="86332" end="86346" title="Margaret Scott (Australian author)" label="Margaret Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q716907" start="86363" end="86379" title="Peter Dale Scott" label="Peter Dale Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817508" start="86396" end="86405" title="Tom Scott (poet)" label="Tom Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="86422" end="86438" title="Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075556" start="86455" end="86473" title="William Bell Scott" label="William Bell Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q378858" start="86490" end="86505" title="Gil Scott-Heron" label="Gil Scott-Heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766665" start="86523" end="86542" title="Ann Scott-Moncrieff" label="Ann Scott-Moncrieff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321969" start="86559" end="86572" title="E. J. Scovell" label="E. J. Scovell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793462" start="86589" end="86603" title="Maurice Scully" label="Maurice Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536814" start="86621" end="86645" title="George Bazeley Scurfield" label="George Bazeley Scurfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176848" start="86662" end="86674" title="Peter Seaton" label="Peter Seaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066050" start="86692" end="86706" title="Sir Charles Sedley, 5th Baronet" label="Charles Sedley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498714" start="86723" end="86739" title="Frederick Seidel" label="Frederick Seidel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439272" start="86757" end="86769" title="Hugh Seidman" label="Hugh Seidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301907" start="86787" end="86803" title="Rebecca Seiferle" label="Rebecca Seiferle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492789" start="86818" end="86833" title="Lasana M. Sekou" label="Lasana M. Sekou"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482433" start="86851" end="86866" title="Francis Sempill" label="Francis Sempill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349683" start="86886" end="86900" title="Robert Sempill the younger" label="Robert Sempill"/>
<link wikidata="Q14020832" start="86925" end="86937" title="Olive Senior" label="Olive Senior"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525643" start="86956" end="86969" title="Sipho Sepamla" label="Sipho Sepamla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726746" start="86987" end="87007" title="Mongane Wally Serote" label="Mongane Wally Serote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038104" start="87025" end="87037" title="Nina Serrano" label="Nina Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392250" start="87055" end="87072" title="Robert W. Service" label="Robert W. Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q379762" start="87091" end="87102" title="Vikram Seth" label="Vikram Seth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5364188" start="87120" end="87134" title="Elkanah Settle" label="Elkanah Settle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131816" start="87151" end="87162" title="Anna Seward" label="Anna Seward"/>
<link wikidata="Q270728" start="87179" end="87190" title="Anne Sexton" label="Anne Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262538" start="87208" end="87222" title="John W. Sexton" label="John W. Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230771" start="87240" end="87255" title="Thomas Shadwell" label="Thomas Shadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4318791" start="87272" end="87285" title="Kathy Shaidle" label="Kathy Shaidle"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="87302" end="87321" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107" start="87338" end="87350" title="Tupac Shakur" label="Tupac Shakur"/>
<link wikidata="Q949156" start="87368" end="87380" title="Otep Shamaya" label="Otep Shamaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349449" start="87398" end="87413" title="Eileen Shanahan" label="Eileen Shanahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q511742" start="87431" end="87445" title="Ntozake Shange" label="Ntozake Shange"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293611" start="87463" end="87476" title="Edward Shanks" label="Edward Shanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948636" start="87493" end="87504" title="Jo Shapcott" label="Jo Shapcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792489" start="87521" end="87536" title="Thomas Shapcott" label="Thomas Shapcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2906282" start="87553" end="87565" title="Karl Shapiro" label="Karl Shapiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834321" start="87583" end="87598" title="Michael Sharkey" label="Michael Sharkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1575288" start="87615" end="87628" title="William Sharp (writer)" label="William Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960761" start="87664" end="87682" title="Brenda Shaughnessy" label="Brenda Shaughnessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6696603" start="87700" end="87709" title="Luci Shaw" label="Luci Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114631" start="87729" end="87740" title="Owen Sheers" label="Owen Sheers"/>
<link wikidata="Q93343" start="87759" end="87779" title="Percy Bysshe Shelley" label="Percy Bysshe Shelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q329141" start="87796" end="87813" title="William Shenstone" label="William Shenstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q13511896" start="87830" end="87842" title="Nan Shepherd" label="Nan Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481574" start="87859" end="87881" title="Francis Joseph Sherman" label="Francis Joseph Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185636" start="87898" end="87912" title="Joseph Sherman" label="Joseph Sherman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16919154" start="87929" end="87951" title="Kate Brownlee Sherwood" label="Kate Brownlee Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q259956" start="87969" end="87982" title="Carol Shields" label="Carol Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q15490516" start="88002" end="88015" title="Trish Shields" label="Trish Shields"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256202" start="88029" end="88043" title="Scarrington" label="Thomas Shipman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349914" start="88060" end="88073" title="James Shirley" label="James Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q114269015" start="88090" end="88110" title="Dora Adele Shoemaker" label="Dora Adele Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q913380" start="88128" end="88143" title="Fredegond Shove" label="Fredegond Shove"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417472" start="88160" end="88172" title="Sandy Shreve" label="Sandy Shreve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162584" start="88186" end="88202" title="Penelope Shuttle" label="Penelope Shuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877386" start="88219" end="88227" title="Beau Sia" label="Beau Sia"/>
<link wikidata="Q469059" start="88245" end="88256" title="Mary Sidney" label="Mary Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="88273" end="88286" title="Philip Sidney" label="Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811351" start="88303" end="88318" title="Melanie Siebert" label="Melanie Siebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5360316" start="88332" end="88342" title="Eli Siegel" label="Eli Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158822" start="88360" end="88373" title="Robert Siegel (author)" label="Robert Siegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271576" start="88391" end="88401" title="Jon Silkin" label="Jon Silkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65665964" start="88418" end="88430" title="Hilda Siller" label="Hilda Siller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364387" start="88448" end="88460" title="Ron Silliman" label="Ron Silliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q361257" start="88478" end="88494" title="Shel Silverstein" label="Shel Silverstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q722555" start="88512" end="88525" title="Charles Simic" label="Charles Simic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584475" start="88543" end="88554" title="Goran Simić (poet)" label="Goran Simić"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960612" start="88574" end="88586" title="Bren Simmers" label="Bren Simmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143182" start="88603" end="88616" title="James Simmons (poet)" label="James Simmons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768800" start="88634" end="88646" title="Anne Simpson" label="Anne Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871997" start="88663" end="88676" title="Louis Simpson" label="Louis Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6789334" start="88696" end="88708" title="Matt Simpson (poet)" label="Matt Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273444" start="88725" end="88738" title="R. A. Simpson" label="R. A. Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889819" start="88755" end="88774" title="Bennie Lee Sinclair" label="Bennie Lee Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5980623" start="88792" end="88805" title="Iain Sinclair" label="Iain Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131497" start="88824" end="88836" title="May Sinclair" label="May Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634288" start="88853" end="88865" title="Sue Sinclair" label="Sue Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804286" start="88879" end="88891" title="Tim Sinclair" label="Tim Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5000089" start="88908" end="88920" title="Burns Singer" label="Burns Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763629" start="88937" end="88951" title="Marilyn Singer" label="Marilyn Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q387218" start="88969" end="88984" title="Sarah Singleton" label="Sarah Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16244581" start="89001" end="89013" title="George Sipos" label="George Sipos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176965" start="89027" end="89037" title="Peter Sirr" label="Peter Sirr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521230" start="89055" end="89066" title="Lemn Sissay" label="Lemn Sissay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006505" start="89083" end="89095" title="C. H. Sisson" label="C. H. Sisson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4790123" start="89112" end="89121" title="Ari Sitas" label="Ari Sitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q259921" start="89139" end="89152" title="Edith Sitwell" label="Edith Sitwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382720" start="89169" end="89183" title="Osbert Sitwell" label="Osbert Sitwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746927" start="89200" end="89219" title="Sacheverell Sitwell" label="Sacheverell Sitwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561913" start="89249" end="89264" title="Sonja Skarstedt" label="Sonja Skarstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q638589" start="89281" end="89293" title="John Skelton (poet)" label="John Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939282" start="89310" end="89323" title="Robin Skelton" label="Robin Skelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55583743" start="89342" end="89362" title="Douglas Reid Skinner" label="Douglas Reid Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948128" start="89380" end="89392" title="Myra Sklarew" label="Myra Sklarew"/>
<link wikidata="Q5335412" start="89410" end="89418" title="Ed Skoog" label="Ed Skoog"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074744" start="89436" end="89449" title="Zoë Skoulding" label="Zoë Skoulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180367" start="89466" end="89482" title="Peter Skrzynecki" label="Peter Skrzynecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q788563" start="89499" end="89514" title="Kenneth Slessor" label="Kenneth Slessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218784" start="89531" end="89544" title="Daniel Sloate" label="Daniel Sloate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345346" start="89561" end="89572" title="Edward Slow" label="Edward Slow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2198220" start="89589" end="89599" title="Adam Small (writer)" label="Adam Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045464" start="89617" end="89630" title="Carolyn Smart" label="Carolyn Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617795" start="89647" end="89664" title="Christopher Smart" label="Christopher Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051272" start="89681" end="89696" title="Elizabeth Smart (Canadian author)" label="Elizabeth Smart"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647944" start="89713" end="89727" title="A. J. M. Smith" label="A. J. M. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610799" start="89744" end="89759" title="Alexander Smith (poet)" label="Alexander Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978301" start="89776" end="89787" title="Bruce Smith (poet)" label="Bruce Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q442902" start="89805" end="89827" title="Charlotte Turner Smith" label="Charlotte Turner Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q20675712" start="89844" end="89864" title="Clara Kathleen Smith" label="Clara Kathleen Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q555298" start="89881" end="89899" title="Clark Ashton Smith" label="Clark Ashton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301286" start="89917" end="89937" title="Douglas Burnet Smith" label="Douglas Burnet Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3396459" start="89954" end="89973" title="Iain Crichton Smith" label="Iain Crichton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258362" start="89990" end="90000" title="John Smith (Canadian poet)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6740839" start="90017" end="90030" title="Malachi Smith (poet)" label="Malachi Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q536480" start="90044" end="90054" title="Marc Smith (American poet)" label="Marc Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759905" start="90072" end="90086" title="Margaret Smith (poet)" label="Margaret Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834472" start="90104" end="90117" title="Michael Smith (poet)" label="Michael Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835042" start="90135" end="90151" title="Michael V. Smith" label="Michael V. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q557" start="90165" end="90176" title="Patti Smith" label="Patti Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356373" start="90194" end="90203" title="Rod Smith (poet)" label="Rod Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7364401" start="90221" end="90230" title="Ron Smith (Canadian author)" label="Ron Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615213" start="90247" end="90264" title="Steven Ross Smith" label="Steven Ross Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q468344" start="90281" end="90293" title="Stevie Smith" label="Stevie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659945" start="90310" end="90330" title="Sydney Goodsir Smith" label="Sydney Goodsir Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831770" start="90347" end="90361" title="Tracy K. Smith" label="Tracy K. Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937776" start="90379" end="90391" title="Vivian Smith (poet)" label="Vivian Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355736" start="90408" end="90425" title="William Jay Smith" label="William Jay Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q356283" start="90443" end="90458" title="Tobias Smollett" label="Tobias Smollett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334959" start="90475" end="90490" title="W. D. Snodgrass" label="W. D. Snodgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q315963" start="90508" end="90519" title="Gary Snyder" label="Gary Snyder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370046" start="90537" end="90548" title="Karen Solie" label="Karen Solie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018814" start="90565" end="90577" title="David Solway" label="David Solway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4428668" start="90594" end="90611" title="William Somervile" label="William Somervile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053494" start="90628" end="90638" title="Cathy Song" label="Cathy Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727043" start="90656" end="90670" title="Madeline Sonik" label="Madeline Sonik"/>
<link wikidata="Q19667701" start="90687" end="90702" title="Edward Sorenson" label="Edward Sorenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066097" start="90719" end="90733" title="Charles Sorley" label="Charles Sorley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5525966" start="90750" end="90759" title="Gary Soto" label="Gary Soto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045419" start="90777" end="90797" title="Carolyn Marie Souaid" label="Carolyn Marie Souaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q304129" start="90814" end="90829" title="Raymond Souster" label="Raymond Souster"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018623" start="90846" end="90860" title="William Soutar" label="William Soutar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979755" start="90877" end="90898" title="Caroline Anne Southey" label="Caroline Anne Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q216838" start="90915" end="90929" title="Robert Southey" label="Robert Southey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380904" start="90946" end="90962" title="Robert Southwell (Jesuit)" label="Robert Southwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q41488" start="90979" end="90991" title="Wole Soyinka" label="Wole Soyinka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399981" start="91009" end="91022" title="Esta Spalding" label="Esta Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949530" start="91039" end="91053" title="Heather Spears" label="Heather Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707810" start="91073" end="91084" title="Alan Spence" label="Alan Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q325589" start="91098" end="91110" title="Lewis Spence" label="Lewis Spence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121378" start="91127" end="91139" title="Anne Spencer" label="Anne Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893664" start="91157" end="91172" title="Bernard Spencer" label="Bernard Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789278" start="91189" end="91210" title="Thomas Edward Spencer" label="Thomas Edward Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q448764" start="91227" end="91242" title="Stephen Spender" label="Stephen Spender"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352055" start="91259" end="91273" title="Edmund Spenser" label="Edmund Spenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547340" start="91290" end="91304" title="Leonora Speyer" label="Leonora Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563197" start="91322" end="91357" title="Harriet Elizabeth Prescott Spofford" label="Harriet Elizabeth Prescott Spofford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349823" start="91375" end="91396" title="Eintou Pearl Springer" label="Eintou Pearl Springer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916375" start="91413" end="91426" title="Birk Sproxton" label="Birk Sproxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699642" start="91443" end="91455" title="J. C. Squire" label="J. C. Squire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534909" start="91472" end="91488" title="Geoffrey Squires" label="Geoffrey Squires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580632" start="91519" end="91535" title="William Stafford (poet)" label="William Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647732" start="91553" end="91568" title="A. E. Stallings" label="A. E. Stallings"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945754" start="91586" end="91601" title="Jon Stallworthy" label="Jon Stallworthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766683" start="91618" end="91630" title="Ann Stanford" label="Ann Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489742" start="91648" end="91662" title="Frank Stanford" label="Frank Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544780" start="91680" end="91694" title="George Stanley (poet)" label="George Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544798" start="91714" end="91729" title="George Starbuck" label="George Starbuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043713" start="91747" end="91763" title="Carmine Starnino" label="Carmine Starnino"/>
<link wikidata="Q15453714" start="91780" end="91796" title="Nicolette Stasko" label="Nicolette Stasko"/>
<link wikidata="Q559631" start="91813" end="91824" title="C. K. Stead" label="C. K. Stead"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645861" start="91842" end="91854" title="Peter Steele (poet)" label="Peter Steele"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329236" start="91871" end="91885" title="Richard Steere (author)" label="Richard Steere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258973" start="91903" end="91916" title="John Steffler" label="John Steffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="91933" end="91947" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Gertrude Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q562894" start="91965" end="91980" title="Mattie Stepanek" label="Mattie Stepanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982970" start="91998" end="92010" title="Ian Stephens (poet)" label="Ian Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q508101" start="92027" end="92041" title="James Stephens (author)" label="James Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130402" start="92059" end="92081" title="James Brunton Stephens" label="James Brunton Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q518182" start="92098" end="92112" title="George Stepney" label="George Stepney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259067" start="92129" end="92142" title="John Sterling (author)" label="John Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5549604" start="92159" end="92171" title="Gerald Stern" label="Gerald Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322820" start="92189" end="92206" title="Ricardo Sternberg" label="Ricardo Sternberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006582" start="92226" end="92239" title="C. J. Stevens" label="C. J. Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q166835" start="92257" end="92272" title="Wallace Stevens" label="Wallace Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329251" start="92290" end="92307" title="Richard Stevenson (poet)" label="Richard Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512" start="92324" end="92346" title="Robert Louis Stevenson" label="Robert Louis Stevenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q64414526" start="92363" end="92380" title="Margo Taft Stever" label="Margo Taft Stever"/>
<link wikidata="Q454174" start="92395" end="92409" title="Amanda Stewart" label="Amanda Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302000" start="92426" end="92441" title="Douglas Stewart (poet)" label="Douglas Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5662469" start="92458" end="92472" title="Harold Stewart" label="Harold Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7488964" start="92489" end="92504" title="Shannon Stewart (poet)" label="Shannon Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945608" start="92518" end="92536" title="W. Gregory Stewart" label="W. Gregory Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541139" start="92553" end="92570" title="Trumbull Stickney" label="Trumbull Stickney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259204" start="92588" end="92599" title="John Stiles" label="John Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143675" start="92615" end="92626" title="James Still (poet)" label="James Still"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768823" start="92644" end="92654" title="Anne Stone (writer)" label="Anne Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296374" start="92668" end="92682" title="Donna J. Stone" label="Donna J. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655987" start="92700" end="92710" title="Ruth Stone" label="Ruth Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204408" start="92728" end="92752" title="Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet" label="Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345468" start="92770" end="92783" title="Edward Storer" label="Edward Storer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130734" start="92800" end="92813" title="Randolph Stow" label="Randolph Stow"/>
<link wikidata="Q928775" start="92830" end="92841" title="Mark Strand" label="Mark Strand"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460933" start="92859" end="92875" title="Jennifer Strauss" label="Jennifer Strauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q7441458" start="92892" end="92903" title="Sean Street" label="Sean Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124282" start="92920" end="92936" title="Agnes Strickland" label="Agnes Strickland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4682004" start="92953" end="92966" title="Adelle Stripe" label="Adelle Stripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541139" start="92983" end="93000" title="Trumbull Stickney" label="Trumbull Stickney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296374" start="93018" end="93032" title="Donna J. Stone" label="Donna J. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912950" start="93050" end="93074" title="Billy Marshall Stoneking" label="Billy Marshall Stoneking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204408" start="93091" end="93115" title="Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet" label="Lisa Gluskin Stonestreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345468" start="93133" end="93146" title="Edward Storer" label="Edward Storer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22957904" start="93163" end="93176" title="Eithne Strong" label="Eithne Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6287230" start="93194" end="93207" title="Joseph Stroud" label="Joseph Stroud"/>
<link wikidata="Q15525097" start="93225" end="93240" title="Betsy Struthers" label="Betsy Struthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259489" start="93257" end="93271" title="John Struthers (poet)" label="John Struthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186887" start="93288" end="93300" title="Jesse Stuart" label="Jesse Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q18642223" start="93318" end="93329" title="Abhi Subedi" label="Abhi Subedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339246" start="93343" end="93356" title="John Suckling (poet)" label="John Suckling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6308546" start="93373" end="93382" title="Julie Suk" label="Julie Suk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758668" start="93400" end="93415" title="Andrew Suknaski" label="Andrew Suknaski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707865" start="93432" end="93445" title="Alan Sullivan" label="Alan Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4734706" start="93462" end="93487" title="Aloysius Michael Sullivan" label="Aloysius Michael Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368437" start="93505" end="93522" title="Rosemary Sullivan" label="Rosemary Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6792261" start="93539" end="93550" title="Maud Sulter" label="Maud Sulter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890322" start="93567" end="93578" title="Moez Surani" label="Moez Surani"/>
<link wikidata="Q594565" start="93595" end="93609" title="Kamala Surayya" label="Kamala Surayya"/>
<link wikidata="Q274741" start="93627" end="93642" title="Efua Sutherland" label="Efua Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6259699" start="93660" end="93675" title="John Sutherland (Canadian writer)" label="John Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350180" start="93692" end="93706" title="Robert Swanson (inventor)" label="Robert Swanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350183" start="93723" end="93735" title="Robert Sward" label="Robert Sward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4445640" start="93755" end="93767" title="George Swede" label="George Swede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1167588" start="93784" end="93799" title="Matthew Sweeney" label="Matthew Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982413" start="93817" end="93829" title="Cole Swensen" label="Cole Swensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6370066" start="93847" end="93860" title="Karen Swenson" label="Karen Swenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026443" start="93878" end="93889" title="May Swenson" label="May Swenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41166" start="93907" end="93921" title="Jonathan Swift" label="Jonathan Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q15521413" start="93941" end="93951" title="Todd Swift" label="Todd Swift"/>
<link wikidata="Q315511" start="93970" end="93996" title="Algernon Charles Swinburne" label="Algernon Charles Swinburne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378822" start="94013" end="94029" title="Randall Swingler" label="Randall Swingler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11137999" start="94046" end="94068" title="Ieuan ap Hywel Swrdwal" label="Ieuan ap Hywel Swrdwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934617" start="94093" end="94104" title="Bobbi Sykes" label="Bobbi Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14395605" start="94121" end="94137" title="Joshua Sylvester" label="Joshua Sylvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q711666" start="94154" end="94167" title="Arthur Symons" label="Arthur Symons"/>
<link wikidata="Q213447" start="94184" end="94205" title="John Millington Synge" label="John Millington Synge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800412" start="94223" end="94233" title="Arthur Sze" label="Arthur Sze"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545017" start="94251" end="94265" title="George Szirtes" label="George Szirtes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768834" start="94282" end="94298" title="Anne Szumigalski" label="Anne Szumigalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349461" start="94324" end="94337" title="Eileen Tabios" label="Eileen Tabios"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514808" start="94355" end="94367" title="Proma Tagore" label="Proma Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="94381" end="94400" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6761608" start="94418" end="94434" title="Maria Takolander" label="Maria Takolander"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081700" start="94451" end="94469" title="Francis W. Tancred" label="Francis W. Tancred"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451255" start="94486" end="94502" title="Robert Tannahill" label="Robert Tannahill"/>
<link wikidata="Q234324" start="94519" end="94535" title="Dorothea Tanning" label="Dorothea Tanning"/>
<link wikidata="Q975706" start="94553" end="94563" title="Allen Tate" label="Allen Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q531155" start="94581" end="94591" title="James Tate (writer)" label="James Tate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372970" start="94609" end="94620" title="Emma Tatham" label="Emma Tatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758695" start="94637" end="94650" title="Andrew Taylor (poet)" label="Andrew Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766705" start="94667" end="94677" title="Ann Taylor (poet)" label="Ann Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978352" start="94694" end="94706" title="Bruce Taylor (poet)" label="Bruce Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293841" start="94723" end="94736" title="Edward Taylor" label="Edward Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372392" start="94756" end="94768" title="Emily Taylor" label="Emily Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16210759" start="94785" end="94799" title="Heather Taylor" label="Heather Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607302" start="94813" end="94825" title="Henry Taylor (dramatist)" label="Henry Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11682441" start="94842" end="94857" title="Henry S. Taylor" label="Henry S. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259798" start="94875" end="94886" title="Jane Taylor (poet)" label="Jane Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279137" start="94903" end="94923" title="Rachel Annand Taylor" label="Rachel Annand Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383235" start="94940" end="94951" title="Ruth Taylor (poet)" label="Ruth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q276013" start="94968" end="94981" title="Sara Teasdale" label="Sara Teasdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864831" start="94999" end="95009" title="Barry Tebb" label="Barry Tebb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451121" start="95026" end="95041" title="Fiona Templeton" label="Fiona Templeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580738" start="95060" end="95075" title="William Tennant (poet)" label="William Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="95092" end="95113" title="Alfred, Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred, Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149915" start="95130" end="95148" title="Frederick Tennyson" label="Frederick Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260452" start="95165" end="95178" title="John Terpstra" label="John Terpstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353305" start="95192" end="95208" title="Elaine Terranova" label="Elaine Terranova"/>
<link wikidata="Q13681687" start="95226" end="95244" title="A. S. J. Tessimond" label="A. S. J. Tessimond"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381321" start="95261" end="95271" title="Lucy Terry" label="Lucy Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q17318993" start="95292" end="95315" title="Souvankham Thammavongsa" label="Souvankham Thammavongsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3664258" start="95332" end="95345" title="Celia Thaxter" label="Celia Thaxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q288369" start="95363" end="95376" title="Ernest Thayer" label="Ernest Thayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q519393" start="95394" end="95407" title="John Thelwall" label="John Thelwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7490225" start="95424" end="95437" title="Sharon Thesen" label="Sharon Thesen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108703" start="95454" end="95466" title="Colin Thiele" label="Colin Thiele"/>
<link wikidata="Q30106173" start="95483" end="95497" title="Kai Cheng Thom" label="Kai Cheng Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019280" start="95511" end="95523" title="William Thom (poet)" label="William Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976986" start="95540" end="95557" title="Thomas the Rhymer" label="Thomas the Rhymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17021872" start="95600" end="95615" title="Thomas of Hales" label="Thomas of Hales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969995" start="95630" end="95642" title="D. M. Thomas" label="D. M. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q191023" start="95659" end="95671" title="Dylan Thomas" label="Dylan Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293865" start="95690" end="95703" title="Edward Thomas (poet)" label="Edward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363613" start="95720" end="95736" title="Elizabeth Thomas (poet, born 1675)" label="Elizabeth Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680845" start="95753" end="95767" title="Lorenzo Thomas (poet)" label="Lorenzo Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q725745" start="95785" end="95797" title="R. S. Thomas" label="R. S. Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019287" start="95814" end="95828" title="William Thomas (Islwyn)" label="William Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q367745" start="95845" end="95861" title="Francis Thompson" label="Francis Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260671" start="95878" end="95891" title="John Thompson (Canadian poet)" label="John Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254646" start="95910" end="95930" title="John Reuben Thompson" label="John Reuben Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345913" start="95948" end="95970" title="Edward William Thomson (writer)" label="Edward William Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q555029" start="95987" end="96000" title="James Thomson (poet, born 1700)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q984402" start="96017" end="96030" title="James Thomson (poet, born 1834)" label="James Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q131149" start="96067" end="96086" title="Henry David Thoreau" label="Henry David Thoreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804389" start="96104" end="96114" title="Tim Thorne" label="Tim Thorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q19519845" start="96131" end="96147" title="Russell Thornton (writer)" label="Russell Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670145" start="96161" end="96176" title="Joseph Thurston (poet)" label="Joseph Thurston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773585" start="96193" end="96208" title="Anthony Thwaite" label="Anthony Thwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929586" start="96225" end="96241" title="Michael Thwaites" label="Michael Thwaites"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623314" start="96258" end="96276" title="Chidiock Tichborne" label="Chidiock Tichborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427631" start="96293" end="96307" title="Thomas Tickell" label="Thomas Tickell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791324" start="96324" end="96339" title="Matthew Tierney (poet)" label="Matthew Tierney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423200" start="96356" end="96366" title="Mary Tighe" label="Mary Tighe"/>
<link wikidata="Q64701771" start="96384" end="96399" title="Lydia H. Tilton" label="Lydia H. Tilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329494" start="96417" end="96432" title="Richard Tipping" label="Richard Tipping"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185634" start="96449" end="96463" title="José Tlatelpas" label="José Tlatelpas"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949334" start="96483" end="96494" title="Nick Toczek" label="Nick Toczek"/>
<link wikidata="Q117345" start="96511" end="96530" title="Barbara Euphan Todd" label="Barbara Euphan Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383419" start="96547" end="96559" title="Ruthven Todd" label="Ruthven Todd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463429" start="96576" end="96595" title="Mohamud Siad Togane" label="Mohamud Siad Togane"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="96615" end="96631" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q16206097" start="96648" end="96662" title="Francis Tolson" label="Francis Tolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854319" start="96679" end="96695" title="Melvin B. Tolson" label="Melvin B. Tolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666606" start="96713" end="96730" title="Charles Tomlinson" label="Charles Tomlinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277467" start="96747" end="96758" title="Jean Toomer" label="Jean Toomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082972" start="96776" end="96791" title="Charles Tompson" label="Charles Tompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762573" start="96808" end="96822" title="Angela Topping" label="Angela Topping"/>
<link wikidata="Q6668834" start="96839" end="96859" title="Lola Lemire Tostevin" label="Lola Lemire Tostevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148705" start="96876" end="96890" title="Cyril Tourneur" label="Cyril Tourneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q56516023" start="96907" end="96919" title="Ann Townsend" label="Ann Townsend"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044035" start="96937" end="96952" title="Thomas Traherne" label="Thomas Traherne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261135" start="96974" end="96986" title="John Tranter" label="John Tranter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363640" start="97003" end="97022" title="Elizabeth Treadwell" label="Elizabeth Treadwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751345" start="97040" end="97055" title="Mark Tredinnick" label="Mark Tredinnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320306" start="97072" end="97085" title="Rhea Tregebov" label="Rhea Tregebov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7298698" start="97102" end="97121" title="Raymond D. Tremblay" label="Raymond D. Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3100343" start="97135" end="97157" title="Roland Michel Tremblay" label="Roland Michel Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6968508" start="97176" end="97193" title="Natasha Trethewey" label="Natasha Trethewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q63658348" start="97211" end="97224" title="Tony Trigilio" label="Tony Trigilio"/>
<link wikidata="Q950762" start="97242" end="97256" title="Calvin Trillin" label="Calvin Trillin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240505" start="97274" end="97288" title="David Trinidad" label="David Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261280" start="97306" end="97316" title="John Tripp (poet)" label="John Tripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927862" start="97335" end="97348" title="Quincy Troupe" label="Quincy Troupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177391" start="97366" end="97378" title="Peter Trower" label="Peter Trower"/>
<link wikidata="Q15496975" start="97395" end="97408" title="Mark Truscott" label="Mark Truscott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277679" start="97428" end="97446" title="Dimitris Tsaloumas" label="Dimitris Tsaloumas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983549" start="97463" end="97485" title="Charlotte Maria Tucker" label="Charlotte Maria Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q22815271" start="97511" end="97543" title="Eliza Dorothea Cobbe, Lady Tuite" label="Eliza Dorothea Cobbe, Lady Tuite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545355" start="97564" end="97582" title="George Turberville" label="George Turberville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327632" start="97611" end="97634" title="Richard Marggraf Turley" label="Richard Marggraf Turley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516589" start="97651" end="97664" title="Gael Turnbull" label="Gael Turnbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q778372" start="97681" end="97704" title="Charles Tennyson Turner" label="Charles Tennyson Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307640" start="97721" end="97734" title="Julian Turner" label="Julian Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402018" start="97751" end="97767" title="Walter J. Turner" label="Walter J. Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427809" start="97786" end="97799" title="Thomas Tusser" label="Thomas Tusser"/>
<link wikidata="Q64514555" start="97816" end="97832" title="Emma Rood Tuttle" label="Emma Rood Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q122334" start="97850" end="97862" title="Hone Tuwhare" label="Hone Tuwhare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933288" start="97880" end="97895" title="Violet Tweedale" label="Violet Tweedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087206" start="97914" end="97928" title="Chase Twichell" label="Chase Twichell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376239" start="97946" end="97961" title="Katharine Tynan" label="Katharine Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261515" start="97981" end="97993" title="John Tyndall (poet)" label="John Tyndall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218721" start="98010" end="98029" title="Daniel Scott Tysdal" label="Daniel Scott Tysdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499519" start="98053" end="98066" title="Laura Ulewicz" label="Laura Ulewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q15433384" start="98084" end="98096" title="Jeff Unaegbu" label="Jeff Unaegbu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18911176" start="98114" end="98135" title="Jean Starr Untermeyer" label="Jean Starr Untermeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1872015" start="98153" end="98169" title="Louis Untermeyer" label="Louis Untermeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q105756" start="98187" end="98198" title="John Updike" label="John Updike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245567" start="98216" end="98230" title="Priscila Uppal" label="Priscila Uppal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731928" start="98247" end="98259" title="Allen Upward" label="Allen Upward"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205508" start="98276" end="98284" title="Joan Ure" label="Joan Ure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240559" start="98324" end="98332" title="David UU" label="David UU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749426" start="98366" end="98378" title="Amy Uyematsu" label="Amy Uyematsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948838" start="98403" end="98417" title="Jean Valentine" label="Jean Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q24844391" start="98435" end="98451" title="Valentine Vallis" label="Valentine Vallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169381" start="98468" end="98486" title="Cor van den Heuvel" label="Cor van den Heuvel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897736" start="98504" end="98517" title="Mona Van Duyn" label="Mona Van Duyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241240" start="98535" end="98546" title="Lin Van Hek" label="Lin Van Hek"/>
<link wikidata="Q47135804" start="98563" end="98578" title="Peter van Toorn" label="Peter van Toorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113495" start="98595" end="98614" title="Christopher van Wyk" label="Christopher van Wyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q545363" start="98632" end="98645" title="Henry Vaughan" label="Henry Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273835" start="98662" end="98675" title="R. M. Vaughan" label="R. M. Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794671" start="98692" end="98732" title="Thomas Vaux, 2nd Baron Vaux of Harrowden" label="Thomas Vaux, 2nd Baron Vaux of Harrowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7307031" start="98749" end="98765" title="Reetika Vazirani" label="Reetika Vazirani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3162011" start="98783" end="98800" title="Janine Pommy Vega" label="Janine Pommy Vega"/>
<link wikidata="Q374210" start="98818" end="98845" title="Edward de Vere, 17th Earl of Oxford" label="Edward Vere, Earl of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703331" start="98862" end="98875" title="Helen Vendler" label="Helen Vendler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311013" start="98893" end="98909" title="Jumoke Verissimo" label="Jumoke Verissimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154156" start="98927" end="98942" title="Paul Vermeersch" label="Paul Vermeersch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211133" start="98959" end="98977" title="Katherena Vermette" label="Katherena Vermette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2797629" start="98994" end="99004" title="Jones Very" label="Jones Very"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093781" start="99022" end="99036" title="Vicki Viidikas" label="Vicki Viidikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q559567" start="99053" end="99066" title="Peter Viereck" label="Peter Viereck"/>
<link wikidata="Q6461426" start="99084" end="99101" title="José García Villa" label="José García Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7129292" start="99119" end="99139" title="Pamelia Sarah Vining" label="Pamelia Sarah Vining"/>
<link wikidata="Q23899002" start="99156" end="99169" title="Vivian Virtue" label="Vivian Virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5524389" start="99188" end="99206" title="Garth Von Buchholz" label="Garth Von Buchholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q23688950" start="99220" end="99233" title="Brian Vrepont" label="Brian Vrepont"/>
<link wikidata="Q719558" start="99250" end="99265" title="Prvoslav Vujcic" label="Prvoslav Vujcic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14949648" start="99320" end="99337" title="Miriam Waddington" label="Miriam Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106836" start="99354" end="99366" title="Michael Wade (Canadian actor)" label="Michael Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509396" start="99383" end="99394" title="Sidney Wade" label="Sidney Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031167" start="99412" end="99420" title="Fred Wah" label="Fred Wah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343804" start="99437" end="99446" title="John Wain" label="John Wain"/>
<link wikidata="Q553124" start="99463" end="99474" title="A. E. Waite" label="A. E. Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q29913214" start="99491" end="99506" title="Nayyirah Waheed" label="Nayyirah Waheed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209000" start="99521" end="99534" title="Diane Wakoski" label="Diane Wakoski"/>
<link wikidata="Q132701" start="99552" end="99565" title="Derek Walcott" label="Derek Walcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851328" start="99583" end="99595" title="Anne Waldman" label="Anne Waldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545811" start="99613" end="99627" title="George Waldron" label="George Waldron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385175" start="99653" end="99666" title="Keith Waldrop" label="Keith Waldrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q13563120" start="99684" end="99700" title="Rosmarie Waldrop" label="Rosmarie Waldrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q711869" start="99718" end="99730" title="Arthur Waley" label="Arthur Waley"/>
<link wikidata="Q215868" start="99747" end="99759" title="Alice Walker" label="Alice Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236772" start="99777" end="99792" title="Margaret Walker" label="Margaret Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185653" start="99810" end="99820" title="Rob Walker (poet)" label="Rob Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974121" start="99837" end="99852" title="Bronwen Wallace" label="Bronwen Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108400" start="99869" end="99889" title="Chris Wallace-Crabbe" label="Chris Wallace-Crabbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033351" start="99906" end="99919" title="Edmund Waller" label="Edmund Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817976" start="99936" end="99948" title="Tom Walmsley" label="Tom Walmsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693129" start="99965" end="99976" title="Agnes Walsh" label="Agnes Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q338265" start="99993" end="100008" title="Catherine Walsh (poet)" label="Catherine Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q64485384" start="100026" end="100046" title="Minnie Gow Walsworth" label="Minnie Gow Walsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240813" start="100064" end="100083" title="David Waltner-Toews" label="David Waltner-Toews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764432" start="100100" end="100112" title="Ania Walwicz" label="Ania Walwicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161955" start="100129" end="100141" title="Connie Wanek" label="Connie Wanek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16104792" start="100159" end="100175" title="John Powell Ward" label="John Powell Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q552894" start="100194" end="100202" title="Ned Ward" label="Ned Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7422882" start="100219" end="100231" title="Sarah Wardle" label="Sarah Wardle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767193" start="100248" end="100268" title="Anna Laetitia Waring" label="Anna Laetitia Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372411" start="100287" end="100297" title="Emily Warn" label="Emily Warn"/>
<link wikidata="Q462270" start="100312" end="100334" title="Sylvia Townsend Warner" label="Sylvia Townsend Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191398" start="100351" end="100365" title="Crystal Warren" label="Crystal Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263085" start="100380" end="100412" title="John Warren, 3rd Baron de Tabley" label="John Warren, 3rd Baron de Tabley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15334852" start="100429" end="100443" title="Meralda Warren" label="Meralda Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q312720" start="100461" end="100479" title="Robert Penn Warren" label="Robert Penn Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971218" start="100497" end="100510" title="Thomas Warton" label="Thomas Warton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705123" start="100527" end="100539" title="Terry Watada" label="Terry Watada"/>
<link wikidata="Q325437" start="100556" end="100570" title="Vernon Watkins" label="Vernon Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546073" start="100587" end="100600" title="George Watsky" label="George Watsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367306" start="100618" end="100642" title="Rosamund Marriott Watson" label="Rosamund Marriott Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412859" start="100677" end="100696" title="Samuel Wagan Watson" label="Samuel Wagan Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644065" start="100713" end="100727" title="Stephen Watson (poet)" label="Stephen Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q345716" start="100745" end="100758" title="Thomas Watson (poet)" label="Thomas Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020076" start="100775" end="100789" title="William Watson (poet)" label="William Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727209" start="100806" end="100817" title="Alison Watt (writer)" label="Alison Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863448" start="100834" end="100848" title="Barrett Watten" label="Barrett Watten"/>
<link wikidata="Q537034" start="100866" end="100877" title="Isaac Watts" label="Isaac Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q47488467" start="100894" end="100907" title="Rebecca Watts" label="Rebecca Watts"/>
<link wikidata="Q330323" start="100924" end="100945" title="Theodore Watts-Dunton" label="Theodore Watts-Dunton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818006" start="100962" end="100972" title="Tom Wayman" label="Tom Wayman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708007" start="100989" end="101000" title="Alan Wearne" label="Alan Wearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482719" start="101017" end="101029" title="Francis Webb (poet)" label="Francis Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127737" start="101046" end="101056" title="Harri Webb" label="Harri Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188637" start="101073" end="101085" title="Phyllis Webb" label="Phyllis Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q225904" start="101102" end="101114" title="John Webster" label="John Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780383" start="101139" end="101159" title="Mary Morison Webster" label="Mary Morison Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379123" start="101177" end="101193" title="James Wedderburn (poet)" label="James Wedderburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263348" start="101213" end="101228" title="John Wedderburn (poet)" label="John Wedderburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350924" start="101248" end="101265" title="Robert Wedderburn (poet)" label="Robert Wedderburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7301963" start="101290" end="101301" title="Rebecca Wee" label="Rebecca Wee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546123" start="101316" end="101331" title="George Weideman" label="George Weideman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6263375" start="101349" end="101359" title="John Weier" label="John Weier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648983" start="101376" end="101389" title="Hannah Weiner" label="Hannah Weiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436349" start="101407" end="101426" title="Robert Stanley Weir" label="Robert Stanley Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462533" start="101443" end="101458" title="Marjorie Welish" label="Marjorie Welish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063906" start="101476" end="101491" title="Zachariah Wells" label="Zachariah Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q7933035" start="101508" end="101522" title="Viola S. Wendt" label="Viola S. Wendt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766358" start="101540" end="101563" title="Marjory Heath Wentworth" label="Marjory Heath Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q963153" start="101581" end="101598" title="William Wentworth" label="William Wentworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225230" start="101615" end="101630" title="Darren Wershler" label="Darren Wershler"/>
<link wikidata="Q349070" start="101670" end="101684" title="Charles Wesley" label="Charles Wesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q14945471" start="101701" end="101713" title="Gilbert West" label="Gilbert West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161903" start="101730" end="101739" title="Jane West (novelist)" label="Jane West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240997" start="101756" end="101768" title="David Wevill" label="David Wevill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272795" start="101801" end="101814" title="Philip Whalen" label="Philip Whalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242719" start="101832" end="101846" title="Dawud Wharnsby" label="Dawud Wharnsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768883" start="101863" end="101875" title="Anne Wharton" label="Anne Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585986" start="101892" end="101906" title="Gordon Wharton" label="Gordon Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5733241" start="101923" end="101935" title="Herb Wharton" label="Herb Wharton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6780950" start="101952" end="101965" title="Mary Whateley" label="Mary Whateley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526504" start="101982" end="101996" title="Anne Wheathill" label="Anne Wheathill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241006" start="102012" end="102026" title="David Wheatley (poet)" label="David Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q257911" start="102046" end="102062" title="Phillis Wheatley" label="Phillis Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912509" start="102080" end="102097" title="Billy Edd Wheeler" label="Billy Edd Wheeler"/>
<link wikidata="Q361617" start="102115" end="102126" title="E. B. White" label="E. B. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q5724396" start="102144" end="102161" title="Henry Kirke White" label="Henry Kirke White"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137677" start="102178" end="102192" title="James L. White (poet)" label="James L. White"/>
<link wikidata="Q348099" start="102210" end="102223" title="Kenneth White" label="Kenneth White"/>
<link wikidata="Q64261849" start="102240" end="102260" title="Laura Rosamond White" label="Laura Rosamond White"/>
<link wikidata="Q52370600" start="102278" end="102294" title="Joshua Whitehead" label="Joshua Whitehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4978455" start="102308" end="102322" title="Bruce Whiteman" label="Bruce Whiteman"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="102339" end="102351" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078113" start="102369" end="102385" title="Isabella Whitney" label="Isabella Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q12072880" start="102418" end="102430" title="Zoe Whittall" label="Zoe Whittall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7306708" start="102447" end="102462" title="Reed Whittemore" label="Reed Whittemore"/>
<link wikidata="Q458372" start="102480" end="102503" title="John Greenleaf Whittier" label="John Greenleaf Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965631" start="102521" end="102538" title="Brian Whittingham" label="Brian Whittingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3997272" start="102555" end="102572" title="Christopher Whyte (writer)" label="Christopher Whyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546247" start="102589" end="102610" title="George Whyte-Melville" label="George Whyte-Melville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767612" start="102629" end="102641" title="Anna Wickham" label="Anna Wickham"/>
<link wikidata="Q12117718" start="102660" end="102669" title="Les Wicks" label="Les Wicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702153" start="102686" end="102698" title="John Wieners" label="John Wieners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7041094" start="102716" end="102736" title="Nissanka Wijeyeratne" label="Nissanka Wijeyeratne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333582" start="102755" end="102769" title="Richard Wilbur" label="Richard Wilbur"/>
<link wikidata="Q21536659" start="102787" end="102798" title="Dora Wilcox" label="Dora Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q448376" start="102815" end="102834" title="Ella Wheeler Wilcox" label="Ella Wheeler Wilcox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351052" start="102852" end="102863" title="Robert Wild (poet)" label="Robert Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q272303" start="102880" end="102890" title="Jane Wilde" label="Jane Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q30875" start="102910" end="102921" title="Oscar Wilde" label="Oscar Wilde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4747967" start="102941" end="102952" title="Amos Wilder" label="Amos Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086189" start="102970" end="102986" title="Charlotte Wilder" label="Charlotte Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q4768886" start="103004" end="103018" title="Anne Wilkinson (poet)" label="Anne Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264067" start="103035" end="103049" title="John Wilkinson (poet)" label="John Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020894" start="103066" end="103087" title="William of Nassyngton" label="William of Nassyngton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846866" start="103104" end="103123" title="William of Shoreham" label="William of Shoreham"/>
<link wikidata="Q32128509" start="103147" end="103170" title="Aeneas Francon Williams" label="Aeneas Francon Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723641" start="103187" end="103202" title="Alfred Williams (poet)" label="Alfred Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q772966" start="103219" end="103232" title="Anna Williams (poet)" label="Anna Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150771" start="103251" end="103265" title="Athol Williams" label="Athol Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2930440" start="103283" end="103297" title="C. K. Williams" label="C. K. Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234490" start="103315" end="103334" title="David Gwyn Williams" label="David Gwyn Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q441389" start="103353" end="103367" title="Donna Williams" label="Donna Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q719185" start="103384" end="103399" title="Emmett Williams" label="Emmett Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592518" start="103417" end="103435" title="Heathcote Williams" label="Heathcote Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q525710" start="103452" end="103472" title="Helen Maria Williams" label="Helen Maria Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142457" start="103496" end="103509" title="Hugo Williams" label="Hugo Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q13341457" start="103526" end="103540" title="Isaac Williams (writer)" label="Isaac Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152943" start="103557" end="103570" title="Jane Williams (Ysgafell)" label="Jane Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274797" start="103589" end="103606" title="Jonathan Williams (poet)" label="Jonathan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859278" start="103624" end="103639" title="Miller Williams" label="Miller Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106322" start="103657" end="103671" title="Oscar Williams (poet)" label="Oscar Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325026" start="103689" end="103718" title="Richard D&amp;#x27;Alton Williams" label="Richard D&amp;#x27;Alton Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q49615" start="103736" end="103750" title="Rowan Williams" label="Rowan Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q533369" start="103769" end="103782" title="Saul Williams" label="Saul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495068" start="103800" end="103821" title="Sherley Anne Williams" label="Sherley Anne Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="103839" end="103862" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5489367" start="103880" end="103899" title="Frank S. Williamson" label="Frank S. Williamson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363731" start="103916" end="103932" title="Elizabeth Willis" label="Elizabeth Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681309" start="103950" end="103961" title="James Wills (poet)" label="James Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q121554469" start="103979" end="103989" title="Ruth Wills" label="Ruth Wills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134704" start="104006" end="104018" title="Clive Wilmer" label="Clive Wilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5490422" start="104035" end="104047" title="Frank Wilmot" label="Frank Wilmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q358912" start="104081" end="104115" title="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester" label="John Wilmot, 2nd Earl of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354413" start="104132" end="104146" title="Eleanor Wilner" label="Eleanor Wilner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510466" start="104164" end="104178" title="Alan R. Wilson" label="Alan R. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q110972651" start="104192" end="104213" title="Anne Elizabeth Wilson" label="Anne Elizabeth Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800711" start="104233" end="104246" title="Arthur Wilson (writer)" label="Arthur Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249745" start="104263" end="104274" title="Dede Wilson" label="Dede Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346560" start="104292" end="104304" title="Edwin Wilson (poet)" label="Edwin Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q56065785" start="104321" end="104341" title="Florence Mary Wilson (writer)" label="Florence Mary Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q551377" start="104365" end="104385" title="Peter Lamborn Wilson" label="Peter Lamborn Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494839" start="104419" end="104433" title="Sheri-D Wilson" label="Sheri-D Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965701" start="104447" end="104462" title="Christian Wiman" label="Christian Wiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660338" start="104480" end="104492" title="Liz Winfield" label="Liz Winfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340654" start="104509" end="104519" title="Rob Winger" label="Rob Winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q22958140" start="104536" end="104552" title="Sheila Wingfield" label="Sheila Wingfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q728959" start="104572" end="104584" title="Yvor Winters" label="Yvor Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6152955" start="104602" end="104614" title="Jane Wiseman" label="Jane Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546465" start="104650" end="104663" title="George Wither" label="George Wither"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381420" start="104680" end="104693" title="Charles Wolfe (poet)" label="Charles Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5939939" start="104711" end="104724" title="Humbert Wolfe" label="Humbert Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q314256" start="104741" end="104753" title="Thomas Wolfe" label="Thomas Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782909" start="104771" end="104787" title="Theresa Wolfwood" label="Theresa Wolfwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16211348" start="104801" end="104814" title="Jennifer Wong" label="Jennifer Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6990155" start="104829" end="104840" title="Nellie Wong" label="Nellie Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q23071235" start="104858" end="104877" title="Gwyneth Barber Wood" label="Gwyneth Barber Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q954360" start="104894" end="104909" title="George Woodcock" label="George Woodcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607228" start="104926" end="104939" title="Gregory Woods" label="Gregory Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6288068" start="104956" end="104968" title="Joseph Woods (poet)" label="Joseph Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722956" start="104988" end="105001" title="Macdara Woods" label="Macdara Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q11983044" start="105019" end="105033" title="Lance Woolaver" label="Lance Woolaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q448992" start="105050" end="105068" title="Dorothy Wordsworth" label="Dorothy Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="105085" end="105103" title="William Wordsworth" label="William Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184418" start="105120" end="105143" title="Philip Stanhope Worsley" label="Philip Stanhope Worsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q641028" start="105164" end="105176" title="Henry Wotton" label="Henry Wotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045339" start="105193" end="105210" title="Carolyn D. Wright" label="Carolyn D. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045507" start="105228" end="105243" title="Carolyne Wright" label="Carolyne Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960465" start="105261" end="105275" title="Charles Wright (poet)" label="Charles Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241310" start="105293" end="105305" title="David Wright (poet)" label="David Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237392" start="105322" end="105340" title="David McKee Wright" label="David McKee Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493008" start="105360" end="105372" title="Franz Wright" label="Franz Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145850" start="105390" end="105402" title="James Wright (poet)" label="James Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167365" start="105420" end="105430" title="Jay Wright (poet)" label="Jay Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q469885" start="105448" end="105461" title="Judith Wright" label="Judith Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6414966" start="105478" end="105490" title="Kirby Wright" label="Kirby Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702480" start="105505" end="105516" title="Luke Wright (poet)" label="Luke Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351272" start="105533" end="105547" title="Robert Wrigley" label="Robert Wrigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2325216" start="105565" end="105580" title="Lady Mary Wroth" label="Lady Mary Wroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q314325" start="105602" end="105614" title="Thomas Wyatt (poet)" label="Thomas Wyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q460055" start="105631" end="105643" title="Elinor Wylie" label="Elinor Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341541" start="105661" end="105682" title="Edward Alexander Wyon" label="Edward Alexander Wyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6739424" start="105708" end="105724" title="Makhosazana Xaba" label="Makhosazana Xaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883392" start="105742" end="105756" title="Mitsuye Yamada" label="Mitsuye Yamada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1818794" start="105774" end="105787" title="Leo Yankevich" label="Leo Yankevich"/>
<link wikidata="Q15462666" start="105805" end="105821" title="Morgan Yasbincek" label="Morgan Yasbincek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106553" start="105838" end="105854" title="J. Michael Yates" label="J. Michael Yates"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="105874" end="105885" title="W. B. Yeats" label="W. B. Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6171699" start="105903" end="105912" title="Jean Yoon" label="Jean Yoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772017" start="105929" end="105942" title="Marly Youmans" label="Marly Youmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900118" start="105960" end="105971" title="Monica Youn" label="Monica Youn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758995" start="105989" end="106001" title="Andrew Young (poet, born 1885)" label="Andrew Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q4821578" start="106018" end="106032" title="Augustus Young" label="Augustus Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203198" start="106050" end="106065" title="d&amp;#x27;bi Young" label="d&amp;#x27;bi Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302141" start="106084" end="106097" title="Douglas Young (classicist)" label="Douglas Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q507699" start="106114" end="106126" title="Edward Young" label="Edward Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q24068896" start="106143" end="106154" title="Ellen Young (poet)" label="Ellen Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q18210961" start="106174" end="106183" title="Ian Young (writer)" label="Ian Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397805" start="106200" end="106211" title="Kevin Young (poet)" label="Kevin Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760823" start="106229" end="106245" title="Marguerite Young" label="Marguerite Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q94297986" start="106270" end="106285" title="Alessio Zanelli" label="Alessio Zanelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487802" start="106303" end="106319" title="Matthew Zapruder" label="Matthew Zapruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q545261" start="106337" end="106353" title="Marya Zaturenska" label="Marya Zaturenska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351344" start="106371" end="106382" title="Robert Zend" label="Robert Zend"/>
<link wikidata="Q561142" start="106399" end="106417" title="Benjamin Zephaniah" label="Benjamin Zephaniah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6428444" start="106434" end="106449" title="Komninos Zervos" label="Komninos Zervos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241411" start="106466" end="106479" title="David Zieroth" label="David Zieroth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279460" start="106496" end="106507" title="Rachel Zolf" label="Rachel Zolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q53588774" start="106524" end="106541" title="Daniel Zomparelli" label="Daniel Zomparelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045497" start="106555" end="106570" title="Carolyn Zonailo" label="Carolyn Zonailo"/>
<link wikidata="Q975481" start="106587" end="106601" title="Louis Zukofsky" label="Louis Zukofsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438945" start="106619" end="106629" title="Fay Zwicky" label="Fay Zwicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682395" start="106646" end="106656" title="Jan Zwicky" label="Jan Zwicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562917" start="106724" end="106748" title="List of Australian poets" label="List of Australian poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q945695" start="106750" end="106772" title="List of Canadian poets" label="List of Canadian poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174177" start="106774" end="106793" title="List of Irish poets" label="List of Irish poets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="106795" end="106827" title="List of Indian poets#Indian poets writing in English" label="List of English poets from India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592215" start="106829" end="106851" title="List of Nigerian poets" label="List of Nigerian poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q15829830" start="106853" end="106880" title="List of South African poets" label="List of South African poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q256703" start="106882" end="106918" title="List of poets from the United States" label="List of poets from the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671604" start="106934" end="106948" title="English poetry" label="English poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11203052" start="106950" end="106963" title="List of poets" label="List of poets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179492" start="106965" end="106984" title="List of women poets" label="List of women poets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9717" wikidata="Q187880" url="?curid=9717" title="Excalibur">
<text>Excalibur is the mythical sword of King Arthur that may possess magical powers or be associated with the rightful sovereignty of Britain. Its first reliably datable appearance is found in Geoffrey of Monmouth&#x27;s &quot;Historia Regum Britanniae&quot;. Excalibur as the &quot;sword in the stone&quot; functioning as the proof of Arthur&#x27;s lineage is an iconic motif featured throughout most works dealing with Arthur&#x27;s youth since its introduction in Robert de Boron&#x27;s &quot;Merlin&quot;. The sword given to the young Arthur by the Lady of the Lake in the tradition that began soon afterwards with the &quot;Post-Vulgate Cycle&quot; is not the same weapon, but in &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot; both of them share the name of Excalibur. Several similar swords and other weapons also appear within Arthurian texts, as well as in other legends.

== Forms and etymology ==



The name &quot;Excalibur&quot; ultimately derives from the Welsh (Breton , Middle Cornish ), which is a compound of , , and , . Caledfwlch appears in several early Welsh works, including the prose tale &quot;Culhwch and Olwen&quot; (). The name was later used in Welsh adaptations of foreign material such as the s (chronicles), which were based on Geoffrey of Monmouth. It is often considered to be related to the phonetically similar , a sword borne by several figures from Irish mythology, although a borrowing of from the Irish has been considered unlikely by Rachel Bromwich and D. Simon Evans. They suggest instead that both names &quot;may have similarly arisen at a very early date as generic names for a sword&quot;. In the late 15th to early 16th-century Middle Cornish play , Arthur&#x27;s sword is called , which is etymologically an exact Middle Cornish cognate of the Welsh . It is unclear if the name was borrowed from the Welsh (if so, it must have been an early loan, for phonological reasons), or represents an early, pan-Brittonic traditional name for Arthur&#x27;s sword.

Welsh author Geoffrey of Monmouth, in his Latin chronicle (&quot;The History of the Kings of Britain&quot;, ), Latinised the name of Arthur&#x27;s sword as (possibly influenced by the Medieval Latin spelling of Classical Latin , from the Greek (), ). Most Celticists consider Geoffrey&#x27;s to be derivative of a lost Old Welsh text in which (Old Welsh ) had not yet been lenited to (Middle Welsh or ). Geoffrey Gaimar, in his Old French chronicle (1134–1140), mentions Arthur and his sword: &quot;this Constantine was the nephew of Arthur, who had the sword Caliburc&quot; (&quot;&quot;). In Wace&#x27;s (), composed in Old French, the sword is called (, , ), , , , , and (with additional variant spellings such as , , , , , found in various continental manuscripts). Various other spellings in the later medieval Arthurian literature have included &quot;Calibourch&quot;, &quot;Calibourn&quot;, &quot;Calibourne&quot;, &quot;Caliburc&quot;, &quot;Escaliber&quot;, &quot;Escalibur&quot;, &quot;Excalibor&quot;, and finally the familiar &quot;Excalibur&quot;.

==Legend==
=== The Sword in the Stone and the Sword in the Lake ===
Romance tradition elaborates on how Arthur came into possession of Excalibur. In Robert de Boron&#x27;s c. 1200 French poem &quot;Merlin&quot;, the first known tale to mention the &quot;sword in the stone&quot; motif, Arthur obtained the British throne by pulling a sword from an anvil sitting atop a stone that appeared in a churchyard on Christmas Eve. In this account, as foretold by Merlin, the act could not be performed except by &quot;the true king&quot;, meaning the divinely appointed king or true heir of Uther Pendragon. (As Thomas Malory related in his English-language Arthurian compilation, the 15th-century &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;, &quot;whoso pulleth out this sword of this stone and anvil, is rightwise king born of all England.&quot;) The scene is set by different authors at either explicitly London (historical Londinium) or generally in the land of Logres (which can be a city and also associated with London), and might have been inspired by a miracle attributed to the 11th-century bishop Wulfstan of Worcester. After many of the gathered nobles try and fail to complete Merlin&#x27;s challenge, the teenage Arthur, who up to this point had believed himself to be biological son of Ector and went there as a squire to his foster brother Kay, succeeds effortlessly. Arthur first achieves this feat by accident while unaware of the contest and unseen. He then returns the sword to its place in the anvil on a stone, and later repeats the act publicly as Merlin comes to announce his true parentage.

The identity of this sword as Excalibur is made explicit in the Prose &quot;Merlin&quot;, a part of the 13th-century &quot;Lancelot-Grail&quot; cycle of French romances also known as the Vulgate Cycle. Eventually, in the cycle&#x27;s finale Vulgate &quot;Mort Artu&quot;, when Arthur is at the brink of death, he enigmatically orders his surviving knight Griflet to cast Excalibur into a nearby lake. After two failed attempts to deceive Arthur, since Griflet felt that such a great sword should not be thrown away, he finally does comply with the wounded king&#x27;s request. A woman&#x27;s hand emerges from the lake to catch Excalibur, after which Morgan appears in a boat to take Arthur to Avalon. This motif then became attached to Bedivere (or Yvain in the chronicle &quot;Scalacronica&quot;), instead of Griflet, in the English Arthurian tradition. 

However, in the subsequent Post-Vulgate Cycle variants of the &quot;Merlin&quot; and the &quot;Merlin Continuation&quot;, written soon afterwards, Arthur&#x27;s sword drawn from the stone is unnamed. Furthermore, the young Arthur promptly breaks it in his duel against King Pellinore very early in his reign. On Merlin&#x27;s advice, Arthur then goes with him to be given the actual Excalibur by a Lady of the Lake in exchange for a later boon for her (some time later, she arrives at Arthur&#x27;s court to demand the head of Balin). In the Post-Vulgate &quot;Mort Artu&quot;, it is this sword that is eventually hurled into the pool at Camlann (or actually Salisbury Plain where both cycles locate the battle, as do the English romances) by Griflet in the same circumstances as told in the story&#x27;s Vulgate version. Malory included both of these stories in his now-iconic &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot; while naming each of the swords as Excalibur: both the first one (from the stone), soon shattered in combat in a story taken from the Post-Vulgate &quot;Merlin Continuation&quot;, and its replacement (from the lake), returned by Bedivere in the end.

=== Other roles and attributes ===
In the Welsh tales, Arthur&#x27;s sword is known as &quot;Caledfwlch&quot;. In &quot;Culhwch and Olwen&quot;, it is one of Arthur&#x27;s most valuable possessions and is used by Arthur&#x27;s warrior Llenlleawg the Irishman to kill the Irish king Diwrnach while stealing his magical cauldron. Though not named as Caledfwlch, Arthur&#x27;s sword is described vividly in &quot;The Dream of Rhonabwy&quot;, one of the tales associated with the &quot;Mabinogion&quot; (as translated by Jeffrey Gantz): &quot;Then they heard Cadwr Earl of Cornwall being summoned, and saw him rise with Arthur&#x27;s sword in his hand, with a design of two chimeras on the golden hilt; when the sword was unsheathed what was seen from the mouths of the two chimeras was like two flames of fire, so dreadful that it was not easy for anyone to look.&quot;

Geoffrey&#x27;s &quot;Historia&quot; is the first non-Welsh text to speak of the sword. Geoffrey says the sword was forged in Avalon and Latinises the name Caledfwlch as &quot;Caliburnus&quot;. When his influential pseudo-history made it to continental Europe, writers altered the name further until it finally took on the popular form &quot;Excalibur&quot;. Its role was expanded upon in the Vulgate Cycle and in the Post-Vulgate Cycle which emerged in its wake. Both of these prose cycles incorporated the Prose &quot;Merlin&quot;. However, the Post-Vulgate authors left out the original &quot;Merlin&quot; continuation from the earlier cycle, choosing to add an original account of Arthur&#x27;s early days including a new origin for Excalibur. In some versions, Excalibur&#x27;s blade was engraved with phrases on opposite sides: &quot;Take me up&quot; and &quot;Cast me away&quot; (or similar). In addition, it said that when Excalibur was first drawn in combat, in the first battle testing Arthur&#x27;s sovereignty, its blade shone so bright it blinded his enemies.

In Chrétien de Troyes&#x27; late 12th-century Old French &quot;Perceval&quot;, Arthur&#x27;s nephew and best knight Gawain carries Excalibur, &quot;for at his belt hung Escalibor, the finest sword that there was, which sliced through iron as through wood&quot; (&quot;&quot;). This statement was probably picked up by the author of the &quot;Estoire Merlin&quot;, or Vulgate &quot;Merlin&quot;, where the author asserts that Escalibor &quot;is a Hebrew name which means in French &#x27;cuts iron, steel, and wood (&quot;&quot;; the word for &#x27;steel&#x27; here, &quot;achier&quot;, also means &#x27;blade&#x27; or &#x27;sword&#x27;) and comes from medieval Latin , a derivative of &#x27;sharp&#x27;, so there is no direct connection with Latin ). It is from this fanciful etymological musing that Thomas Malory got the notion that Excalibur meant &#x27;cut steel&#x27; (&quot;the name of it,&#x27; said the lady, &#x27;is Excalibur, that is as moche to say, as cut stele&quot;).

In the Post-Vulgate version, used in Malory&#x27;s &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot; for the second Excalibur, the sword&#x27;s scabbard is also said to have powers of its own, as any wounds received while wearing it would not bleed at all, thus preventing the wearer from ever bleeding to death in battle. For this reason, Merlin chides Arthur for preferring Excalibur over its sheath, saying that the latter is the greater treasure. The scabbard is, however, soon stolen from Arthur by his half-sister Morgan le Fay in revenge for the death of her beloved Accolon, he having been slain by Arthur with Excalibur in a duel involving a false Excalibur (Morgan also secretly makes at least one duplicate of Excalibur during the time when the sword is entrusted to her by Arthur earlier in the different French, Iberian and English variants of that story). During Morgan&#x27;s flight from the pursuit by Arthur, the sheath is then thrown by her into a deep lake and lost. This act later enables the death of Arthur, deprived of its magical protection, many years later in his final battle. In Malory&#x27;s telling, the scabbard is never found again. In the Post-Vulgate, however, it is recovered and claimed by another fay, Marsique, who then briefly gives it to Gawain to help him fight Naborn the Enchanter (a Mabon figure).

As mentioned above, Excalibur is wielded also by Gawain in some French romances, including the Vulgate &quot;Lancelot&quot;. The Prose &quot;Merlin&quot; also uniquely tells of Gawain killing the Roman leader Lucius with Excalibur. This is, however, in contrast to most versions, where Excalibur belongs solely to Arthur. A few texts, such as the English Alliterative &quot;Morte Arthure&quot; and one copy of the Welsh &quot;Ymddiddan Arthur a&#x27;r Eryr&quot;, tell of Arthur using Excalibur to kill his son Mordred (in the first of these, he also uses it to kill Lucius). In the Iberian post-Arthurian romance &quot;Florambel de Lucea&quot;, Morgan later gifts Excalibur (&quot;Esclariber&quot;) to the eponymous hero. Another late Iberian romance, &quot;Tirant lo Blanch&quot;, features Arthur who was brought back to life by Morgan and then wandered the world for a long time while mad and able to talk only when having Excalibur in his hands. Finally, Morgan finds her brother imprisoned in the contemporary (15th-century) Constantinople, where she restores him to his mind by making him gaze upon his reflection in Excalibur&#x27;s blade.

==Connections and analogues==
=== Similar weapons ===
The challenge of drawing a sword from a stone (placed on the river just outside Camelot) also appears in the later Arthurian story of Galahad, whose achievement of the task indicates that he is destined to find the Holy Grail, as also foretold in Merlin&#x27;s prophecies. This powerful yet cursed weapon, known as the Adventurous Sword among other names, has also come from Avalon; it is first stolen and wielded by Balin until his death while killing his own brother, then is briefly taken up by Galahad, and eventually is used by Lancelot to give his former friend Gawain a mortal wound in their long final duel. In the Old French &quot;Perlesvaus&quot;, Lancelot pulls other weapons from stone on two occasions. In the Post-Vulgate &quot;Merlin&quot;, Morgan creates the copies of Excalibur itself as well as of its scabbard.

In Welsh mythology, the Dyrnwyn (&quot;White-Hilt&quot;), one of the Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain, is said to be a powerful sword belonging to Rhydderch Hael, one of the Three Generous Men of Britain mentioned in the Welsh Triads. When drawn by a worthy or well-born man, the entire blade would blaze with fire. Rhydderch was never reluctant to hand the weapon to anyone, hence his nickname Hael &quot;the Generous&quot;, but the recipients, as soon as they had learned of its peculiar properties, always rejected the sword. There are other similar weapons described in other mythologies as well. Irish mythology features Caladbolg, the sword of Fergus mac Róich, which was also known for its incredible power and was carried by some of Ireland&#x27;s greatest heroes. The name, which can also mean &quot;hard cleft&quot; in Irish, appears in the plural, &quot;caladbuilc&quot;, as a generic term for &quot;great swords&quot; in &quot;Togail Troi&quot; (&quot;The Destruction of Troy&quot;), a 10th-century Irish translation of the classical tale. A sword named Claíomh Solais, which is an Irish term meaning &quot;sword of light&quot;, or &quot;shining sword&quot;, appears in a number of orally transmitted Irish folk-tales. The Sword in the Stone has an analogue in some versions of the story of Sigurd, whose father, Sigmund, draws the sword Gram out of the tree Barnstokkr where it is embedded by the Norse god Odin. Apart from legendary swords, the only real ancient Sword in the Stone which still exists nowadays is kept since the medieval ages in the Chapel of Saint Galgano at Montesiepi in Tuscany, Italy; it is associated with the 12th-century Italian legend of that saint in the tale of &quot;Tuscany&#x27;s Excalibur&quot;.

=== Arthur&#x27;s other weapons ===
A number of different swords and other weapons have been also associated with Arthur. In the Alliterative &quot;Morte Arthure&quot;, Clarent is the royal sword of peace meant for knighting and ceremonies as opposed to battle, which Mordred stole and then used to kill Arthur at Camlann. The Prose &quot;Lancelot&quot; of the Vulgate Cycle mentions a sword called Sequence (also &quot;Secace&quot; or &quot;Seure&quot;) as borrowed from Arthur by Lancelot. In the Vulgate &quot;Merlin&quot;, Arthur captures Marmiadoise (Marmydoyse), the marvelous sword of Hercules, from the latter&#x27;s descendant King Rions. Marmiadoise&#x27;s powers (such as causing wounds that would never heal) are in fact so superior compared to those of Excalibur that Arthur gives his old sword to Gawain.

Early-Arthurian Welsh tradition knew of a dagger named Carnwennan and a spear named Rhongomyniad that belonged to him. Carnwennan (&quot;little white-hilt&quot;) first appears in &quot;Culhwch and Olwen&quot;, where Arthur uses it to slice the witch Orddu in half. Rhongomyniad (&quot;spear&quot; + &quot;striker, slayer&quot;) is also mentioned in &quot;Culhwch&quot;, although only in passing; it appears as simply Ron (&quot;spear&quot;) in Geoffrey&#x27;s &quot;Historia&quot;. Geoffrey also names Arthur&#x27;s shield as Pridwen; in &quot;Culhwch&quot;, however, Prydwen (&quot;fair face&quot;) is the name of Arthur&#x27;s ship while his shield is named Wynebgwrthucher (&quot;face of evening&quot;).

== Excalibur as a relic ==
Historically, a sword identified as Excalibur (Caliburn) was supposedly discovered during the exhumation of Arthur&#x27;s purported grave at Glastonbury Abbey in 1191. On 6 March 1191, after the Treaty of Messina, either this or another claimed Excalibur was given as a gift of goodwill by the English king Richard I of England (Richard the Lionheart) to his ally Tancred, King of Sicily. It was one of a series of symbolic Arthurian acts by the Anglo-Norman monarchs, such as their association of the crown of King Arthur with the crown they won from the slain Welsh prince Llywelyn ap Gruffudd.

==See also==
*List of magical weapons

== Notes ==
== References ==
===Citations===
=== Sources ===

*&quot;The Works of Sir Thomas Malory,&quot; Ed. Vinaver, Eugène, 3rd ed. Field, Rev. P. J. C. (1990). 3 vol. Oxford: Oxford University Press. , , .
* 
* 
* 
* 


=== Further reading ===
*Lacy, N. J (ed). &quot;The New Arthurian Encyclopedia.&quot; (London: Garland. 1996). .

== External links ==

*The Camelot Project at the University of Rochester: Excalibur and the Sword in the Stone</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q187880" start="0" end="9" title="Excalibur" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243129" start="17" end="31" title="Legendary swords" label="mythical sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="35" end="46" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3965846" start="56" end="78" title="magic sword" label="possess magical powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="114" end="125" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="188" end="208" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q238693" start="222" end="247" title="Historia Regum Britanniae" label="Historia Regum Britanniae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411243" start="331" end="352" title="King Arthur&amp;#x27;s family" label="Arthur&amp;#x27;s lineage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380" start="462" end="477" title="Robert de Boron" label="Robert de Boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291073" start="485" end="503" title="Merlin (Robert de Boron poem)" label="&amp;quot;Merlin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q854036" start="548" end="564" title="Lady of the Lake" label="Lady of the Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179725" start="624" end="642" title="Post-Vulgate Cycle" label="Post-Vulgate Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="686" end="708" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="952" end="957" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12107" start="959" end="965" title="Breton language" label="Breton"/>
<link wikidata="Q25289" start="968" end="982" title="Middle Cornish" label="Middle Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q245423" start="997" end="1005" title="Compound (linguistics)" label="compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q389906" start="1101" end="1118" title="Culhwch and Olwen" label="Culhwch and Olwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188344" start="1242" end="1262" title="Geoffrey of Monmouth" label="Geoffrey of Monmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="1369" end="1384" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323741" start="1457" end="1472" title="Rachel Bromwich" label="Rachel Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="1929" end="1942" title="Common Brittonic" label="pan-Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806983" start="2097" end="2106" title="Latinisation (literature)" label="Latinised"/>
<link wikidata="Q253854" start="2197" end="2212" title="Classical Latin" label="Classical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585442" start="2300" end="2304" title="Lost literary work" label="lost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="2305" end="2314" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q935716" start="2359" end="2366" title="Lenition" label="lenited"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487263" start="2371" end="2383" title="Middle Welsh" label="Middle Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q281774" start="2390" end="2405" title="Geoffrey Gaimar" label="Geoffrey Gaimar"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="2414" end="2424" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q5382" start="2580" end="2584" title="Wace" label="Wace"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380" start="3197" end="3219" title="Robert de Boron" label="Robert de Boron&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291073" start="3246" end="3252" title="Merlin (Robert de Boron poem)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188044" start="3503" end="3509" title="Merlin" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="3591" end="3614" title="Divine right of kings" label="divinely appointed king"/>
<link wikidata="Q657200" start="3631" end="3646" title="Uther Pendragon" label="Uther Pendragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="3652" end="3665" title="Thomas Malory" label="Thomas Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="3744" end="3766" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q927198" start="3958" end="3967" title="Londinium" label="Londinium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720685" start="3997" end="4003" title="Logres" label="Logres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272586" start="4139" end="4160" title="Wulfstan (died 1095)" label="Wulfstan of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q971238" start="4332" end="4337" title="Sir Ector" label="Ector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052725" start="4387" end="4390" title="Sir Kay" label="Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467333" start="4771" end="4785" title="Lancelot-Grail" label="Lancelot-Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467333" start="4835" end="4848" title="Vulgate Cycle" label="Vulgate Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="5003" end="5010" title="Griflet" label="Griflet"/>
<link wikidata="Q321305" start="5299" end="5305" title="Morgan le Fay" label="Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216901" start="5342" end="5348" title="Avalon" label="Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202529" start="5385" end="5393" title="Bedivere" label="Bedivere"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129446" start="5398" end="5403" title="Yvain" label="Yvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090152" start="5427" end="5439" title="Scalacronica" label="Scalacronica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179725" start="5533" end="5551" title="Post-Vulgate Cycle" label="Post-Vulgate Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205690" start="5780" end="5789" title="Pellinore" label="Pellinore"/>
<link wikidata="Q854036" start="5904" end="5920" title="Lady of the Lake" label="Lady of the Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2880904" start="6033" end="6038" title="Sir Balin" label="Balin"/>
<link wikidata="Q862619" start="6141" end="6151" title="Battle of Camlann" label="at Camlann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472049" start="6165" end="6180" title="Salisbury Plain" label="Salisbury Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q215681" start="6905" end="6915" title="Llenlleawg" label="Llenlleawg"/>
<link wikidata="Q911120" start="7080" end="7101" title="The Dream of Rhonabwy" label="The Dream of Rhonabwy"/>
<link wikidata="Q815523" start="7152" end="7162" title="Mabinogion" label="Mabinogion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272509" start="7225" end="7247" title="Cador" label="Cadwr Earl of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q182790" start="7340" end="7348" title="Chimera (mythology)" label="chimeras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302" start="8615" end="8633" title="Chrétien de Troyes" label="Chrétien de Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335337" start="8669" end="8689" title="Perceval, the Story of the Grail" label="&amp;quot;Perceval&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="8728" end="8734" title="Gawain" label="Gawain"/>
<link wikidata="Q9288" start="9058" end="9064" title="Hebrew language" label="Hebrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q661140" start="9724" end="9732" title="scabbard" label="scabbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q321305" start="10100" end="10113" title="Morgan le Fay" label="Morgan le Fay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088823" start="10154" end="10161" title="Accolon" label="Accolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862619" start="10666" end="10682" title="Battle of Camlann" label="his final battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638513" start="10907" end="10912" title="Mabon ap Modron" label="Mabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873642" start="11132" end="11138" title="Lucius Tiberius" label="Lucius"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732874" start="11278" end="11316" title="Alliterative Morte Arthure" label="Alliterative &amp;quot;Morte Arthure&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q81109" start="11434" end="11441" title="Mordred" label="Mordred"/>
<link wikidata="Q559667" start="11682" end="11698" title="Tirant lo Blanch" label="Tirant lo Blanch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="11953" end="11967" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q220437" start="12205" end="12212" title="Camelot" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q831462" start="12259" end="12266" title="Galahad" label="Galahad"/>
<link wikidata="Q162808" start="12340" end="12350" title="Holy Grail" label="Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q215681" start="12658" end="12666" title="Lancelot" label="Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="12748" end="12758" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071412" start="12765" end="12775" title="Perlesvaus" label="Perlesvaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243531" start="12959" end="12974" title="Welsh mythology" label="Welsh mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400089" start="13025" end="13068" title="Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain" label="Thirteen Treasures of the Island of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q887367" start="13114" end="13128" title="Rhydderch Hael" label="Rhydderch Hael"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542444" start="13188" end="13200" title="Welsh Triads" label="Welsh Triads"/>
<link wikidata="Q387800" start="13617" end="13633" title="Fergus mac Róich" label="Fergus mac Róich"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="13950" end="13954" title="Troy" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q831492" start="14033" end="14047" title="Claíomh Solais" label="Claíomh Solais"/>
<link wikidata="Q537554" start="14270" end="14276" title="Sigurd" label="Sigurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158552" start="14292" end="14299" title="Sigmund" label="Sigmund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044686" start="14317" end="14321" title="Gram (mythology)" label="Gram"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861975" start="14338" end="14348" title="Barnstokkr" label="Barnstokkr"/>
<link wikidata="Q43610" start="14387" end="14391" title="Odin" label="Odin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706288" start="14540" end="14553" title="Galgano Guidotti" label="Saint Galgano"/>
<link wikidata="Q240679" start="15301" end="15309" title="Hercules" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q3935268" start="15345" end="15355" title="King Rience" label="King Rions"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044181" start="15584" end="15594" title="Carnwennan" label="Carnwennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q107143750" start="15613" end="15625" title="Rhongomyniad" label="Rhongomyniad"/>
<link wikidata="Q100888089" start="16055" end="16062" title="Pridwen" label="Pridwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q102441974" start="16097" end="16104" title="Prydwen" label="Prydwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q544113" start="16405" end="16422" title="Glastonbury Abbey" label="Glastonbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42305" start="16571" end="16591" title="Richard I of England" label="Richard I of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q468653" start="16628" end="16651" title="Tancred, King of Sicily" label="Tancred, King of Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="16710" end="16722" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q369651" start="16839" end="16859" title="Llywelyn ap Gruffudd" label="Llywelyn ap Gruffudd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4437672" start="16876" end="16899" title="List of magical weapons" label="List of magical weapons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373589" start="17012" end="17027" title="Eugène Vinaver" label="Vinaver, Eugène"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9719" wikidata="Q5348930" url="?curid=9719" title="Eight-bar blues">
<text>In music, an eight-bar blues is a common blues chord progression. Music writers have described it as &quot;the second most common blues form&quot; being &quot;common to folk, rock, and jazz forms of the blues&quot;. It is often notated in  or time with eight bars to the verse.

==Overview==
Early examples of eight-bar blues standards include:
*&quot;Ain&#x27;t Nobody&#x27;s Business If I Do&quot; (Sara Martin, 1922)
*&quot;Trouble in Mind&quot; (Bertha Hill, 1926)
*&quot;How Long Blues&quot; (Leroy Carr, 1928) 
*&quot;Nobody Knows You When You&#x27;re Down and Out&quot; (Bessie Smith, 1929)
*&quot;It Hurts Me Too&quot; (Tampa Red, 1940)
*&quot;Key to the Highway&quot; (Big Bill Broonzy, 1941)
*&quot;Worried Life Blues&quot; (Big Maceo, 1941)
One variant using this progression is to couple one eight-bar blues melody with a different eight-bar blues bridge to create a blues variant of the standard 32-bar song: &quot;I Want a Little Girl&quot; (T-Bone Walker) and &quot;Great Balls of Fire&quot; (Jerry Lee Lewis)(

Eight-bar blues progressions have more variations than the more rigidly defined twelve bar format. The move to the IV chord usually happens at bar 3 (as opposed to 5 in twelve bar); however, &quot;the I chord moving to the V chord right away, in the second measure, is a characteristic of the eight-bar blues.&quot;

In the following examples each box represents a &#x27;bar&#x27; of music (the specific time signature is not relevant). The chord in the box is played for the full bar. If two chords are in the box they are each played for half a bar, etc. The chords are represented as scale degrees in Roman numeral analysis. Roman numerals are used so the musician may understand the progression of the chords regardless of the key it is played in.

&quot;Eight-bar blues chord progression&quot;:


&quot;Worried Life Blues&quot; (probably the most common eight-bar blues progression):


&quot;Heartbreak Hotel&quot; (variation with the I on the first half):

J. B. Lenoir&#x27;s &quot;Slow Down&quot; and &quot;Key to the Highway&quot; (variation with the V at bar 2):

&quot;Get a Haircut&quot; by George Thorogood (simple progression):

Jimmy Rogers&#x27; &quot;Walkin&#x27; By Myself&quot; (somewhat unorthodox example of the form):

Howlin Wolf&#x27;s version of &quot;Sitting on Top of the World&quot; is actually a 9 bar blues that adds an extra &quot;V&quot; chord at the end of the progression. The song uses movement between major and dominant 7th and major and minor fourth:

The first four bar progression used by Wolf is also used in Nina Simone&#x27;s 1965 version of &quot;Trouble in Mind&quot;, but with a more uptempo beat than &quot;Sitting on Top of the World&quot;:

The progression may be created by dropping the first four bars from the twelve-bar blues, as in the solo section of Bonnie Raitt&#x27;s &quot;Love Me Like a Man&quot; and Buddy Guy&#x27;s &quot;Mary Had a Little Lamb&quot;:

There are at least a few very successful songs using somewhat unusual chord progressions as well. For example, the song &quot;Ain&#x27;t Nobody&#x27;s Business&quot; as performed by Freddie King at least, uses a I–III–IV–iv progression in each of the first four bars. The same four bar progression is used by the band Radiohead to make up the bulk of the song &quot;Creep&quot;.

The same chord progression can also be called a sixteen-bar blues, if each symbol above is taken to be a half note in or time. Examples are &quot;Nine Pound Hammer&quot; and Ray Charles&#x27;s original instrumental &quot;Sweet Sixteen Bars&quot;.

==See also==
*Twelve-bar blues
*Sixteen-bar blues
*Thirty-two-bar form

==Sources==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5348930" start="13" end="28" title="Eight-bar blues" label="eight-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="41" end="46" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326471" start="47" end="64" title="chord progression" label="chord progression"/>
<link wikidata="Q155234" start="239" end="239" title="time signature" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3240892" start="259" end="263" title="bar (music)" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561199" start="271" end="276" title="verse (music)" label="verse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888852" start="320" end="335" title="blues standards" label="blues standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697276" start="352" end="393" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody&amp;#x27;s Business If I Do" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody&amp;#x27;s Business If I Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q530846" start="401" end="412" title="Sara Martin" label="Sara Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999784" start="427" end="442" title="Trouble in Mind (song)" label="Trouble in Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q451470" start="450" end="461" title="Bertha Hill" label="Bertha Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917928" start="476" end="490" title="How Long, How Long Blues" label="How Long Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q729444" start="498" end="508" title="Leroy Carr" label="Leroy Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082552" start="524" end="570" title="Nobody Knows You When You&amp;#x27;re Down and Out" label="Nobody Knows You When You&amp;#x27;re Down and Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q93349" start="578" end="590" title="Bessie Smith" label="Bessie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140007" start="605" end="620" title="It Hurts Me Too" label="It Hurts Me Too"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345751" start="628" end="637" title="Tampa Red" label="Tampa Red"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449702" start="652" end="670" title="Key to the Highway" label="Key to the Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q449239" start="678" end="694" title="Big Bill Broonzy" label="Big Bill Broonzy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594038" start="709" end="727" title="Worried Life Blues" label="Worried Life Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q166010" start="735" end="744" title="Big Maceo" label="Big Maceo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109478" start="860" end="866" title="bridge (music)" label="bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346887" start="909" end="920" title="thirty-two-bar form" label="32-bar song"/>
<link wikidata="Q358538" start="956" end="969" title="T-Bone Walker" label="T-Bone Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028032" start="981" end="1000" title="Great Balls of Fire" label="Great Balls of Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202729" start="1008" end="1023" title="Jerry Lee Lewis" label="Jerry Lee Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q586277" start="1614" end="1626" title="scale degree" label="scale degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358919" start="1631" end="1653" title="Roman numeral analysis" label="Roman numeral analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594038" start="1835" end="1853" title="Worried Life Blues" label="Worried Life Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343509" start="1924" end="1940" title="Heartbreak Hotel" label="Heartbreak Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348114" start="1990" end="2002" title="J. B. Lenoir" label="J. B. Lenoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q288560" start="2130" end="2146" title="George Thorogood" label="George Thorogood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347919" start="2170" end="2182" title="Jimmy Rogers" label="Jimmy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q44780" start="2268" end="2279" title="Howlin Wolf" label="Howlin Wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q966120" start="2304" end="2331" title="Sitting on Top of the World" label="Sitting on Top of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q174957" start="2577" end="2588" title="Nina Simone" label="Nina Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999784" start="2618" end="2633" title="Trouble in Mind (song)" label="Trouble in Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255006" start="2657" end="2664" title="uptempo" label="uptempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089987" start="2789" end="2805" title="twelve-bar blues" label="twelve-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q270827" start="2817" end="2821" title="solo (music)" label="solo"/>
<link wikidata="Q234693" start="2833" end="2845" title="Bonnie Raitt" label="Bonnie Raitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q314208" start="2888" end="2897" title="Buddy Guy" label="Buddy Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697276" start="3068" end="3101" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody&amp;#x27;s Business" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t Nobody&amp;#x27;s Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q436209" start="3124" end="3136" title="Freddie King" label="Freddie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q44190" start="3260" end="3269" title="Radiohead" label="Radiohead"/>
<link wikidata="Q863433" start="3308" end="3313" title="Creep (Radiohead song)" label="Creep"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533031" start="3370" end="3387" title="sixteen-bar blues" label="sixteen-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045353" start="3468" end="3485" title="Nine Pound Hammer" label="Nine Pound Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q544387" start="3496" end="3507" title="Ray Charles" label="Ray Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q639197" start="3524" end="3536" title="instrumental" label="instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089987" start="3584" end="3600" title="Twelve-bar blues" label="Twelve-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533031" start="3602" end="3619" title="Sixteen-bar blues" label="Sixteen-bar blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346887" start="3621" end="3640" title="Thirty-two-bar form" label="Thirty-two-bar form"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9720" wikidata="Q347212" url="?curid=9720" title="Echidna (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Echidna]]s are Australian egg-laying mammals also known as spiny anteaters.

Echidna may also refer to:

*Echidna (mythology), monster in Greek mythology and namesake of the mammal
*(42355) Typhon I Echidna, the natural satellite of the asteroid 42355 Typhon
*ECHIDNA, high-resolution neutron powder diffractometer at Australia&#x27;s research reactor OPAL
*Echidna (&quot;Re:Zero&quot;), a character in the light novel series &quot;Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World&quot; 
*Echidna, character in the video game &quot;The Bouncer&quot;

==Taxonomic genera==
*&quot;Echidna&quot; (fish) , a genus of moray eels
*&quot;Echidna&quot; , a junior homonym referring to the mammals commonly known as echidnas
*&quot;Echidna&quot; , junior homonym for a genus of African snakes now treated as &quot;Bitis&quot;

==See also==
*Knuckles the Echidna, character from the &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; video game series
*Echidna Parass, fictional character from the &quot;Black Cat&quot; series</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q347212" start="0" end="12" title="Echidna (disambiguation)" label="[[Echidna]]s"/>
<link wikidata="Q347212" start="79" end="86" title="Echidna (disambiguation)" label="Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q185670" start="108" end="127" title="Echidna (mythology)" label="Echidna (mythology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q153102" start="184" end="208" title="(42355) Typhon I Echidna" label="(42355) Typhon I Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q989491" start="262" end="269" title="ECHIDNA" label="ECHIDNA"/>
<link wikidata="" start="360" end="389" title="Echidna (Re:Zero)" label="Echidna (&amp;quot;Re:Zero&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601729" start="527" end="538" title="The Bouncer (video game)" label="The Bouncer"/>
<link wikidata="Q913206" start="568" end="594" title="Echidna (fish)" label="&amp;quot;Echidna&amp;quot; (fish)"/>
<link wikidata="Q21824" start="702" end="709" title="echidna" label="echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q574527" start="800" end="805" title="Bitis" label="Bitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q904189" start="827" end="847" title="Knuckles the Echidna" label="Knuckles the Echidna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="874" end="892" title="Sonic the Hedgehog" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="959" end="991" title="List of Black Cat characters#Echidna Parass" label="the &amp;quot;Black Cat&amp;quot; series"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9723" wikidata="Q323028" url="?curid=9723" title="Edward Waring">
<text>Edward Waring (15 August 1798) was a British mathematician. He entered Magdalene College, Cambridge as a sizar and became Senior wrangler in 1757. He was elected a Fellow of Magdalene and in 1760 Lucasian Professor of Mathematics, holding the chair until his death. He made the assertion known as Waring&#x27;s problem without proof in his writings &quot;Meditationes Algebraicae&quot;. Waring was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1763 and awarded the Copley Medal in 1784.

==Early years==
Waring was the eldest son of John and Elizabeth Waring, a prosperous farming couple. He received his early education in Shrewsbury School under a Mr Hotchkin and was admitted as a sizar at Magdalene College, Cambridge, on 24 March 1753, being also Millington exhibitioner. 

His extraordinary talent for mathematics was recognised from his early years in Cambridge. In 1757 he graduated BA as senior wrangler and on 24 April 1758 was elected to a fellowship at Magdalene. He belonged to the Hyson Club, whose members included William Paley.

==Career==
At the end of 1759 Waring published the first chapter of &quot;Miscellanea Analytica&quot;. On 28 January the next year he was appointed Lucasian professor of mathematics, one of the highest positions in Cambridge. William Samuel Powell, then tutor in St John&#x27;s College, Cambridge opposed Waring&#x27;s election and instead supported the candidacy of William Ludlam. In the polemic with Powell, Waring was backed by John Wilson. In fact Waring was very young and did not hold the MA, necessary for qualifying for the Lucasian chair, but this was granted him in 1760 by royal mandate. In 1762 he published the full &quot;Miscellanea Analytica&quot;, mainly devoted to the theory of numbers and algebraic equations. In 1763 he was elected to the Royal Society. He was awarded its Copley Medal in 1784 but withdrew from the society in 1795, after he had reached sixty, &#x27;on account of [his] age&#x27;. Waring was also a member of the academies of sciences of Göttingen and Bologna. In 1767 he took an MD degree, but his activity in medicine was quite limited. He carried out dissections with Richard Watson, professor of chemistry and later bishop of Llandaff. From about 1770 he was physician at Addenbrooke&#x27;s Hospital at Cambridge, and he also practised at St Ives, Huntingdonshire, where he lived for some years after 1767. His career as a physician was not very successful since he was seriously short-sighted and a very shy man.

==Personal life==
Waring had a younger brother, Humphrey, who obtained a fellowship at Magdalene in 1775. In 1776 Waring married Mary Oswell, sister of a draper in Shrewsbury; they moved to Shrewsbury and then retired to Plealey, 8 miles out of the town, where Waring owned an estate of 215 acres in 1797

==Work==

Waring wrote a number of papers in the &quot;Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society&quot;, dealing with the resolution of algebraic equations, number theory, series, approximation of roots, interpolation, the geometry of conic sections, and dynamics. The &quot;Meditationes Algebraicae&quot; (1770), where many of the results published in &quot;Miscellanea Analytica&quot; were reworked and expanded, was described by Joseph-Louis Lagrange as &#x27;a work full of excellent researches&#x27;. In this work Waring published many theorems concerning the solution of algebraic equations which attracted the attention of continental mathematicians, but his best results are in number theory. Included in this work was the so-called Goldbach conjecture (every even integer is the sum of two primes), and also the following conjecture: every odd integer is a prime or the sum of three primes. Lagrange had proved that every positive integer is the sum of not more than four squares; Waring suggested that every positive integer is either a cube or the sum of not more than nine cubes. He also advanced the hypothesis that every positive integer is either a biquadrate (fourth power) or the sum of not more than nineteen biquadrates. These hypotheses form what is known as Waring&#x27;s problem. He also published a theorem, due to his friend John Wilson, concerning prime numbers; it was later proven rigorously by Lagrange.

In &quot;Proprietates Algebraicarum Curvarum&quot; (1772) Waring reissued in a much revised form the first four chapters of the second part of &quot;Miscellanea Analytica&quot;. He devoted himself to the classification of higher plane curves, improving results obtained by Isaac Newton, James Stirling, Leonhard Euler, and Gabriel Cramer. In 1794 he published a few copies of a philosophical work entitled &quot;An Essay on the Principles of Human Knowledge&quot;, which were circulated among his friends.

Waring&#x27;s mathematical style is highly analytical. In fact he criticised those British mathematicians who adhered too strictly to geometry. It is indicative that he was one of the subscribers of John Landen&#x27;s &quot;Residual Analysis&quot; (1764), one of the works in which the tradition of the Newtonian fluxional calculus was more severely criticised. In the preface of &quot;Meditationes Analyticae&quot; Waring showed a good knowledge of continental mathematicians such as Alexis Clairaut, Jean le Rond d&#x27;Alembert, and Euler. He lamented the fact that in Great Britain mathematics was cultivated with less interest than on the continent, and clearly desired to be considered as highly as the great names in continental mathematics—there is no doubt that he was reading their work at a level never reached by any other eighteenth-century British mathematician. Most notably, at the end of chapter three of &quot;Meditationes Analyticae&quot; Waring presents some partial fluxional equations (partial differential equations in Leibnizian terminology); such equations are a mathematical instrument of great importance in the study of continuous bodies which was almost completely neglected in Britain before Waring&#x27;s researches. One of the most interesting results in &quot;Meditationes Analyticae&quot; is a test for the convergence of series generally attributed to d&#x27;Alembert (the &#x27;ratio test&#x27;). The theory of convergence of series (the object of which is to establish when the summation of an infinite number of terms can be said to have a finite &#x27;sum&#x27;) was not much advanced in the eighteenth century.

Waring&#x27;s work was known both in Britain and on the continent, but it is difficult to evaluate his impact on the development of mathematics. His work on algebraic equations contained in &quot;Miscellanea Analytica&quot; was translated into Italian by Vincenzo Riccati in 1770. Waring&#x27;s style is not systematic and his exposition is often obscure. It seems that he never lectured and did not habitually correspond with other mathematicians. After Jérôme Lalande in 1796 observed, in &quot;Notice sur la vie de Condorcet&quot;, that in 1764 there was not a single first-rate analyst in England, Waring&#x27;s reply, published after his death as &#x27;Original letter of Dr Waring&#x27; in the &quot;Monthly Magazine&quot;, stated that he had given &#x27;somewhere between three and four hundred new propositions of one kind or another&#x27;.

==Death==
During his last years he sank into a deep religious melancholy, and a violent cold caused his death, in Plealey, on 15 August 1798. He was buried in the churchyard at Fitz, Shropshire.

==See also==
*Lagrange polynomial

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323028" start="0" end="13" title="Edward Waring" label="Edward Waring"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="45" end="58" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="71" end="99" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533398" start="105" end="110" title="sizar" label="sizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450721" start="122" end="137" title="Senior wrangler" label="Senior wrangler"/>
<link wikidata="Q865664" start="196" end="229" title="Lucasian Professor of Mathematics" label="Lucasian Professor of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q657903" start="297" end="318" title="Waring&amp;#x27;s problem" label="Waring&amp;#x27;s problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="408" end="435" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q28003" start="460" end="472" title="Copley Medal" label="Copley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280221" start="619" end="636" title="Shrewsbury School" label="Shrewsbury School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7533398" start="679" end="684" title="sizar" label="sizar"/>
<link wikidata="Q776807" start="688" end="716" title="Magdalene College, Cambridge" label="Magdalene College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450721" start="892" end="907" title="senior wrangler" label="senior wrangler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="990" end="1000" title="Hyson Club" label="Hyson Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q433739" start="1025" end="1038" title="William Paley" label="William Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q865664" start="1189" end="1207" title="Lucasian professor" label="Lucasian professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18759454" start="1267" end="1288" title="William Samuel Powell" label="William Samuel Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q691283" start="1304" end="1337" title="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="St John&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8014775" start="1408" end="1422" title="William Ludlam" label="William Ludlam"/>
<link wikidata="Q337339" start="1473" end="1484" title="John Wilson (mathematician)" label="John Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="1801" end="1814" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q28003" start="1835" end="1847" title="Copley Medal" label="Copley Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033" start="2017" end="2026" title="Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671532" start="2031" end="2038" title="Institute of Bologna Academy of Sciences" label="Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329838" start="2150" end="2164" title="Richard Watson (bishop)" label="Richard Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244613" start="2209" end="2217" title="Llandaff" label="Llandaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q130282" start="2255" end="2282" title="Addenbrooke&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Addenbrooke&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569095" start="2322" end="2346" title="St Ives, Huntingdonshire" label="St Ives, Huntingdonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876890" start="2719" end="2726" title="Plealey" label="Plealey"/>
<link wikidata="Q80222" start="3241" end="3262" title="Joseph-Louis Lagrange" label="Joseph-Louis Lagrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q485520" start="3550" end="3569" title="Goldbach conjecture" label="Goldbach conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q756946" start="3764" end="3797" title="Lagrange&amp;#x27;s four-square theorem" label="sum of not more than four squares"/>
<link wikidata="Q657903" start="4088" end="4109" title="Waring&amp;#x27;s problem" label="Waring&amp;#x27;s problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q935" start="4515" end="4527" title="Isaac Newton" label="Isaac Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q437734" start="4529" end="4543" title="James Stirling (mathematician)" label="James Stirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604" start="4545" end="4559" title="Leonhard Euler" label="Leonhard Euler"/>
<link wikidata="Q122331" start="4565" end="4579" title="Gabriel Cramer" label="Gabriel Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398963" start="4948" end="4959" title="John Landen" label="John Landen"/>
<link wikidata="Q28937" start="5234" end="5249" title="Alexis Clairaut" label="Alexis Clairaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q153232" start="5251" end="5279" title="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert" label="Jean le Rond d&amp;#x27;Alembert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121731" start="6656" end="6672" title="Vincenzo Riccati" label="Vincenzo Riccati"/>
<link wikidata="Q168419" start="6856" end="6870" title="Jérôme Lalande" label="Jérôme Lalande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876890" start="7365" end="7372" title="Plealey" label="Plealey"/>
<link wikidata="Q629378" start="7428" end="7444" title="Fitz, Shropshire" label="Fitz, Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q861606" start="7461" end="7480" title="Lagrange polynomial" label="Lagrange polynomial"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9724" wikidata="Q1283557" url="?curid=9724" title="Eden Phillpotts">
<text>Eden Phillpotts (4 November 1862 – 29 December 1960) was an English author, poet and dramatist. He was born in Mount Abu, India, was educated in Plymouth, Devon, and worked as an insurance officer for ten years before studying for the stage and eventually becoming a writer.

==Life==
Eden Phillpotts was a great-nephew of Henry Phillpotts, Bishop of Exeter. His father Henry Phillpotts was a son of the bishop&#x27;s younger brother Thomas Phillpotts. James Surtees Phillpotts the reforming headmaster of Bedford School was his second cousin.

Eden Phillpotts was born on 4 November 1862 at Mount Abu in Rajasthan. His father Henry was an officer in the Indian Army, while his mother Adelaide was the daughter of an Indian Civil Service officer posted in Madras, George Jenkins Waters.

Henry Phillpotts died in 1865, leaving Adelaide a widow at the age of 21. With her three small sons, of whom Eden was the eldest, she returned to England and settled in Plymouth.

Phillpotts was educated at Mannamead School in Plymouth. At school he showed no signs of a literary bent. In 1879, aged 17, he left home and went to London to earn his living. He found a job as a clerk with the Sun Fire Office.

Phillpotts&#x27; ambition was to be an actor and he attended evening classes at a drama school for two years. He came to the conclusion that he would never make a name as an actor but might have success as a writer. In his spare time out of office hours he proceeded to create a stream of small works which he was able to sell. In due course he left the insurance company to concentrate on his writing, while also working part-time as assistant editor for the weekly &quot;Black and White&quot; magazine.

Eden Phillpotts maintained a steady output of three or four books a year for the next half century. He produced poetry, short stories, novels, plays and mystery tales. Many of his novels were about rural Devon life and some of his plays were distinguished by their effective use of regional dialect.

Eden Phillpotts died at his home in Broadclyst near Exeter, Devon, on 29 December 1960.

==Personal life==
Phillpotts was for many years the President of the Dartmoor Preservation Association and cared passionately about the conservation of Dartmoor. He was an agnostic and a supporter of the Rationalist Press Association.

Phillpotts was a friend of Agatha Christie, who was an admirer of his work and a regular visitor to his home. She dedicated her 1932 novel &quot;Peril at End House&quot; to Phillpotts, and in her autobiography, she expressed gratitude for his early advice on fiction writing and quoted some of it. Jorge Luis Borges was another Phillpotts admirer. Borges mentioned him numerous times, wrote at least two reviews of his novels, and included him in his &quot;Personal Library&quot;, a collection of works selected to reflect his personal literary preferences.

Philpotts allegedly sexually abused his daughter Adelaide. In a 1976 interview for a book about her father, Adelaide described an incestuous &quot;relationship&quot; with him that she says lasted from the age of five or six until her early thirties, when he remarried. When she herself finally married at the age of 55 her father never forgave her, and never communicated with her again.

==Writings==

Phillpotts wrote a great many books with a Dartmoor setting. One of his novels, &quot;Widecombe Fair&quot; (1913), inspired by an annual fair at the village of Widecombe-in-the-Moor, provided the scenario for his comic play &quot;The Farmer&#x27;s Wife&quot; (1916). It went on to become a 1928 silent film of the same name, directed by Alfred Hitchcock. It was followed by a 1941 remake, directed by Norman Lee and Leslie Arliss. It became a BBC TV drama in 1955, directed by Owen Reed. Jan Stewer played Churdles Ash. The BBC had broadcast the play in 1934.

He co-wrote several plays with his daughter Adelaide Phillpotts, &quot;The Farmer&#x27;s Wife&quot; and &quot;Yellow Sands&quot; (1926); she later claimed their relationship was incestuous. Eden is best known as the author of many novels, plays and poems about Dartmoor. His Dartmoor cycle of 18 novels and two volumes of short stories still has many avid readers despite the fact that many titles are out of print.

Philpotts also wrote a series of novels, each set against the background of a different trade or industry. Titles include: &quot;Brunel&#x27;s Tower&quot; (a pottery) and &quot;Storm in a Teacup&quot; (hand-papermaking). Among his other works is &quot;The Grey Room&quot;, the plot of which is centred on a haunted room in an English manor house. He also wrote a number of other mystery novels, both under his own name and the pseudonym Harrington Hext. These include: &quot;The Thing at Their Heels&quot;, &quot;The Red Redmaynes&quot;, &quot;The Monster&quot;, &quot;The Clue from the Stars&quot;, and &quot;The Captain&#x27;s Curio&quot;. &quot;The Human Boy&quot; was a collection of schoolboy stories in the same genre as Rudyard Kipling&#x27;s &quot;Stalky &amp; Co.&quot;, though different in mood and style. Late in his long writing career he wrote a few books of interest to science fiction and fantasy readers, the most noteworthy being &quot;Saurus&quot;, which involves an alien reptilian observing human life.

Eric Partridge praised the immediacy and impact of his dialect writing.

==Photographs==
==Works==
Novels
*&quot;The End of a Life&quot; (1891)
*&quot;Folly and Fresh Air&quot; (1891)
*&quot;A Tiger&#x27;s Club&quot; (1892)
*&quot;A Deal with the Devil&quot; (1895)
*&quot;Some Every-day Folks&quot; (1895)
*&quot;My Laughing Philosopher&quot; (1896)
*&quot;Down Dartmoor Way&quot; (1896)
*&quot;Lying Prophets: A Novel&quot; (1897)
*&quot;Children of the Mist&quot; (1898)
*&quot;Sons of the Morning&quot; (1900)
* &quot;The Good Red Earth&quot; (1901)
*&quot;The River&quot; (1902)
* &quot;Old Delabole&quot; (1903)
*&quot;The Golden Fetich&quot; (1903)
*&quot;The American Prisoner&quot; (1904)
*&quot;The Farm of the Dagger&quot; (1904)
*&quot;The Secret Woman&quot; (1905)
*&quot;The Poacher&#x27;s Wife&quot; (1906) AKA &quot;Daniel Sweetland&quot; (1906)
*&quot;The Sinews of War: A Romance of London and the Sea&quot; (1906) with Arnold Bennett
*&quot;Doubloons&quot; (1906) with Arnold Bennett
*&quot;The Portreeve&quot; (1906)
*&quot;The Whirlwind&quot; (1907)
*&quot;The Human Boy Again&quot; (1908)
* &quot;The Mother&quot; (1908)
* &quot;The Virgin in Judgment&quot; (1908) AKA &quot;A Fight to Finish&quot; (1911)
* &quot;The Statue: A Story of International Intrigue and Mystery&quot; (1908) with Arnold Bennett
*&quot;The Three Brothers&quot; (1909)
* &quot;The Fun of the Fair&quot; (1909)
*&quot;The Haven&quot; (1909)
*&quot;The Flint Heart: A Fairy Story&quot; (1910)
*&quot;The Thief of Virtue&quot; (1910)
*&quot;The Beacon&quot; (1911)
*&quot;Demeter&#x27;s Daughter&quot; (1911)
*&quot;The Three Knaves&quot; (1912)
*&quot;The Forest on the Hill&quot; (1912)
* &quot;The Lovers: A Romance&quot; (1912)
*&quot;Widecombe Fair&quot; (1913)
*&quot;The Joy of Youth&quot; (1913)
*&quot;The Old Time Before Them&quot; (1913)
*&quot;Faith Tresilion&quot; (1914)
*&quot;The Master of Merripit&quot; (1914)
*&quot;Brunel&#x27;s Tower&quot; (1915)
*&quot;The Green Alleys: A Comedy&quot; (1916)
*&quot;The Human Boy and the War&quot; (1916)
*&quot;The Banks of Colne: (the Nursery)&quot; (1917)
*&quot;The Girl and the Faun&quot; (1917)
*&quot;The Spinners&quot; (1918)
* &quot;From the Angle of Seventeen&quot; (1912)
*&quot;Evander&quot; (1919)
*&quot;Storm in a Teacup&quot; (1919)
*&quot;Miser&#x27;s Money&quot; (1920)
* &quot;Eudocia&quot; (1921)
*&quot;The Grey Room&quot; (1921)
*&quot;The Bronze Venus&quot; (1921)
*&quot;Orphan Dinah&quot; (1920)
* &quot;The Red Redmaynes&quot; (1922)
*&quot;Pan and the Twins&quot; (1922)
* &quot;Number 87&quot; (1922)
* &quot;The Thing at Their Heels&quot; (1923)
*&quot;Children of Men&quot; (1923)
*&quot;Cheat-the-boys; a Story of the Devonshire Orchards&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Redcliff&quot; (1924)
*&quot;The Treasures of Typhon&quot; (1924)
*&quot;The Lavender Dragon&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Who Killed Diana?&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Circé&#x27;s Island&quot; (1924)
*&quot;A Voice from the Dark&quot; (1925)
*&quot;The Monster&quot; (1925)
*&quot;George Westover&quot; (1926)
*&quot;The Marylebone Miser&quot; (1926) AKA &quot;Jig-Saw&quot; (1926)
*&quot;Cornish Droll: A Novel&quot; (1926)
*&quot;The Miniature&quot; (1926)
*&quot;The Jury&quot; (1927)
*&quot;Arachne&quot; (1928)
*&quot;The Ring Fence&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Tryphena&quot; (1929)
*&quot;The Apes&quot; (1929)
*&quot;The Three Maidens&quot; (1930)
*&quot;Alcyone (a Fairy Story)&quot; (1930)
*&quot;Found Drowned&quot; (1931)
*&quot;A Clue from the Stars&quot; (1932)
*&quot;The Broom Squires&quot; (1932)
*&quot;Stormbury, A Story of Devon&quot; (1932)
*&quot;The Captain&#x27;s Curio&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Bred in the Bone&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Witch&#x27;s Cauldron&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Nancy Owlett&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Minions of the Moon&quot; (1934)
*&quot;Ned of the Caribbees&quot; (1934)
*&quot;Portrait of a Gentleman&quot; (1934)
*&quot;Mr. Digweed and Mr. Lumb: A Mystery Novel&quot; (1934)
*&quot;The Oldest Inhabitant: A Comedy&quot; (1934)
*&quot;A Close Call&quot; (1936)
*&quot;The Owl of Athene&quot; (1936)
*&quot;The White Camel: A Story of Arabia&quot; (1936)
*&quot;The Anniversary Murder&quot; (1936)
*&quot;The Wife of Elias: A Mystery Novel&quot; (1937)
*&quot;Wood-nymph&quot; (1937)
*&quot;Farce in Three Acts&quot; (1937)
*&quot;Portrait of a Scoundrel&quot; (1938)
*&quot;Saurus&quot; (1938)
*&quot;Lycanthrope, the Mystery of Sir William Wolf&quot; (1938)
*&quot;Dark Horses&quot; (1938)
*&quot;Golden Island&quot; (1938)
*&quot;Thorn in Her Flesh&quot; (1939)
*&quot;Tabletop&quot; (1939) with Arnold Bennett
*&quot;Monkshood&quot; (1939)
*&quot;Chorus of Clowns&quot; (1940)
*&quot;Goldcross&quot; (1940)
*&quot;Awake Deborah!&quot; (1941)
*&quot;Ghostwater&quot; (1941)
*&quot;The Deed Without a Name&quot; (1942)
*&quot;Pilgrims of the Night&quot; (1942)
*&quot;A Museum Piece&quot; (1943)
*&quot;Flower of the Gods&quot; (1943)
*&quot;The Changeling&quot; (1944)
*&quot;The Drums of Dombali&quot; (1945)
*&quot;They Were Seven: (A Mystery)&quot; (1945)
*&quot;Quartet&quot; (1946)
*&quot;The Fall of the House of Heron&quot; (1948)
*&quot;Address Unknown&quot; (1949)
*&quot;The Waters of Walla&quot; (1950)
*&quot;Through a Glass Darkly&quot; (1951)
*&quot;George and Georgina: A Mystery Story&quot; (1952)
*&quot;His Brother&#x27;s Keeper&quot; (1953)
*&quot;The Widow Garland&quot; (1955)
*&quot;Connie Woodland&quot; (1956)
*&quot;Giglet Market&quot; (1957)
*&quot;There Was an Old Man&quot; (1959)

Short Fiction Books
*&quot;My Adventure in the Flying Scotsman; a Romance of London and North-Western Railway Shares&quot; (1888)
* &quot;The Human Boy&quot; (1899)
*&quot;Loup-garou!&quot; (1899)
*&quot;Summer Clouds and Other Stories&quot; (1893)
* &quot;Fancy Free&quot; (1901)
*&quot;The Striking Hours&quot; (1901)
* &quot;The Transit of the Red Dragon: And Other Tales&quot; (1903)
*&quot;Knock at a Venture&quot; (1905)
*&quot;The Unlucky Number&quot; (1906)
*&quot;The Folk Afield&quot; (1907)
*&quot;Tales of the Tenements&quot; (1910)
*&quot;The Judge&#x27;s Chair&quot; (1914)
* &quot;The Human Boy and the War&quot; (1916)
*&quot;Chronicles of St. Tid&quot; (1918)
* &quot;Black, White, and Brindled&quot; (1923)
*&quot;Up Hill, Down Dale: A Volume of Short Stories&quot; (1925)
*&quot;Peacock House and Other Mysteries&quot; (1926)
*&quot;It happened Like That, a New Volume of Short Stories&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Brother Man&quot; (1928)
*&quot;The Torch and Other Tales&quot; (1929)
*&quot;Cherry Gambol and Other Stories&quot; (1930)
*&quot;They Could Do No Other: A Volume of Stories&quot; (1932)
*&quot;Once upon a Time&quot; (1936)
*&quot;The Hidden Hand&quot; (1952)

Poetry
*&quot;Up-Along and Down-Along&quot; (1905)
*&quot;Wild Fruit&quot; (1911)
*&quot;The Iscariot&quot; (1912)
*&quot;Delight and Other Poems&quot; (1916)
*&quot;Plain Song&quot; (1917)
*&quot;A Shadow Passes&quot; [Observations and Poems] (1918)
*&quot;As the Wind Blows&quot; (1920)
*&quot;A Dish of Apples&quot; (1921)
*&quot;Pixies&#x27; Plot&quot; (1922)
*&quot;Thoughts in Prose and Verse&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Cherry-Stones&quot; (1924)
*&quot;A Harvesting&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Brother Beast&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Goodwill&quot; (1928)
*&quot;For Remembrance&quot; (1929)
*&quot;A Hundred Sonnets&quot; (1929)
*&quot;A Hundred Lyrics&quot; (1930)
*&quot;Becoming&quot; (1932)
* &quot;Song of a Sailor Man: A Narrative Poem&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Sonnets from Nature&quot; (1935)
*&quot;A Dartmoor Village&quot; (1937)
*&quot;Miniatures&quot; (1942)
*&quot;The Enchanted Wood&quot; (1948)
*&quot;One Thing and Another&quot; [Essays and poems.] (1954)

Plays
*&quot;The Prude&#x27;s Progress: A Comedy&quot; with Jerome K. Jerome (1895)
*&quot;A Golden Wedding: An Original Comedy in One Act&quot; (1899)
*&quot;A Breezy Morning&quot; (1904)
*&quot;A Pair of Knickerbockers&quot; (1900)
*&quot;Curtain Raisers&quot; (1912)
*&quot;The Shadow; A Play in Three Acts&quot; (1913)
*&quot;The Mother: A Play in Four Acts&quot; (1914)
*&quot;The Secret Woman; A Play in Five Acts&quot; (1914)
*&quot;The Angel in the House: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1915)
*&quot;The Farmer&#x27;s Wife&quot; (1916)
*&quot;Arachne; A Play&quot; (1920) By Adelaide Eden Phillpotts
*&quot;St. George and the Dragons: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1919) AKA *&quot;The bishop&#x27;s night out&quot; (1929)
*&quot;The Market-Money. A Play in One Act&quot; (1923)
*&quot;Bed Rock: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1924)
*&quot;Devonshire Cream: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1925)
*&quot;A Comedy Royal&quot; (1925) Dramatization of &quot;Eudocia (1921)&quot;
*&quot;Yellow Sands&quot; (1926)
*&quot;Blue Comet&quot; (1927)
*&quot;The Runaways: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Three Short Plays: The Market-money; Something to Talk about; The Purple Bedroom&quot; (1928)
*&quot;Buy a Broom: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1929)
*&quot;Jane&#x27;s Legacy: A Folk Play in Three Acts&quot; (1931)
*&quot;The Good Old Days: A Comedy in Three Acts&quot; (1932) with his daughter
*&quot;Bert: A Play in One Act&quot; (1932)
*&quot;A Cup of Happiness: A Comedy&quot; (1933)
*&quot;At the &#x27;bus-stop: A Duologue for Two Women&quot; (1943)
*&quot;The Orange Orchard&quot; (1951) Based on &quot;The Waters of Walla&quot;

Nonfiction
*&quot;In Sugar-Cane Land&quot; (1890)
*&quot;My Garden&quot; (1906)
*&quot;Dance of the Months.&quot; [Sketches of Dartmoor and poems.] (1911)
*&quot;My Shrubs&quot; (1915)
*&quot;My Devon Year&quot; (1916)
*&quot;One Hundred Pictures from Eden Phillpotts / Selected by L.H. Brewitt&quot; (1919)
*&quot;A West Country Pilgrimage&quot; (1920) [Essays and verse.]
*&quot;A West Country Sketch Book&quot; (1928) Essays from &quot;Dance of the Months&quot; and &quot;A West Country Pilgrimage&quot; with one new essay.
*&quot;Essays in Little&quot; (1931)
*&quot;Handmade Paper: Its Method of Manufacture as Described in the Novel &quot;Storm in a Teacup&quot;&quot; (1932)
*&quot;A Year with Bisshe-Bantam&quot; (1934)
*&quot;A Mixed Grill&quot; (1940) Essays.
*&quot;From the Angle of 88&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Selected Letters&quot; (1984)
===Omnibus===
*&quot;Dartmoor Omnibus&quot; [&quot;Orphan Dinah&quot;, &quot;Three Brothers&quot;, &quot;Children of Men&quot;, &quot;The Whirlwind&quot;]
*&quot;Three plays: The shadows; The mother; The secret woman&quot; (1913)
*&quot;Circe&#x27;s Island and The Girl &amp; The Faun&quot; (1925)
*&quot;The Complete Human Boy. Comprising &quot;The Human Boy,&quot; &quot;The Human Boy Again,&quot; &quot;The Human Boy and the War,&quot; &quot;The Human Boy&#x27;s Diary,&quot; &quot;From the Angle of Seventeen,&quot; Etc.&quot; (1930)
*&quot;West Country Plays&quot; (1933) [&quot;Buy a Broom&quot; and &quot;A Cup of Happiness&quot;.]
*&quot;The Book of Avis: A Trilogy Comprising Bred in the Bone, Witch&#x27;s Cauldron, A Shadow Passes&quot; [1936]

==References==
===Further reading===
* The New Cambridge Bibliography of English Literature, George Watson, Ian R. Willison CUP Archive, 1987

==External links==
* 
* 
* Eden Phillpotts papers, MSS 1458 in the L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University
* Eden Phillpotts Collection at the Harry Ransom Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1283557" start="0" end="15" title="Eden Phillpotts" label="Eden Phillpotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q695221" start="111" end="120" title="Mount Abu" label="Mount Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726983" start="323" end="339" title="Henry Phillpotts" label="Henry Phillpotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q18009182" start="453" end="477" title="James Surtees Phillpotts" label="James Surtees Phillpotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140484" start="506" end="520" title="Bedford School" label="Bedford School"/>
<link wikidata="Q695221" start="592" end="601" title="Mount Abu" label="Mount Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="605" end="614" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="655" end="666" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661231" start="717" end="737" title="Indian Civil Service" label="Indian Civil Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="957" end="965" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780407" start="1179" end="1194" title="RSA Insurance Group" label="Sun Fire Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3640780" start="1664" end="1691" title="Black and White (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Black and White&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="1907" end="1912" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q654026" start="2040" end="2050" title="Broadclyst" label="Broadclyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q134672" start="2056" end="2062" title="Exeter" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225647" start="2162" end="2195" title="Dartmoor Preservation Association" label="Dartmoor Preservation Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3131678" start="2297" end="2326" title="Rationalist Press Association" label="Rationalist Press Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q35064" start="2356" end="2371" title="Agatha Christie" label="Agatha Christie"/>
<link wikidata="Q957248" start="2474" end="2492" title="Peril at End House" label="Peril at End House"/>
<link wikidata="Q909" start="2627" end="2644" title="Jorge Luis Borges" label="Jorge Luis Borges"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3377" end="3391" title="Widecombe Fair (novel)" label="Widecombe Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998656" start="3428" end="3432" title="Widecombe Fair" label="fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q977068" start="3451" end="3472" title="Widecombe-in-the-Moor" label="Widecombe-in-the-Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733458" start="3521" end="3543" title="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Wife (play)" label="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621735" start="3593" end="3614" title="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="3628" end="3644" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733455" start="3667" end="3678" title="The Farmer&amp;#x27;s Wife (1941 film)" label="1941 remake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343798" start="3692" end="3702" title="Norman Lee" label="Norman Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820755" start="3707" end="3720" title="Leslie Arliss" label="Leslie Arliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q27786436" start="3779" end="3789" title="Jan Stewer" label="Jan Stewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15449011" start="3896" end="3915" title="Adelaide Phillpotts" label="Adelaide Phillpotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051821" start="3962" end="3974" title="Yellow Sands (play)" label="Yellow Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q214823" start="4113" end="4121" title="Dartmoor" label="Dartmoor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4782" end="4799" title="The Red Redmaynes" label="The Red Redmaynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q34743" start="4996" end="5011" title="Rudyard Kipling" label="Rudyard Kipling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439259" start="5025" end="5041" title="Stalky &amp;amp; Co." label="Stalky &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="5173" end="5180" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5222" end="5228" title="Saurus (novel)" label="Saurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387246" start="5293" end="5307" title="Eric Partridge" label="Eric Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713537" start="5956" end="5977" title="The American Prisoner" label="The American Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q314158" start="6231" end="6245" title="Arnold Bennett" label="Arnold Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q104835316" start="6707" end="6716" title="The Haven (novel)" label="The Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051821" start="13875" end="13887" title="Yellow Sands (play)" label="Yellow Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q104835643" start="13908" end="13918" title="Blue Comet (play)" label="Blue Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811431" start="16348" end="16380" title="L. Tom Perry Special Collections" label="L. Tom Perry Special Collections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5659990" start="16382" end="16403" title="Harold B. Lee Library" label="Harold B. Lee Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q332498" start="16405" end="16429" title="Brigham Young University" label="Brigham Young University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="16466" end="16485" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9725" wikidata="Q5334421" url="?curid=9725" title="Ecuador–United States relations">
<text>Ecuador and the United States maintained close ties based on mutual interests in maintaining democratic institutions; combating cannabis and cocaine; building trade, investment, and financial ties; cooperating in fostering Ecuador&#x27;s economic development; and participating in inter-American organizations. Ties are further strengthened by the presence of an estimated 150,000-200,000 Ecuadorians living in the United States and by 24,000 U.S. citizens visiting Ecuador annually, and by approximately 15,000 U.S. citizens living in Ecuador.

Relations between the two nations have been strained following Julian Assange&#x27;s bid to seek political asylum in the Ecuadorian embassy in London following repeated claims that the US government was pursuing his extradition due to his work with Wikileaks.
 Ecuador first offered political asylum to Julian Assange in November 2010, which he then invoked by entering their London embassy in June 2012. This was then revoked in 2019, following negotiations between the Moreno administration and the British Government. Relations have since improved following the ouster of Rafael Correa from office as President of Ecuador. 

==History==
Both nations were early signatories of the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (the &quot;Rio Treaty&quot;) of 1947, the Western Hemisphere&#x27;s regional mutual security treaty. However, under the Correa administration, Ecuador denounced the treaty in February 2014, a legal prerequisite by which Ecuador would leave the treaty in 2016. Ecuador shares U.S. concern over increasing narcotrafficking and international terrorism and has energetically condemned terrorist actions, whether directed against government officials or private citizens. The government has maintained Ecuador virtually free of coca production since the mid-1980s and is working to combat money laundering and the transhipment of drugs and chemicals essential to the processing of cocaine.

According to CIA critic and former CIA agent who was stationed in Ecuador Philip Agee, the CIA carried out extensive operations and political manipulation in Ecuador in the early 1960s. For instance the CIA was involved in the group the Ecuadorian Anti-Communist Action.

Ecuador and the U.S. agreed in 1999 to a 10-year arrangement whereby U.S. military surveillance aircraft could use the airbase at Manta, Ecuador, as a &quot;Forward Operating Location&quot; to detect drug trafficking flights through the region. The arrangement expired in 2009; former president Rafael Correa vowed not to renew it, and since then Ecuador has not had any foreign military facilities in the country.

In fisheries issues, the United States claims jurisdiction for the management of coastal fisheries up to 200 mile (370 km) from its coast, but excludes highly migratory species; Ecuador, on the other hand, claims a 200-mile (370-km) territorial sea, and imposes license fees and fines on foreign fishing vessels in the area, making no exceptions for catches of migratory species. In the early 1970s, Ecuador seized about 100 foreign-flag vessels (many of them U.S.) and collected fees and fines of more than $6 million. After a drop-off in such seizures for some years, several U.S. tuna boats were again detained and seized in 1980 and 1981.

The U.S. Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act then triggered an automatic prohibition of U.S. imports of tuna products from Ecuador. The prohibition was lifted in 1983, and although fundamental differences between U.S. and Ecuadorian legislation still exist, there is no current conflict. During the period that has elapsed since seizures which triggered the tuna import ban, successive Ecuadorian governments have declared their willingness to explore possible solutions to this problem with mutual respect for longstanding positions and principles of both sides. The election of Rafael Correa in October 2006, has strained relations between the two countries and relations have since been fraught with tension. Rafael Correa was heavily critical of U.S. foreign policy whilst in office.

In April 2011, relations between Ecuador and the United States soured particularly after Ecuador expelled the U.S. ambassador after a leaked diplomatic cable was shown accusing president Correa of knowingly ignoring police corruption. In reciprocation, the Ecuadorian ambassador Luis Gallegos was expelled from the United States.

In 2013, when Ecuador unilaterally pulled out of a preferential trade pact with the United States over claiming the U.S. used it as blackmail in regards to the asylum request of Edward Snowden, relations between Ecuador and the United States reached an all-time low. The pact offered Ecuador US$23 million, which it offered to the U.S. for human rights training. Tariff free imports had been offered to Ecuador in exchange for drug elimination efforts.

Julian Assange applied for Ecuadorian citizenship on 16 September 2017, which Ecuador granted on 12 December 2017. However, this development was not announced until 25 January 2018.

In April 2019, Assange was arrested by the Metropolitan Police. President of Ecuador, Lenin Moreno, stated that he had &#x27;violated the terms of his asylum&#x27;. British Foreign Secretary, Jeremy Hunt stated that the British and Ecuadorian governments had been co-operating since Moreno&#x27;s inauguration and aimed to resolve the situation. Assange extradition to the United States was denied, due to a combination of his ill health and the nature of the US carceral system.

The relations with the United States improved significantly during the presidency of Lenin Moreno since 2017. In February 2020, his visit to Washington was the first meeting between an Ecuadorian and U.S. president in 17 years. In June 2019, Ecuador had agreed to allow US military planes to operate from an airport on the Galapagos Islands.

==Education==
American schools in Ecuador:
*Colegio Americano de Quito
*Inter-American Academy of Guayaquil
*Academia Cotopaxi - American International school

*Alliance Academy International

==See also==
* Latin America–United States relations

==References==
==Further reading==
* Mumford, Jeremy. &quot;Ecuadorian Americans.&quot; &quot;Gale Encyclopedia of Multicultural America,&quot; edited by Thomas Riggs, (3rd ed., vol. 2, Gale, 2014), pp. 47–60. online
* Pineo, Ronn F. &quot;Ecuador and the United States: Useful Strangers&quot; (University of Georgia Press, 2007).
* Pribilsky, Jason. &quot;La Chulla Vida: Gender, Migration and the Family in Andean Ecuador and New York City&quot; (Syracuse University Press, 2007).

==External links==

* History of Ecuador - United States relations
* - U.S. State Department Fact Sheet on U.S. Ecuador relations
* &quot;Ecuador News&quot; newspaper</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="0" end="7" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="16" end="29" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="128" end="136" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="141" end="148" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q360" start="609" end="630" title="Julian Assange" label="Julian Assange&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="643" end="659" title="political asylum" label="political asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1803773" start="667" end="695" title="Ecuadorian embassy in London" label="Ecuadorian embassy in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153854" start="1017" end="1038" title="Politics of Ecuador" label="Moreno administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6063" start="1047" end="1065" title="British Government" label="British Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q19581" start="1121" end="1134" title="Rafael Correa" label="Rafael Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q732562" start="1150" end="1170" title="President of Ecuador" label="President of Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410645" start="1229" end="1275" title="Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance" label="Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="1860" end="1876" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="1952" end="1959" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q62493" start="2036" end="2047" title="Philip Agee" label="Philip Agee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444671" start="2353" end="2369" title="Manta Air Base" label="airbase at Manta"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="2371" end="2378" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q19581" start="2529" end="2542" title="Rafael Correa" label="Rafael Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q19581" start="3887" end="3900" title="Rafael Correa" label="Rafael Correa"/>
<link wikidata="Q276441" start="4230" end="4236" title="United States diplomatic cables leak" label="leaked"/>
<link wikidata="Q1876415" start="4375" end="4388" title="Luis Gallegos" label="Luis Gallegos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13424289" start="4605" end="4619" title="Edward Snowden" label="Edward Snowden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139213" start="5107" end="5126" title="Metropolitan Police" label="Metropolitan Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q333533" start="5256" end="5267" title="Jeremy Hunt" label="Jeremy Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q518626" start="5630" end="5642" title="Lenin Moreno" label="Lenin Moreno"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142778" start="5932" end="5958" title="Colegio Americano de Quito" label="Colegio Americano de Quito"/>
<link wikidata="Q21044249" start="5960" end="5995" title="Inter-American Academy of Guayaquil" label="Inter-American Academy of Guayaquil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671056" start="5997" end="6046" title="Academia Cotopaxi" label="Academia Cotopaxi - American International school"/>
<link wikidata="Q4732279" start="6049" end="6079" title="Alliance Academy International" label="Alliance Academy International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467810" start="6096" end="6133" title="Latin America–United States relations" label="Latin America–United States relations"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9727" wikidata="Q2060479" url="?curid=9727" title="Eight-ball">
<text>Eight-ball (also spelled 8-ball or eightball, and sometimes called solids and stripes, spots and stripes, big ones and little ones, or rarely highs and lows) is a discipline of pool played on a billiard table with six pockets, cue sticks, and sixteen billiard balls (a and fifteen ). The object balls include seven solid-colored balls numbered 1 through 7, seven striped balls numbered 9 through 15, and the black 8 ball. After the balls are scattered with a shot, a player is assigned either the group of solid or striped balls once they have legally pocketed a ball from that group. The object of the game is to legally pocket the 8-ball in a &quot;called&quot; pocket, which can only be done after all of the balls from a player&#x27;s assigned group have been cleared from the table.

The game is the most frequently played discipline of pool, and is often thought of as synonymous with &quot;pool&quot;. The game has numerous variations, mostly regional. It is the second most played professional pool game, after nine-ball, and for the last several decades ahead of straight pool.

==History==
The game of eight-ball arose around 1900 in the United States as a development of pyramid pool, which allows any eight of the fifteen object balls to be pocketed to win. The game arose from two changes made, namely that the 8 ball must be pocketed last to win, and that each player may pocket only half of the other object balls. By 1925, the game was popular enough for the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Company to introduce purpose-made ball sets with seven , seven , one , and the cue ball, which allowed spectators to more easily see which suit each ball belonged to. (Such colors became standard in the later British-originating variant.) The rules, as officially codified in the Billiard Congress of America&#x27;s rule book, were periodically revised in the years following.

==Standardized rules of play==
American-style eight-ball is played around the world by professionals and in many amateur leagues. Nevertheless, the rules for eight-ball may be the most inconsistent of any billiard game, as there are several competing sets of &quot;official&quot; rules.

The World Pool-Billiard Association (WPA), the governing body of pool which has continental and national affiliates around the world, promulgates standardized rules as &quot;Pool Billiards – The Rules of Play&quot;. These are used for amateur and professional play.

Meanwhile, many amateur leagues – such as the American Poolplayers Association (APA) and its affiliate the Canadian Poolplayers Association (CPA), the Valley National Eight-ball Association (VNEA) and the BCA Pool League (BCAPL) – use their own rulesets which have slight differences from WPA rules and from each other. Millions of individuals play casually, using informal &quot;house rules&quot; which vary not only from area to area but even from venue to venue.

===Equipment===

The regulation size of a table&#x27;s playing surface is , with the between-cushion area being , though exact dimensions may vary slightly by manufacturer. Some leagues and tournaments using the World Standardized Rules may allow smaller sizes, down to . Early 20th-century models are occasionally also still used. Professional competition generally employs regulation tables, while the amateur championships of various leagues, including BCAPL, VNEA, and APA, use the seven-foot tables in order to fit more of them into the hosting venue.

There are seven numbered 1 through 7, seven numbered 9 through 15, an , and a . The balls are usually colored as follows:

Special sets designed to be more easily discernible on television substitute pink for the dark purple of the 4 and 12 and light tan for the darker maroon of the 7 and 15 balls, and these alternative-color sets are now also available to consumers.

===Setup===
To start the game, the s are placed in a triangular rack. The base of the rack is parallel to the (the short end of the pool table) and positioned so the apex ball of the rack is located on the . The balls in the rack are ideally placed so that they are all in contact with one another; this is accomplished by pressing the balls together toward the apex ball. The order of the balls should be random, with the exceptions of the 8-ball, which must be placed in the center of the rack (i.e., the middle of the third row), and the two back corner balls, one of which must be a stripe and the other a solid. The cue ball is placed anywhere the breaker desires behind the .

===Break===
One person is chosen by some predetermined method (e.g., coin toss, , or win or loss of previous game or match) to shoot first, using the cue ball to the object-ball rack apart. In most leagues, it is the breaker&#x27;s opponent who racks the balls, but in some, players break their own racks. If the breaker fails to make a successful break—usually defined as at least four balls hitting cushions or an object ball being pocketed—then the opponent can opt either to play from the current position or to call for a and either re-break or have the original breaker repeat the break.
If the 8 ball is pocketed on the break, then the breaker can choose either to the 8 ball and play from the current position or to re-rack and re-break; but if the cue ball is also pocketed on the break (colloquially referred to as a &quot;scratch&quot;) then the opponent is the one who has the choice: either to re-spot the 8 ball and shoot with behind the , accepting the current position, or to re-break or have the breaker re-break.

===Turn-taking===
A player (or team) continues to shoot until committing a or failing to legally pocket an object ball (whether or not); thereupon it is the turn of the opposing players. Play alternates in this manner for the remainder of the game. Following a foul, the incoming player has anywhere on the table, unless the foul occurred on the break shot, as noted previously.

===Selection of the target group===
The table is &quot;open&quot; at the start of the game, meaning that either player may shoot at any ball. It remains open until one player legally pockets any called ball other than the 8 after the break. That player is assigned the &quot;group&quot;, or &quot;suit&quot;, of the pocketed and the other suit is assigned to the opponent. Balls pocketed on the break, or as the result of a foul while the table is still open, are not used to assign the suits. Once the suits are assigned, they remain fixed throughout the game. If any balls from a player&#x27;s suit are on the table, the player must hit one of them first on every shot; otherwise a foul is called and the turn ends. After all balls from the suit have been pocketed, the player&#x27;s target becomes the 8 for the remainder of the game.

===Pocketing the 8 ball===
Once all of a player&#x27;s (or team&#x27;s) group of object balls are pocketed, the player attempts to sink the 8 ball. In order to win the game, the player first designates which pocket the 8 ball will be pocketed into and then successfully pockets the 8 ball into that pocket. If the player knocks the 8 ball off the table, the player loses the game. If the player pockets the 8 ball and commits a foul or pockets it into another pocket than the one designated, the player loses the game. Otherwise (i.e., if the 8 ball is neither pocketed nor knocked off the table), the shooter&#x27;s turn is simply over, even if a foul occurs. In short, a world-standardized rules game of eight-ball, like a game of nine-ball, is not over until the &quot;&quot; is no longer on the table. The rule has been increasingly adopted by amateur leagues.

===Winning===
A player wins the game if that player legally pockets the 8 ball into a designated pocket after all of their object balls have been pocketed. Because of this, it is possible for a game to end with only one of the players having shot, which is known as &quot;running the table&quot; or a &quot;denial&quot;; conversely, it&#x27;s also possible to win a game &quot;without&quot; taking a shot; such a scenario may occur if the opposing player illegally pockets the 8 ball on any shot other than the break (such as sinking the 8 ball in an uncalled pocket, knocking the 8 ball off the table, sinking the 8 ball when a player is not yet on the black ball, or sinking both the 8 ball and the cue ball off a single shot). The rules on what happens when the 8 ball is pocketed off the break vary by the rules in question .

===Fouls===
The general rules of pool apply to eight-ball, such as the requirements that the cue ball not be pocketed and that a cushion be hit by any of the balls after the cue ball has struck an object ball. Fouls specific to eight-ball are:
*The shooter fails to strike one of their own object balls (or the 8 ball when it is the legal ball) with the cue ball, before other balls are contacted by the cue ball. This excludes &quot;&quot; shots, where the cue ball strikes one of the shooter&#x27;s and one of the opponent&#x27;s object balls simultaneously.
*If an attempt is made to pocket a ball, and the ball hits the pocket, bounces out and lands on the ground, the ball is placed in the pocket and the game continues.
*The shooter shoots the black 8 ball without designating the pocket to opposite team members or the match referee in advance.
*The shooter deliberately pockets the opponent&#x27;s balls while shooting the 8 ball.
*On the break shot, no balls are pocketed and fewer than four balls reach the cushions, in which case the incoming player can demand a re-rack and take the break or force the original breaker to re-break, or may take ball-in-hand behind the and shoot the balls as they lie.

==Variants==
===United Kingdom===


The British version of eight-ball, known internationally as either blackball or simply eight-ball, has evolved into a separate game, retaining significant elements of earlier pub versions of the game, with additional influences from English billiards and snooker. It is popular in amateur and professional competition in the UK, Ireland, Australia and some other countries.

The game uses unnumbered, solid-colored object balls, typically red and yellow, with one black 8 ball. They are usually or in diameter, the latter being the same size as the balls used in snooker and English billiards. Tables are usually long, and feature pockets with rounded cushion openings, like snooker tables. Smaller tables are sometimes used in places where a larger table would be too large.

The rules of blackball differ from standard eight-ball in numerous ways, including the handling of fouls, which may give the opponent two shots, racking (the 8 ball, not the apex ball, goes on the spot), selection of which group of balls will be shot by which player, handling of balls and s, and many other details.

Internationally, the World Pool-Billiard Association and the World Eightball Pool Federation both publish rules and promote events. The two rule sets differ in some details regarding the penalties for fouls.

===Chinese eight-ball (Heyball)===
The version of eight-ball played in China uses rules that are essentially the same as standard WPA rules; and the game is played with standard solids-and-stripes balls. However, the tables are constructed similarly to snooker tables, with rounded pocket openings, napped cloth and flat-faced rail cushions. This results in some differences in gameplay approach. The variant arose in the mid-1980s and 1990s as eight-ball gained popularity in China, where snooker was the most popular cue sport at the time. With standard American-style pool tables rare, Chinese players made do with playing eight-ball on small snooker tables. It has since become the most popular cue sport in China, and the major tournaments have some of the largest prize money in pool.

===Eight-ball rotation===

The hybrid game eight-ball rotation is a combination of eight-ball and rotation, in which the players must pocket their balls (other than the 8, which remains last) in numerical order. Specifically, the solids player starts by pocketing the 1 ball and ascends to the 7 ball, and the stripes player starts by pocketing the 15 ball and descends to the 9 ball.

===Backwards eight-ball===
Backwards eight-ball, also called reverse eight-ball, is a variant in which, instead of shooting the cue ball at an object ball to force the object ball into a pocket, the player strikes the object ball with their cue so it s off the cue ball and into a pocket, in a fashion similar to Russian pyramid.

==See also==

*List of World Eight-ball Champions

==Notes==
==References==

==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
*World Pool-Billiard Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2060479" start="0" end="10" title="Eight-ball" label="Eight-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060479" start="25" end="31" title="Eight-ball" label="8-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060479" start="35" end="44" title="Eight-ball" label="eightball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060479" start="67" end="85" title="Eight-ball" label="solids and stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060479" start="87" end="104" title="Eight-ball" label="spots and stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060479" start="106" end="130" title="Eight-ball" label="big ones and little ones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060479" start="142" end="156" title="Eight-ball" label="highs and lows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11020" start="177" end="181" title="Pool (cue sports)" label="pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500725" start="194" end="208" title="billiard table" label="billiard table"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500725" start="218" end="225" title="Pocket (billiards)" label="pockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q593707" start="227" end="236" title="cue stick" label="cue stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q862747" start="251" end="265" title="billiard balls" label="billiard balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063445" start="1019" end="1028" title="nine-ball" label="nine-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7468888" start="1072" end="1085" title="straight pool" label="straight pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263294" start="1182" end="1194" title="pyramid pool" label="pyramid pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q994153" start="1475" end="1508" title="Brunswick Corporation" label="Brunswick-Balke-Collender Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q967318" start="1710" end="1737" title="Eight-ball pool (British variation)" label="British-originating variant"/>
<link wikidata="Q862836" start="1781" end="1809" title="Billiard Congress of America" label="Billiard Congress of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593770" start="2171" end="2202" title="World Pool-Billiard Association" label="World Pool-Billiard Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744706" start="2480" end="2512" title="American Poolplayers Association" label="American Poolplayers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912151" start="2585" end="2623" title="Valley National Eight-ball Association" label="Valley National Eight-ball Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q862836" start="2639" end="2654" title="BCA Pool League" label="BCA Pool League"/>
<link wikidata="Q455282" start="2814" end="2824" title="house rule" label="house rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928735" start="3894" end="3898" title="Rack (billiards)" label="rack"/>
<link wikidata="Q825367" start="4582" end="4591" title="coin toss" label="coin toss"/>
<link wikidata="Q967318" start="9778" end="9787" title="Blackball (pool)" label="blackball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324916" start="9944" end="9961" title="English billiards" label="English billiards"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015" start="9966" end="9973" title="snooker" label="snooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593770" start="10827" end="10858" title="World Pool-Billiard Association" label="World Pool-Billiard Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602071" start="10867" end="10898" title="World Eightball Pool Federation" label="World Eightball Pool Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357109" start="11905" end="11913" title="Rotation (pool)" label="rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q506941" start="12506" end="12521" title="Russian pyramid" label="Russian pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645830" start="12539" end="12573" title="List of World Eight-ball Champions" label="List of World Eight-ball Champions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="9728" wikidata="Q1277565" url="?curid=9728" title="Earned value management">
<text>Earned value management (EVM), earned value project management, or earned value performance management (EVPM) is a project management technique for measuring project performance and progress in an objective manner.

== Overview ==
Earned value management is a project management technique for measuring project performance and progress. It has the ability to combine measurements of the project management triangle: scope, time, and costs.

In a single integrated system, EVM is able to provide accurate forecasts of project performance problems, which is an important aspect of project management.

Early EVM research showed that the areas of planning and control are significantly impacted by its use; and similarly, using the methodology improves both scope definition as well as the analysis of overall project performance. More recent research studies have shown that the principles of EVM are positive predictors of project success. The popularity of EVM has grown in recent years beyond government contracting, a sector in which its importance continues to rise (e.g. recent new DFARS rules), in part because EVM can also surface in and help substantiate contract disputes.

=== EVM features ===
Essential features of any EVM implementation include:
* A project schedule that identifies work to be accomplished. Sometimes incorrectly called a Project Plan.
* A valuation of planned work, called planned value (PV) or budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS)
* Pre-defined &quot;earning rules&quot; (also called metrics) to quantify the accomplishment of work, called earned value (EV) or budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP)
* Actual Cost which is also known as Actual Cost of Work Performed (ACWP)
* A plot of project cumulative costs vs time especially to show both early date and late date curves

EVM implementations for large or complex projects include many more features, such as indicators and forecasts of cost performance (over budget or under budget) and schedule performance (behind schedule or ahead of schedule). Large projects usually need to use quantitative forecasts associated with earned value management. Although deliverables in these large projects can use adaptive development methods, the forecasting metrics found in earned value management are mostly used in projects using the predictive approach. However, the most basic requirement of an EVM system is that it quantifies progress using PV and EV.

=== Application example ===
Project A has been approved for a duration of one year and with a budget. It was also planned that the project spends 50% of the approved budget and expects 50% of the work to be complete in the first six months. If now, six months after the start of the project, a project manager reports that he has spent 50% of the budget, one may presume that the project is perfectly on plan. However, in reality the provided information is not sufficient to come to such a conclusion. The project can spend 50% of the budget, whilst finishing only 25% of the work, which would mean the project is not doing well; or the project can spend 50% of the budget, whilst completing 75% of the work, which would mean that project is doing better than planned. EVM is meant to address such and similar issues.

== History ==
EVM emerged as a financial analysis specialty in United States government programs in the 1960s, with the government requiring contractors to implement an EVM system (EVMS). It has since become a significant branch of project management and cost engineering. Project management research investigating the contribution of EVM to project success suggests a moderately strong positive relationship. Implementations of EVM can be scaled to fit projects of all sizes and complexities.

The genesis of EVM occurred in industrial manufacturing at the turn of the 20th century, based largely on the principle of &quot;earned time&quot; popularized by Frank and Lillian Gilbreth.

In 1979, EVM was introduced to the architecture and engineering industry in a &quot;Public Works Magazine&quot; article by David Burstein, a project manager with a national engineering firm. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, EVM emerged more widely as a project management methodology to be understood and used by managers and executives, not just EVM specialists. Many industrialized nations also began to utilize EVM in their own procurement programs.

An overview of EVM was included in the Project Management Institute (PMI)&#x27;s first Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBOK) Guide in 1987 and was expanded in subsequent editions. In the most recent edition of the PMBOK guide, EVM is listed among the general tools and techniques for processes to control project costs.

The construction industry was an early commercial adopter of EVM. Closer integration of EVM with the practice of project management accelerated in the 1990s. In 1999, the Performance Management Association merged with the PMI to become its first college, the College of Performance Management (CPM). The United States Office of Management and Budget began to mandate the use of EVM across all government agencies, and, for the first time, for certain internally managed projects (not just for contractors). EVM also received greater attention by publicly traded companies in response to the Sarbanes–Oxley Act of 2002.

In Australia, EVM has been codified as the standards AS 4817-2003 and AS 4817–2006.

=== US defense industry ===
The EVM concept took root in the United States Department of Defense in the 1960s. The original concept was called the Program Evaluation and Review Technique, but it was considered overly burdensome and not very adaptable by contractors whom were mandated to use it, and many variations of it began to proliferate among various procurement programs. In 1967, the DoD established a criterion-based approach, using a set of 35 criteria, called the Cost/Schedule Control Systems Criteria (C/SCSC). In the 1970s and early 1980s, a subculture of C/SCSC analysis grew, but the technique was often ignored or even actively resisted by project managers in both government and industry. C/SCSC was often considered a financial control tool that could be delegated to analytical specialists.

In 1989, EVM leadership was elevated to the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, thus making EVM an element of program management and procurement. In 1991, Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney canceled the Navy A-12 Avenger II Program because of performance problems detected by EVM. This demonstrated that EVM mattered to secretary-level leadership. In the 1990s, many U.S. Government regulations were eliminated or streamlined. However, EVM not only survived the acquisition reform movement, but became strongly associated with the acquisition reform movement itself. Most notably, from 1995 to 1998, ownership of EVM criteria (reduced to 32) was transferred to industry by adoption of ANSI EIA 748-A standard.

The use of EVM has expanded beyond the U.S. Department of Defense. It was adopted by the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the United States Department of Energy and other technology-related agencies.

== Project tracking ==

It is helpful to see an example of project tracking that does not include earned value performance management. Consider a project that has been planned in detail, including a time-phased spend plan for all elements of work. Figure 1 shows the cumulative budget (cost) for this project as a function of time (the blue line, labeled PV). It also shows the cumulative actual cost of the project (red line, labeled AC) through week 8. To those unfamiliar with EVM, it might appear that this project was over budget through week 4 and then under budget from week 6 through week 8. However, what is missing from this chart is any understanding of how much work has been accomplished during the project. If the project was actually completed at week 8, then the project would actually be well under budget and well ahead of schedule. If, on the other hand, the project is only 10% complete at week 8, the project is significantly over budget and behind schedule. A method is needed to measure technical performance objectively and quantitatively, and that is what EVM accomplishes.

=== Progress measurement sheet ===
Progress can be measured using a measurement sheet and employing various techniques including milestones, weighted steps, value of work done, physical percent complete, earned value, Level of Effort, earn as planned, and more. Progress can be tracked based on any measure – cost, hours, quantities, schedule, directly input percent complete, and more.

Progress can be assessed using fundamental earned value calculations and variance analysis (Planned Cost, Actual Cost, and Earned Value); these calculations can determine where project performance currently is using the estimated project baseline&#x27;s cost and schedule information.

=== With EVM ===
Consider the same project, except this time the project plan includes pre-defined methods of quantifying the accomplishment of work. At the end of each week, the project manager identifies every detailed element of work that has been completed, and sums the EV for each of these completed elements. Earned value may be accumulated monthly, weekly, or as progress is made. The Value of Work Done (VOWD) is mainly used in Oil &amp; Gas and is similar to the Actual Cost in EVM.

== Earned value (EV) ==
formula_1

EV is calculated by multiplying %complete of each task (completed or in progress) by its planned value

Figure 2 shows the EV curve (in green) along with the PV curve from Figure 1. The chart indicates that technical performance (i.e. progress) started more rapidly than planned, but slowed significantly and fell behind schedule at week 7 and 8. This chart illustrates the schedule performance aspect of EVM. It is complementary to critical path or critical chain schedule management.

Figure 3 shows the same EV curve (green) with the actual cost data from Figure 1 (in red). It can be seen that the project was actually under budget, relative to the amount of work accomplished, since the start of the project. This is a much better conclusion than might be derived from Figure 1.

Figure 4 shows all three curves together – which is a typical EVM line chart. The best way to read these three-line charts is to identify the EV curve first, then compare it to PV (for schedule performance) and AC (for cost performance). It can be seen from this illustration that a true understanding of cost performance and schedule performance &quot;relies first on measuring technical performance objectively.&quot; This is the &quot;foundational principle&quot; of EVM.

== Scaling EVM from simple to advanced implementations ==
The &quot;foundational principle&quot; of EVM, mentioned above, does not depend on the size or complexity of the project. However, the &quot;implementations&quot; of EVM can vary significantly depending on the circumstances. In many cases, organizations establish an all-or-nothing threshold; projects above the threshold require a full-featured (complex) EVM system and projects below the threshold are exempted. Another approach that is gaining favor is to scale EVM implementation according to the project at hand and skill level of the project team.

== Simple implementations (emphasizing only technical performance) ==

There are many more small and simple projects than there are large and complex ones, yet historically only the largest and most complex have enjoyed the benefits of EVM. Still, lightweight implementations of EVM are achievable by any person who has basic spreadsheet skills. In fact, spreadsheet implementations are an excellent way to learn basic EVM skills.

The &quot;first step&quot; is to define the work. This is typically done in a hierarchical arrangement called a work breakdown structure (WBS), although the simplest projects may use a simple list of tasks. In either case, it is important that the WBS or list be comprehensive. It is also important that the elements be mutually exclusive, so that work is easily categorized into one and only one element of work. The most detailed elements of a WBS hierarchy (or the items in a list) are called work packages. Work packages are then often devolved further in the project schedule into tasks or activities.

The &quot;second step&quot; is to assign a value, called planned value (PV), to each work package. For large projects, PV is almost always an allocation of the total project budget, and may be in units of currency (e.g. dollar, euro or naira) or in labor hours, or both. However, in very simple projects, each activity may be assigned a weighted &quot;point value&quot; which might not be a budget number. Assigning weighted values and achieving consensus on all PV quantities yields an important benefit of EVM, because it exposes misunderstandings and miscommunications about the scope of the project, and resolving these differences should always occur as early as possible. Some terminal elements can not be known (planned) in great detail in advance, and that is expected, because they can be further refined at a later time.

The &quot;third step&quot; is to define &quot;earning rules&quot; for each work package. The simplest method is to apply just one earning rule, such as the 0/100 rule, to all activities. Using the 0/100 rule, no credit is earned for an element of work until it is finished. A related rule is called the 50/50 rule, which means 50% credit is earned when an element of work is started, and the remaining 50% is earned upon completion. Other fixed earning rules such as a 25/75 rule or 20/80 rule are gaining favor, because they assign more weight to finishing work than for starting it, but they also motivate the project team to identify when an element of work is started, which can improve awareness of work-in-progress. These simple earning rules work well for small or simple projects because generally, each activity tends to be fairly short in duration.

These initial three steps define the minimal amount of planning for simplified EVM. The &quot;final step&quot; is to execute the project according to the plan and measure progress. When activities are started or finished, EV is accumulated according to the earning rule. This is typically done at regular intervals (e.g. weekly or monthly), but there is no reason why EV cannot be accumulated in near real-time, when work elements are started/completed. In fact, waiting to update EV only once per month (simply because that is when cost data are available) only detracts from a primary benefit of using EVM, which is to create a technical performance scoreboard for the project team.

In a lightweight implementation such as described here, the project manager has not accumulated cost nor defined a detailed project schedule network (i.e. using a critical path or critical chain methodology). While such omissions are inappropriate for managing large projects, they are a common and reasonable occurrence in many very small or simple projects. Any project can benefit from using EV alone as a real-time score of progress. One useful result of this very simple approach (without schedule models and actual cost accumulation) is to compare EV curves of similar projects, as illustrated in Figure 5. In this example, the progress of three residential construction projects are compared by aligning the starting dates. If these three home construction projects were measured with the same PV valuations, the &quot;relative&quot; schedule performance of the projects can be easily compared.

== Making earned value schedule metrics concordant with the CPM schedule ==

The actual critical path is ultimately the determining factor of every project&#x27;s duration. Because earned value schedule metrics take no account of critical path data, big budget activities that are not on the critical path have the potential to dwarf the impact of performing small budget critical path activities. This can lead to gaming the SV and Schedule Performance Index (SPI) metrics by ignoring critical path activities in favor of big-budget activities that may have more float. This can sometimes even lead to performing activities out-of-sequence just to improve the schedule tracking metrics, which can cause major problems with quality.

A simple two-step process has been suggested to fix this:
# Create a second earned-value baseline strictly for schedule, with the weighted activities and milestones on the as-late-as-possible dates of the backward pass of the critical path algorithm, where there is no float.
# Allow earned-value credit for schedule metrics to be taken no earlier than the reporting period during which the activity is scheduled unless it is on the project&#x27;s current critical path.

In this way, the distorting aspect of float would be eliminated. There would be no benefit to performing a non-critical activity with many floats until it is due in proper sequence. Also, an activity would not generate a negative schedule variance until it had used up its float. Under this method, one way of gaming the schedule metrics would be eliminated. The only way of generating a positive schedule variance (or SPI over 1.0) would be by completing work on the current critical path ahead of schedule, which is in fact the only way for a project to get ahead of schedule.

== Advanced implementations ==
In addition to managing technical and schedule performance, large and complex projects require cost performance to be monitored and reviewed at regular intervals. To measure cost performance, planned value (BCWS) and earned value (BCWP) must be in the same currency units as actual costs.

In large implementations, the planned value curve is commonly called a Performance Measurement Baseline (PMB) and may be arranged in control accounts, summary-level planning packages, planning packages and work packages.

In large projects, establishing control accounts is the primary method of delegating responsibility and authority to various parts of the performing organization. Control accounts are cells of a responsibility assignment (RACI) matrix, which is the intersection of the project WBS and the organizational breakdown structure (OBS). Control accounts are assigned to Control Account Managers (CAMs).

Large projects require more elaborate processes for controlling baseline revisions, more thorough integration with subcontractor EVM systems, and more elaborate management of procured materials.

In the United States, the primary standard for full-featured EVM systems is the ANSI/EIA-748A standard, published in May 1998 and reaffirmed in August 2002. The standard defines 32 criteria for full-featured EVM system compliance. As of the year 2007, a draft of ANSI/EIA-748B, a revision to the original is available from ANSI. Other countries have established similar standards.

In addition to using BCWS and BCWP, implementations often use the term actual cost of work performed (ACWP) instead of AC. Additional acronyms and formulas include:

=== Budget at completion (BAC) ===
According to the PMBOK (7th edition) by the Project Management Institute (PMI), Budget at Completion (BAC) is the &quot;sum of all budgets established for the work to be performed.&quot;

It is the total planned value (PV or BCWS) at the end of the project. If a project has a management reserve (MR), it is typically &quot;not&quot; included in the BAC, and respectively, in the performance measurement baseline.

=== Cost variance (CV) ===
According to the PMBOK (7th edition) by the Project Management Institute (PMI), Cost variance (CV) is a &quot;The amount of budget deficit or surplus at a given point in time, expressed as the difference between the earned value and the actual cost.&quot; Cost variance compares the estimated cost of a deliverable with the actual cost.

formula_2

CV greater than 0 is good (under budget).

=== Cost performance index (CPI) ===
According to the PMBOK (7th edition) by the Project Management Institute (PMI), Cost performance index is a &quot;measure of the cost efficiency of budgeted resources expressed at the ratio of earned value to actual cost.&quot;

formula_3

CPI greater than 1 is favorable (under budget).

CPI that is less than 1 means that the cost of completing the work is higher than planned (bad).

When CPI is equal to 1, it means that the cost of completing the work is right on plan (good).

CPI greater than 1 means that the cost of completing the work is less than planned (good or sometimes bad).

Having a CPI that is very high (in some cases, very high is only 1.2) may mean that the plan was too conservative, and thus a very high number may in fact not be good, as the CPI is being measured against a poor baseline. Management or the customer may be upset with the planners as an overly conservative baseline ties up available funds for other purposes, and the baseline is also used for manpower planning.

=== Estimate at completion (EAC) ===
According to the PMBOK (7th edition) by the Project Management Institute (PMI), Estimate at completion (EAC) is the &quot;expected total cost of completing all work expressed as the sum of the actual cost to date and the estimate to complete.&quot;

EAC is the manager&#x27;s projection of total cost of the project at completion.

formula_4

This formula is based on the assumption, that the performance of the project (or rather a deviation of the actual performance from a baseline) to date gives a good indication of what a performance (or rather deviation of a performance from a baseline) will be in the future. In other words, this formula is using statistics of the project to date to predict future results. Therefore, it has to be used carefully, when the nature of the project in the future is likely to be different from the one to date (e.g. performance of the project compare to baseline at the design phase may not be a good indication of what it will be during a construction phase).

=== Estimate to complete (ETC) ===
According to the PMBOK (7th edition) by the Project Management Institute (PMI), Estimate to complete (ETC) is the &quot;expected cost to finish all the remaining project work.&quot;

ETC is the estimate to complete the remaining work of the project. ETC must be based on objective measures of the outstanding work remaining, typically based on the measures or estimates used to create the original planned value (PV) profile, including any adjustments to predict performance based on historical performance, actions being taken to improve performance, or acknowledgement of degraded performance.
While algebraically, ETC = EAC-AC is correct, ETC should &quot;never&quot; be computed using either EAC or AC.

In the following equation:

formula_5

ETC is the independent variable, EAC is the dependent variable, and AC is fixed based on expenditures to date. ETC should always be reported truthfully to reflect the project team estimate to complete the outstanding work. If ETC pushes EAC to exceed BAC, then project management skills are employed to either recommend performance improvements or scope change, but never force ETC to give the &quot;correct&quot; answer so that EAC=BAC. Managing project activities to keep the project within budget is a human factors activity, not a mathematical function.

=== To-complete performance index (TCPI) ===

To-complete performance index (TCPI) is an earned value management measure that estimates the cost performance needed to achieve a particular management objective.
The TCPI provides a projection of the anticipated performance required to achieve either the BAC or the EAC. TCPI indicates the future required cost efficiency needed to achieve a target BAC (Budget At Complete) or EAC (Estimate At Complete). Any significant difference between CPI, the cost performance to date, and the TCPI, the cost performance needed to meet the BAC or the EAC, should be accounted for by management in their forecast of the final cost.

For the TCPI based on BAC (describing the performance required to meet the original BAC budgeted total):

formula_6

or for the TCPI based on EAC (describing the performance required to meet a new, revised budget total EAC):

formula_7

This implies, that if revised budget (EAC) is calculated using Earned Value methodology formula (BAC/CPI), then at the moment, when TCPI based on EAC is first time calculated, it will always be equal to CPI of a project at that moment. This happens because when EAC is calculated using formula BAC/CPI it is assumed, that cost performance of the remaining part of the project will be the same as the cost performance of the project to date.

The graph illustrates three scenarios outlined in PMI&#x27;s &quot;Process Group: A Practice Guide&quot; (2022 edition, p. 311):
# The To-Complete Performance Index (TCPI) required to complete the project on plan, assuming the Budget at Completion (BAC) remains unchanged (i.e., EAC = BAC).
# The Estimated At Completion (EAC) calculated under the assumption that the Cost Performance Index (CPI) remains constant (i.e., TCPI = CPI).
# The EAC calculated under the assumption that future work will be accomplished at the planned rate (i.e., TCPI = 1).

=== Independent estimate at completion (IEAC) ===
The IEAC is a metric to project total cost using the performance to date to project overall performance. This can be compared to the EAC, which is the manager&#x27;s projection.

formula_8

== Limitations ==
Proponents of EVM note a number of issues with implementing it, and further limitations may be inherent to the concept itself.

Because EVM requires quantification of a project plan, it is often perceived to be inapplicable to discovery-driven or Agile software development projects. For example, it may be impossible to plan certain research projects far in advance, because research itself uncovers some opportunities (research paths) and actively eliminates others. However, another school of thought holds that all work can be planned, even if in weekly timeboxes or other short increments.

Traditional EVM is not intended for non-discrete (continuous) effort. In traditional EVM standards, non-discrete effort is called &quot;level of effort&quot; (LOE). If a project plan contains a significant portion of LOE, and the LOE is intermixed with discrete effort, EVM results will be contaminated. This is another area of EVM research.

Traditional definitions of EVM typically assume that project accounting and project network schedule management are prerequisites to achieving any benefit from EVM. Many small projects don&#x27;t satisfy either of these prerequisites, but they too can benefit from EVM, as described for simple implementations, above. Other projects can be planned with a project network, but do not have access to true and timely actual cost data. In practice, the collection of true and timely actual cost data can be the most difficult aspect of EVM. Such projects can benefit from EVM, as described for intermediate implementations, above, and earned schedule.

As a means of overcoming objections to EVM&#x27;s lack of connection to qualitative performance issues, the Naval Air Systems Command (NAVAIR) PEO(A) organization initiated a project in the late 1990s to integrate true technical achievement into EVM projections by utilizing risk profiles. These risk profiles anticipate opportunities that may be revealed and possibly be exploited as development and testing proceeds. The published research resulted in a Technical Performance Management (TPM) methodology and software application that is still used by many DoD agencies in informing EVM estimates with technical achievement.
The research was peer-reviewed and was the recipient of the Defense Acquisition University Acquisition Research Symposium 1997 Acker Award for excellence in the exchange of information in the field of acquisition research.

There is the difficulty inherent for any periodic monitoring of synchronizing data timing: actual deliveries, actual invoicing, and the date the EVM analysis is done are all independent, so that some items have arrived but their invoicing has not and by the time analysis is delivered the data will likely be weeks behind events. This may limit EVM to a less tactical or less definitive role where use is combined with other forms to explain why or add recent news and manage future expectations.

There is a measurement limitation for how precisely EVM can be used, stemming from classic conflict between accuracy and precision, as the mathematics can calculate deceptively far beyond the precision of the measurements of data and the approximation that is the plan estimation. The limitation on estimation is commonly understood (such as the ninety–ninety rule in software) but is not visible in any margin of error. The limitations on measurement are largely a form of digitization error as EVM measurements ultimately can be no finer than by item, which may be the work breakdown structure terminal element size, to the scale of reporting period, typically end summary of a month, and by the means of delivery measure. (The delivery measure may be actual deliveries, may include estimates of partial work done at the end of month subject to estimation limits, and typically does not include QC check or risk offsets.)

As traditionally implemented, EVM deals with, and is based in, budget and cost. It has no relationship to the investment value or benefit for which the project has been funded and undertaken. Yet due to the use of the word &quot;value&quot; in the name, this fact is often misunderstood. However, earned value metrics can be used to compute the cost and schedule inputs to Devaux&#x27;s Index of Project Performance (the DIPP), which integrates schedule and cost performance with the planned investment value of the project&#x27;s scope across the project management triangle.

Darling &amp; Whitty (2019) conducted an ethnographic study to see how EVM is implemented, applying Goffman&#x27;s Dramaturgy (sociology), they found there is a sham act occurring through impressionable acts presenting statistical data as fact even when the data may be worthless. Findings include sham progress reporting can emerge in an environment where senior management&#x27;s ignorance of project work creates unworkable binds for project staff. Moreover, the sham behaviour succeeds at its objective because senior management are vulnerable to false impressions. This situation raises ethical issues for those involved, and creates an overhead in dealing with the reality of project work. Further the Darling &amp; Whitty study is pertinent as it provides sociological insight to how a scientific management technique has been implemented.

== See also ==
* Critical chain project management
* Earned schedule
* List of project management topics

== References ==
==Sources==

== Further reading ==
* Humphreys, Gary (2001). &quot;Project Management Using Earned Value&quot;. Humphreys and Associates. 
* Philipson, Erik and Sven Antvik (2009). &quot;Earned Value Management – an introduction&quot;. Philipson Biz. 
* Project Management Institute (2005). &quot;Practice Standard for Earned Value Management&quot;. Project Management Institute. 
* Solomon, Paul and Ralph Young (2006). &quot;Performance-Based Earned Value&quot;. Wiley-IEEE Computer Society. 
* Stratton, Ray (2006). &quot;The Earned Value Maturity Model&quot;. Management Concepts. 
* U.S. Air Force Materiel Command (1994). &quot;Guide to Analysis of Contractor Cost Data&quot;. AFMCPAM 65–501
* Defense Contract Management Agency (2006) &quot;Earned Value Implementation Guide&quot; DAU link 
* GAO (2009) &quot;GAO Cost Estimating and Assessment Guide&quot; GAO-09-SSP
* 
* Bembers, Ivan, Ed Knox, Michelle Jones and Jeff Traczyk (Jan 2017). &quot;EVM System&#x27;s High Cost, Fact or Fiction?&quot; Defense AT&amp;L Magazine. https://www.dau.mil/library/defense-atl/_layouts/15/WopiFrame.aspx?sourcedoc=/library/defense-atl/DATLFiles/Jan-Feb2017/Bembers_Knox_Jones_Traczyk.pdf 
* Wagner, Bernhard (2020-11-01) &quot;Earned Value Management (EVM) to control software development&quot; 

== External links ==

* &quot;Measurable News&quot; - College of Performance Management (CPM)
* College of Performance Management (CPM)
* EVM at NASA
* U.S. Office of the Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics Earned Value Management website
* Measuring Integrated Progress on Agile Software Development Projects
* Monitoring Scrum Projects with Agile EVM and Earned Business Value (EBV) Metrics
* UK MoD on-line training using Flash player
* U.S. DoD DAU Acquisition Community Earned Value Management website
* U.S. Defense Contract Management Agency Guidebook
* EVM earned value management general definitions
* EVMS Surveillance Instruction, U.S. Defense Contract Management Agency</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1277565" start="0" end="23" title="Earned value management" label="Earned value management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277565" start="25" end="28" title="Earned value management" label="EVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277565" start="31" end="62" title="Earned value management" label="earned value project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277565" start="67" end="102" title="Earned value management" label="earned value performance management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277565" start="104" end="108" title="Earned value management" label="EVPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="115" end="133" title="project management" label="project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394609" start="387" end="414" title="project management triangle" label="project management triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q472160" start="416" end="421" title="Scope (project management)" label="scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665453" start="453" end="470" title="System integration" label="integrated system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439994" start="1086" end="1091" title="DFARS" label="DFARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751609" start="1261" end="1277" title="Schedule (project management)" label="project schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437778" start="1350" end="1362" title="Project plan" label="Project Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985046" start="1424" end="1455" title="budgeted cost of work scheduled" label="budgeted cost of work scheduled"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985046" start="1593" end="1624" title="budgeted cost of work performed" label="budgeted cost of work performed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363554" start="3286" end="3304" title="financial analysis" label="financial analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="3318" end="3342" title="Federal government of the United States" label="United States government"/>
<link wikidata="Q179012" start="3487" end="3505" title="project management" label="project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443008" start="3510" end="3526" title="cost engineering" label="cost engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q463793" start="3912" end="3938" title="Frank Bunker Gilbreth" label="Frank and Lillian Gilbreth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545010" start="4436" end="4464" title="Project Management Institute" label="Project Management Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135909" start="4484" end="4520" title="Project Management Body of Knowledge" label="Project Management Body of Knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="5029" end="5074" title="United States Office of Management and Budget" label="United States Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q856418" start="5316" end="5334" title="Sarbanes–Oxley Act" label="Sarbanes–Oxley Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="5491" end="5526" title="United States Department of Defense" label="United States Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q873428" start="5577" end="5616" title="Program evaluation and review technique" label="Program Evaluation and Review Technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="5822" end="5825" title="United States Department of Defense" label="DoD"/>
<link wikidata="Q264965" start="5986" end="5996" title="subculture" label="subculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q816432" start="6087" end="6102" title="project manager" label="project manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883163" start="6286" end="6327" title="Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment" label="Undersecretary of Defense for Acquisition"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="6404" end="6424" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q48259" start="6425" end="6436" title="Dick Cheney" label="Dick Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q650938" start="6455" end="6470" title="A-12 Avenger II" label="A-12 Avenger II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439994" start="6614" end="6641" title="Federal Acquisition Regulation" label="U.S. Government regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="7047" end="7092" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="National Aeronautics and Space Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="7098" end="7132" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q816432" start="9126" end="9141" title="project manager" label="project manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q825377" start="9909" end="9922" title="critical path method" label="critical path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140520" start="9926" end="9940" title="critical chain" label="critical chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="11705" end="11716" title="spreadsheet" label="spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q918141" start="11894" end="11918" title="work breakdown structure" label="work breakdown structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625281" start="12102" end="12120" title="mutually exclusive" label="mutually exclusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q614379" start="14734" end="14744" title="scoreboard" label="scoreboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6533542" start="16086" end="16092" title="Gaming the system" label="gaming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16104" end="16130" title="Schedule Performance Index" label="Schedule Performance Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850420" start="18195" end="18234" title="Responsibility assignment matrix" label="responsibility assignment (RACI) matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q852602" start="18289" end="18323" title="organization chart" label="organizational breakdown structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135909" start="19194" end="19199" title="PMBOK" label="PMBOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545010" start="19221" end="19249" title="Project Management Institute" label="Project Management Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135909" start="19636" end="19641" title="PMBOK" label="PMBOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545010" start="19663" end="19691" title="Project Management Institute" label="Project Management Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135909" start="20065" end="20070" title="PMBOK" label="PMBOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545010" start="20092" end="20120" title="Project Management Institute" label="Project Management Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135909" start="21107" end="21112" title="PMBOK" label="PMBOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545010" start="21134" end="21162" title="Project Management Institute" label="Project Management Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135909" start="22143" end="22148" title="PMBOK" label="PMBOK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545010" start="22170" end="22198" title="Project Management Institute" label="Project Management Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q30232" start="25838" end="25864" title="Agile software development" label="Agile software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="25925" end="25933" title="research" label="research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305075" start="26149" end="26158" title="timeboxing" label="timeboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543216" start="26174" end="26184" title="iterative development" label="increments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771203" start="26583" end="26601" title="project accounting" label="project accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235289" start="26606" end="26641" title="project network" label="project network schedule management"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26817" end="26839" title="#Simple implementations (emphasizing only technical performance)" label="simple implementations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27120" end="27148" title="#Intermediate implementations (integrating technical and schedule performance)" label="intermediate implementations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326923" start="27161" end="27176" title="earned schedule" label="earned schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981726" start="27287" end="27312" title="Naval Air Systems Command" label="Naval Air Systems Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q272035" start="28636" end="28658" title="accuracy and precision" label="accuracy and precision"/>
<link wikidata="Q791801" start="28797" end="28807" title="estimation" label="estimation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269245" start="28874" end="28892" title="ninety–ninety rule" label="ninety–ninety rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352827" start="28932" end="28947" title="margin of error" label="margin of error"/>
<link wikidata="Q3890355" start="29002" end="29020" title="Discretization error" label="digitization error"/>
<link wikidata="Q918141" start="29099" end="29123" title="work breakdown structure" label="work breakdown structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212987" start="29826" end="29868" title="Devaux&amp;#x27;s Index of Project Performance" label="Devaux&amp;#x27;s Index of Project Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394609" start="30001" end="30028" title="project management triangle" label="project management triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q132151" start="30072" end="30084" title="ethnographic" label="ethnographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271527" start="30146" end="30168" title="Dramaturgy (sociology)" label="Dramaturgy (sociology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q203549" start="30824" end="30845" title="scientific management" label="scientific management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140520" start="30896" end="30929" title="Critical chain project management" label="Critical chain project management"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326923" start="30932" end="30947" title="Earned schedule" label="Earned schedule"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112707" start="30950" end="30983" title="List of project management topics" label="List of project management topics"/>
</links>
</doc>
