<doc id="1019716" wikidata="Q1686465" url="?curid=1019716" title="Jeffrey R. MacDonald">
<text>Jeffrey Robert MacDonald (born October 12, 1943) is an American former medical doctor and United States Army captain who was convicted in August 1979 of murdering his pregnant wife and two daughters in February 1970 while serving as an Army Special Forces physician.

MacDonald has always proclaimed his innocence of the murders, which he claims were committed by four intruders—three male and one female—who had entered the unlocked rear door of his apartment at Fort Bragg, North Carolina, and attacked him, his wife, and his children with instruments such as knives, clubs and ice picks. Prosecutors and appellate courts have pointed to strong physical evidence attesting to his guilt. He is currently incarcerated at the Federal Correctional Institution in Cumberland, Maryland.

The MacDonald murder case remains one of the most litigated murder cases in American criminal history.

==Early life==
Jeffrey MacDonald was born in Jamaica, Queens, New York, the second of three children born to Robert and Dorothy (née Perry) MacDonald. He was raised in a poor household on Long Island, with a disciplinarian father who, although nonviolent towards his wife and children, demanded obedience and achievement from his family. MacDonald attended Patchogue-Medford High School, where he became president of the student council. He was voted both &quot;most popular&quot; and &quot;most likely to succeed&quot; by his fellow students, and was king of the senior prom.

Towards the end of his eighth grade year, MacDonald became acquainted with Colette Kathryn Stevenson (b. May 10, 1943). He would later recollect he had first observed Colette &quot;walking down the hallway (of Patchogue High School) with her best friend&quot; and that, although he was attracted to both girls, he found Colette more attractive. Approximately two weeks later, they began talking and formed a friendship, with MacDonald soon &quot;asking her out to the movies&quot;. The two formed a brief romantic relationship in the ninth grade, with MacDonald later recollecting they fell in love while holding hands on a balcony while watching the movie &quot;A Summer Place&quot; at the Rialto Theater in Patchogue. He would later reminisce that whenever he or Colette heard the song &quot;Theme from A Summer Place&quot; across the airwaves, &quot;either of us would turn up the radio&quot;.

The following summer, while visiting a friend on Fire Island, Colette announced to MacDonald their relationship was over. MacDonald later formed a relationship with a girl named Penny Wells.

===Scholarship and marriage===
MacDonald&#x27;s high school grades were sufficient for him to earn a three-year scholarship at Princeton University, where he enrolled as a premedical student in 1962. By the second year of his studies, MacDonald and Wells had separated. He soon resumed his romantic relationship with Colette, then a freshman at Skidmore College in Saratoga Springs. He would later recollect Colette had grown into a shy young woman with a &quot;slight fear of the world in general&quot; who would rely on his own self-confidence. MacDonald found her timidity touching, and gradually viewed himself as her protector in addition to her boyfriend. The two regularly exchanged letters, and he would frequently hitchhike to Skidmore College to be in her company at weekends. Although MacDonald was dating other women at the time, he resolved to marry Colette upon learning she was pregnant with his child in August 1963. She in turn left college to raise their child.
With the consent of Colette&#x27;s family, the two married on September 14 in New York City. One hundred people attended the service, with the reception held at the Fifth Avenue Hotel. The couple then honeymooned at Cape Cod. Their first daughter, Kimberley Kathryn, was born on April 18, 1964.

===Medical school===
After his undergraduate work at Princeton, MacDonald briefly worked as a construction supervisor before he moved with his wife and child to Chicago in the summer of 1965, where he had been accepted at Northwestern University Medical School. The couple moved into a small one-bedroom apartment, with Colette committed to maintaining the household and raising their daughter as MacDonald focused on his studies, while also working a series of part-time jobs to assist with family finances. The following year, the family relocated to a middle-class neighborhood. Their second child, Kristen Jean, was born on May 8, 1967.

Shortly after MacDonald graduated from medical school in 1968, he and his family relocated to Bergenfield, New Jersey as he completed a one-year internship at the Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center in New York, specializing in thoracic surgery. MacDonald later described his internship year as &quot;a horrendous year&quot; for both himself and Colette, adding he frequently worked 36 hours with only 12 hours at home. Consequently, when at home, he was frequently exhausted and had limited interaction with his wife and daughters. At the completion of his internship, MacDonald and Colette vacationed in Aruba before MacDonald joined the Army.

==U.S. Army==
MacDonald was commissioned in the United States Army on June 28, 1969, and sent to Fort Sam Houston, Texas to undergo a six-week physician&#x27;s basic training course. While at Fort Sam Houston, he volunteered to be assigned to the Army&#x27;s Special Forces (&quot;Green Berets&quot;) to become a Special Forces physician. He was then assigned to Fort Moore, Georgia (then known as Fort Benning), where he completed their paratrooper training course. Although MacDonald had joined the Army knowing he might be deployed to serve in the Vietnam War, he later learned that, as a Green Beret doctor, he was unlikely to serve overseas.

===Fort Bragg===

In late August, MacDonald reported to the 3rd Special Forces Group (Airborne) at Fort Liberty (then known as Fort Bragg), North Carolina to serve as the group&#x27;s surgeon. He was joined by his wife and children, and the MacDonald family resided at 544 Castle Drive, in a section of the base reserved for married officers and afforded security by military police. The couple quickly became popular among their neighbors, although MacDonald and Colette are known to have argued occasionally.

By the time the MacDonalds moved into their new apartment at Fort Bragg, Colette had accrued two years of studies, with aspirations to obtain a bachelor&#x27;s degree in English literature and teach part-time. Both daughters had developed distinctive personalities: Kimberley being markedly feminine, intelligent, and shy; Kristen a boisterous tomboy who would &quot;run over and crack someone&quot; if she observed her older sister being bullied by other children.

On December 10, the 3rd Special Forces Group was deactivated, and MacDonald was transferred on base to Headquarters and Headquarters Company, 6th Special Forces Group (Airborne), 1st Special Forces, to serve as a preventive medical officer.

Shortly before Christmas 1969, with his wife approximately three months pregnant with their third child and first son, MacDonald bought his daughters a Shetland pony, anticipating the family would soon relocate to a farm in Connecticut. He kept this purchase a secret from his wife and children, and he and his stepfather-in-law drove them to the stable as a surprise on Christmas Day. His daughters chose to name the pony &quot;Trooper&quot;. The same month, Colette is known to have penned a letter to college acquaintances in which she described her life as &quot;never [being] so normal or happy&quot;, adding she and her husband were content, that their baby son was due to be born in July, and her family would be complete.

By 1970, MacDonald had earned the rank of captain. He was planning to study advanced medical training at Yale University upon completion of his tour of duty as a Green Beret doctor.

==February 16–17, 1970==
On the afternoon of February 16, MacDonald took his daughters to feed and ride the Christmas pony he had bought them. The trio then returned home at about 5:45 p.m. MacDonald then showered, and changed into an old pair of blue pajamas. After the family ate supper, Colette left the household to attend an evening teaching class at Fort Bragg&#x27;s North Carolina University extension.

According to MacDonald, he then played &quot;horsey&quot;: allowing his daughters to ride upon his back as if he was their Shetland pony for a short while before he had put Kristen to bed at approximately 7 p.m. as Kimberley played a game on the coffee table. He then slept for an hour before watching Kimberley&#x27;s favorite television show, &quot;Laugh-In&quot;, with her before his older daughter also went to bed. Colette returned home at 9:40 p.m., and the couple sat on the couch watching television together before Colette decided to go to bed midway through &quot;The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson&quot;. MacDonald had himself fallen asleep in the living room in the early hours of the following day.

===Murders===
At 3:42 a.m. on February 17, 1970, dispatchers at Fort Bragg received an emergency phone call from MacDonald, who faintly spoke into the receiver: &quot;Help! Five forty-four Castle Drive! Stabbing! ... Five forty-four Castle Drive! Stabbing! Hurry!&quot; The operator then heard the sound of the receiver clatter against a wall or floor.

Within ten minutes, responding military police had arrived at the address, initially believing they were responding to a domestic disturbance. They found the front door closed and locked and the house dark inside. When no one answered the door, they circled to the back of the house, where a police sergeant discovered the back screen door closed and unlocked and the back door wide open. Upon entering, the sergeant walked into the master bedroom before running to the front of the house, shouting, &quot;Tell them to get Womack, ASAP!&quot;

Colette MacDonald was discovered sprawled on the floor of the master bedroom. She lay on her back, with one eye open and one breast exposed. She had been repeatedly clubbed about her body, with both her forearms later found to be broken. The pathologist would note these wounds had likely been inflicted as Colette had raised her arms to protect her face. In addition, she had been stabbed 21 times in the chest with an ice pick and 16 times about the neck and chest with a knife, with her trachea severed in two places. A bloodied and torn pajama top was draped upon her chest, and a paring knife lay beside her body. Beside her, Jeffrey MacDonald was found lying face-down, alive but wounded, with his head on Colette&#x27;s chest and one arm around her neck. As military personnel approached, he whispered: &quot;Check my kids! I heard my kids crying!&quot;

Five-year-old Kimberley was found in her bed, having been repeatedly bludgeoned about the head and body and stabbed in the neck with a knife between eight and ten times. She lay on her left side. Her skull had been fractured from at least two blows to the right side of her head, and one wound to her face had caused her cheekbone to protrude through her skin. The wounds inflicted to Kimberley&#x27;s head were sufficiently severe in nature to have caused bruising to her brain, coma, and death soon after infliction.

Across the hallway, two-year-old Kristen was found in her own bed, also lying on her left side, with a baby bottle close to her mouth. She had been stabbed 33 times across the chest, neck, hands, and back with a knife and 15 times with an ice pick. Two knife wounds had penetrated her heart, and the ice pick wounds were noted to be shallow. The injuries to her hands were likely defense wounds. On the headboard of the MacDonalds&#x27; marital bed, the word &quot;PIG&quot; was written in eight inch capital letters. The blood used to write this word was later determined to belong to Colette.

Having received impromptu resuscitation, MacDonald sat upright, then exclaimed: &quot;Jesus Christ! Look at my wife! I&#x27;m gonna kill those goddamned acid heads!&quot; He was immediately taken to nearby Womack Hospital, shouting, &quot;Let me see my kids!&quot; as he was carried out of his home on a stretcher.

===MacDonald&#x27;s account===
Taken to the Womack Army Medical Center, medical staff discovered the wounds MacDonald had suffered were much less numerous and severe than those inflicted upon his wife and children. He had suffered cuts, bruises, and fingernail scratches to his face and chest, although none of these wounds were life-threatening or required stitches. MacDonald was also found to have a mild concussion. He had also received a single stab wound between two ribs on his right torso. This wound was described by a staff surgeon as a &quot;clean, small, sharp&quot; incision measuring five-eighths of an inch in depth, and had caused his lung to partially collapse. MacDonald was released from the hospital after nine days.

Questioned by the Criminal Investigation Division (CID), MacDonald claimed that at about 2:00 a.m. on February 17, he had washed the evening&#x27;s dinner dishes before deciding to go to bed, although because his younger daughter, Kristen, had wet his side of the bed, he had taken her to her own bed. Not wishing to wake his wife to change the sheets, he had then taken a blanket from Kristen&#x27;s room and fallen asleep on the living room couch. According to MacDonald, he was later awakened by Colette and Kimberley&#x27;s screams, and Colette shouting: &quot;Jeff! Jeff! Help! Why are they doing this to me?&quot; As he rose from the couch to go to their aid, he was attacked by three male intruders, one black and two white. The shorter of the two white men had worn lightweight, possibly surgical, gloves. A fourth intruder he described as a white female with long blonde hair (possibly a wig) and wearing high heeled, knee-high boots and a white floppy hat partially covering her face. This individual stood nearby holding a lighted candle, chanting, &quot;Acid is groovy, kill the pigs!&quot;

MacDonald claimed the three males then attacked him with a club and ice pick, with the female intruder shouting &quot;Hit &#x27;em again!&quot; During the struggle, his pajama top was pulled over his head to his wrists and he had used this bound garment to ward off thrusts from the ice pick although eventually, he was overcome by his assailants and knocked unconscious in the living room end of the hallway leading to the bedrooms. When he had regained consciousness, the intruders had left the house. He had then stumbled from room to room, attempting mouth-to-mouth resuscitation upon each of his daughters, to no avail, before discovering his wife. He had pulled a small paring knife from Colette&#x27;s chest which he then tossed onto the floor, attempted in vain to find her pulse, then draped his pajama jacket over her body. Then he had phoned for help.

==Initial investigation==
Within minutes of the discoveries at Castle Drive, military police were instructed to check the occupants of all vehicles in and around Fort Bragg, seeking two white men, one black man, and a white woman with blonde hair and a floppy hat in an effort to apprehend the four intruders MacDonald alleged had attacked him and his family. Despite these efforts, military police failed to locate the four intruders, and the initiative was abandoned by 6:00 a.m.

Shortly after daylight on February 17, investigators recovered the murder weapons just outside the back door. These instruments were an &quot;Old Hickory&quot; kitchen knife, an ice pick, and a 31-inch long piece of lumber with two blue threads attached with blood; all three were quickly determined to have come from the MacDonald house, and all had been wiped clean of fingerprints. MacDonald later claimed to have never seen these items before.

===Scrutiny===
As Army investigators studied the physical evidence, the Army CID quickly came to disbelieve MacDonald&#x27;s account, as they found very little evidence to support his version of events. Although MacDonald was trained in unarmed combat, the living room where he had supposedly fought for his life against three armed assailants showed few signs of a struggle apart from a coffee table that had been knocked onto its side with a pile of magazines beneath the edge, and a flower plant that had fallen to the floor. Questioning of the MacDonalds&#x27; neighbors revealed they had heard no sounds of a struggle or disturbance within the household in the early hours, but had heard Colette shouting in a loud and angry voice. The 16-year-old daughter of these neighbors—who occasionally babysat for the family—informed investigators the two had seemed taciturn and indifferent to each other in the month prior to the murders. By February 23, Colonel Robert Kriwanek, the Fort Bragg provost marshal, had advised the FBI to discontinue their search for the four intruders.
In addition to the lack of damage to the inside of the house, no fibers from MacDonald&#x27;s torn pajama top were found in the living room, where he claimed the garment had been when torn in his struggle with the intruders. However, fibers from the pajama top were found beneath Colette&#x27;s body and in the bedrooms of both of his daughters, and one fiber from this garment was also found under Kristen&#x27;s fingernail. A single fragment of skin was recovered from beneath one of Colette&#x27;s fingernails, although this evidence was later lost. Bloodstained splinters likely sourcing from the section of lumber recovered close to the back door of the apartment were recovered from all three bedrooms of the apartment, but not the room where MacDonald claimed to have been attacked. No blood or fingerprints were found on either telephone MacDonald claimed he had used to call for help after checking each member of his family and attempting to resuscitate them. Furthermore, the bloodstained tip of a surgical glove was also found beneath the headboard where the blood inscription was written; this glove was identical in composition to a medical supply MacDonald invariably kept in the family kitchen.

Although it had rained on the night of February 16–17 and MacDonald also specifically claimed the female intruder&#x27;s boots were &quot;all wet&quot;, with rainwater &quot;just dripping off them&quot;, the sole footprint observed at the scene was a bloody bare footprint located in Kristen&#x27;s bedroom, leading from the child&#x27;s bed in the direction of the doorway.

===Forensic analysis===
By mid-March, the CID had obtained the results of forensic testing of the blood, hair, and fiber samples within 544 Castle Drive that contradicted MacDonald&#x27;s accounts of his movements and further convinced investigators of his guilt. For example, Kimberley&#x27;s blood was also found on his pajama top, even though MacDonald had claimed he was not wearing this garment while in her room attempting resuscitation. MacDonald&#x27;s own blood was located in significant quantities in only two locations: in front of the kitchen cabinet containing rubber gloves, and upon the right side of a hallway bathroom sink.

Investigators also questioned why Colette&#x27;s blood was found in Kristen&#x27;s room, although all three victims were found in separate rooms, suggesting they had been attacked separately. Moreover, although blood evidence indicated Kimberley had been attacked as she entered the master bedroom, investigators questioned why home intruders would bother to carry her back to her bedroom to continue their attack.

The four members of the MacDonald family had different blood types: a statistical that assisted investigators in determining the movements of each member of the household and their subsequent theory as to a likely scenario of the unfolding events. Upon the assumption the four individuals discovered by responding military police were the only four people in the house in the early hours of February 17, investigators were able to reconstruct a likely scenario of the chain of events that had unfolded via blood typing and the nature and severity of the wounds discovered upon each individual.
===Forensic reconstruction===
An argument or fight between MacDonald and Colette began in the master bedroom, possibly over the issue of Kristen&#x27;s repeatedly wetting his side of the bed while sleeping there, or his adultery. Investigators speculated that the argument turned physical and she had probably hit him on the forehead with a hairbrush, which resulted in a mark on his forehead which failed to break his skin. As he retaliated by hitting her, first with his fists and then beating her with a piece of lumber, Kimberley, whose blood and brain serum were found in the doorway, may have walked in after hearing the commotion and was struck at least once on the head, possibly by accident. Believing Colette dead, MacDonald carried the mortally wounded Kimberley back to her bedroom. After stabbing her, MacDonald then proceeded to Kristen&#x27;s room, carrying the club he had used to bludgeon Kimberley, intent on disposing of the last remaining potential witness. Before he could do so, Colette, whose blood was found on Kristen&#x27;s bed covers and on one wall of her room, apparently regained consciousness, stumbled into her younger daughter&#x27;s bedroom and threw her own body over Kristen in a desperate effort to protect her. After killing both of them, MacDonald then wrapped Colette&#x27;s body in a sheet and carried her body to the master bedroom, leaving a smudged footprint matching her blood type as he exited Kristen&#x27;s bedroom.

CID investigators then theorized that MacDonald attempted to cover up the murders, using articles on the Manson Family murders that he had recently read in the March 1970 issue of &quot;Esquire&quot; investigators had found in the living room. Putting on surgical gloves from a medical supply in the kitchen closet, he went to the master bedroom, where he used Colette&#x27;s blood to write the word &quot;PIG&quot; on the headboard. MacDonald then laid his torn pajama top over her dead body and repeatedly stabbed her in the chest with an ice pick, then discarded the weapons close to the back door of the property after wiping them clean of fingerprints. Finally, MacDonald took a scalpel blade from the supply closet, entered the adjacent bathroom, and stabbed himself once in the chest while standing beside the sink before disposing of the surgical gloves. He had then used the family telephone to summon an ambulance before lying down beside Colette&#x27;s body as he waited for the military police to arrive.

==Interrogation==
On April 6, 1970, Army investigators formally cautioned, then interrogated MacDonald. He was first offered the chance to recount his version of events, and recounted his claims of being attacked by four intruders, with whom he grappled before falling to the ground, observing &quot;the top of some boots&quot; and being rendered unconscious before regaining consciousness, experiencing symptoms of pneumothorax, in the hallway after the intruders had left.

Investigators were unconvinced of MacDonald&#x27;s accounts. Midway through questioning, MacDonald was asked the question about his stab wounds by CID Investigator William Ivory: &quot;You didn&#x27;t do it yourself, did you?&quot; This question prompted MacDonald to deny the accusation before referencing his puncture wound and his having to persuade hospital doctors to insert a chest tube into his body as he was sure his lung was punctured. Questioning then focused upon the crime scene and results of the forensic testing. MacDonald denied any of the murder weapons had originated from his household, despite the fact the section of lumber matched wood from Kimberley&#x27;s closet. He also claimed to be unaware of how the fiber and blood evidence contradicted his accounts of his movements and actions.

Investigator Robert Shaw then questioned MacDonald as to the lack of disorder and damage within the household, and the lack of any motive, stating that in the investigators&#x27; experience, had four intruders embarked on a murderous frenzy within a small household, they would expect to encounter evidence such as &quot;busted furniture and broken mirrors and bashed-in walls&quot;, but the only signs of the struggle were the top-heavy living room coffee table, which had not flipped over all the way in the midst of his struggle, and a flower pot beside the table with the plant upon the carpet and the pot standing upright. MacDonald was unable to offer a plausible explanation for this observation, and also claimed to be unaware how Kimberley&#x27;s blood and brain serum were recovered from the master bedroom.

Following a short break, questioning resumed the same afternoon. Investigator Franz Grebner listed further physical discrepancies between MacDonald&#x27;s account and the forensic evidence, repeatedly stating all the facts pointed to his having staged the crime scene. MacDonald was unable to offer a plausible explanation to this questioning before abruptly accusing Grebner of having &quot;run out of ideas&quot; and attempting to frame him to maintain a 100% solved homicide rate. In response, Grebner stated, &quot;We have all this business here that would tend to indicate that you were involved in this rather than people who came in from the outside and picked 544 Castle Drive and went up there and were lucky enough to find your door open.&quot;

When investigators asked MacDonald to submit to a polygraph test to verify his accounts, he readily agreed, although within ten minutes of the conclusion of the interview, he called investigators to state he had changed his mind, and would not submit to any polygraph testing.

==Formal charges==
On the evening of April 6, MacDonald was relieved of his duties and placed under restriction, pending further inquiries. The following day, he was assigned an army lawyer. At the recommendation of his mother, on April 10, he instead hired a flamboyant civilian defense attorney, Bernard Segal, to defend him. Less than a month later, on May 1, the Army formally charged MacDonald with three counts of murder. That same day, MacDonald penned a letter to Colette&#x27;s mother and stepfather professing his innocence, emphasizing the Army would &quot;never admit&quot; their error, and speculating his wife&#x27;s soul may hold &quot;infinite patience and understanding&quot; of his current legal predicament.

==Army hearing==
An initial Army Article 32 hearing into MacDonald&#x27;s possible guilt, overseen by Colonel Warren Rock, convened on July 6, 1970. This hearing lasted until September.

MacDonald&#x27;s lawyer, Bernard Segal, adopted an offensive strategy on behalf of his client at this hearing, citing numerous examples of incompetence on behalf of the Army CID, stating that they had clumsily and unprofessionally &quot;trampled all over&quot; the crime scene during their examination of the house, obliterating any traces of evidence the perpetrators might have left and losing vital pieces of evidence including a single thread found beneath Kimberley&#x27;s nail, MacDonald&#x27;s pajama trousers, four torn tips of rubber surgical gloves found in the master bedroom, and a single layer of skin found beneath one of Colette&#x27;s fingernails. Segal elicited several examples of incompetence from military police and responding personnel, including testimony revealing that an ambulance driver had stolen MacDonald&#x27;s wallet from the living room, and a pathologist who testified to having failed to obtain the children&#x27;s fingerprints for comparison at the crime scene.

The first witness to testify in MacDonald&#x27;s defense, responding military policeman Kenneth Mica, testified that on the way to answering MacDonald&#x27;s emergency call on the night of the murders, he had observed a blonde woman with a wide-brimmed hat standing on a street corner approximately half a mile from the MacDonald home. He noted that this sighting was unusual, given the late hour and the weather. Mica also testified that, contrary to instruction, an ambulance driver had placed the tilted flower pot upright while at the crime scene.

Colonel Rock also testified that he himself went to the scene of the crime and tipped the coffee table over, with it striking the side of a rocking chair and coming to rest on its edge. Rock also noted the fact that if no wet footprints and mud were found at the crime scene belonging to the alleged intruders, that meant the crime scene investigators had also failed to find any evidence of the large numbers of military police and civilians who also walked around the house.

===Suspect identification===
In August, Segal was approached by a deliveryman named William Posey, who claimed the blonde woman MacDonald stated had attacked his family might have been a local 17-year-old drug addict and police informant named Helena Werle Stoeckley. According to Posey, Stoeckley had been in the company of &quot;two or three&quot; young males in a car parked outside her apartment at approximately 4:00 a.m. on the morning of the murders. Posey also claimed Stoeckley had ceased wearing her boots and floppy hat subsequent to February 17, and had dressed in black on the date of the funerals, also stating to him she &quot;[did not] remember what [she] did&quot; on the date of the murders. Posey later relayed this information at the hearing, adding that Stoeckley had informed him months later that she and her boyfriend could not marry until &quot;we go out and kill some more people&quot;.

Stoeckley was located and questioned regarding her whereabouts on February 17. Her answers were vague and self-contradictory. She recalled being in the company of her boyfriend, Gregory Mitchell, on the night of February 16, and going &quot;out for a ride&quot; in a car in the early hours of the following day, &quot;driving aimlessly&quot;, but claimed to have been &quot;so far out&quot; on mescaline that she could not say for sure whether she had been at the house or not. Although witnesses had claimed Stoeckley had admitted her involvement in the murders, with several also remembering her wearing clothing similar to that described by MacDonald on the date in question, she was not subpoenaed to testify. Procedural irregularities regarding investigative conduct into Stoeckley were also highlighted by Segal at this hearing.

===MacDonald&#x27;s testimony===
Following favorable character testimony from several acquaintances and a military psychiatrist, MacDonald testified for three days in mid-August. Sections of his testimony contradicted what he had informed investigators on April 6, including his claim on this occasion to have actually moved Colette&#x27;s body, having found her &quot;a little bit propped up against a chair&quot; before he &quot;just sort of laid her flat&quot; on the floor. He also stated that, possibly because of his surgical background, he had &quot;sort of rinsed off [his] hands&quot; as he checked his own injuries in the bathroom before calling for help. Referencing the type B blood found in the kitchen, MacDonald testified that he &quot;may have&quot; also washed his hands in the kitchen sink &quot;for some reason&quot; prior to making the phone call to emergency services. Contrary to medical reports and his earlier accounts, he also claimed to have located two bumps on the back of his head and &quot;two or three&quot; puncture wounds in his upper left chest, other wounds to his right bicep, and approximately ten ice pick wounds to his abdomen on February 17 or 18—all of which had healed without treatment and none of which had required surgery.

Questioned in regards to his infidelity, MacDonald admitted he had been unfaithful on two occasions, but insisted Colette had not known about either affair. He also claimed their time at Fort Bragg had been the most content of their married life.

MacDonald&#x27;s testimony was followed by that of a clinical psychologist, who testified as to conclusions of a series of tests he had conducted on MacDonald. This expert testified that the tests revealed an extraordinary absence of anxiety, depression, and anger in MacDonald with regard to the loss of his family, and that his report concluded he was &quot;able to muster massive denial or repression&quot; to such a degree that the &quot;impact of the recent events in his life has been blunted&quot;. Furthermore, this extreme psychological response would likely see an individual convey himself as &quot;victimized&quot; and &quot;perhaps, somewhat of a martyr&quot;.

==Initial dismissal of charges==
To the chagrin of Colonel Kriwanek, on October 13, 1970, Colonel Rock issued a report recommending that charges be dismissed against MacDonald as insufficient evidence existed to prove his guilt, adding his belief no truth existed in the charges, and that the nature of the murders led him to believe the perpetrator(s) were either insane or under the influence of drugs. Rock also recommended that civilian authorities further investigate Stoeckley. Later the same month, all charges were formally dismissed, although a new CID investigation tasked with finding the murderer(s) was assembled in February 1971, with MacDonald still considered a suspect.

In December, MacDonald received an honorable discharge from the Army and initially returned to New York City, where he briefly worked as a doctor before relocating to Long Beach, California in July 1971 in an effort to &quot;put the past&quot; behind him and to distance himself from the &quot;constant reminders&quot; of his wife and daughters. He obtained employment as an emergency room physician at the St. Mary Medical Center, frequently working long hours. He also became an instructor at the UCLA medical school, a medical director of the Long Beach Grand Prix, a lecturer on the subject of the recognition and treatment of child abuse, and a participant in the development of a national cardiopulmonary resuscitation training program. MacDonald lived in a $350,000 Huntington Beach condominium apartment, and is known to have lived a promiscuous lifestyle prior to forming a long-term relationship with a 22-year-old airline stewardess named Candy Kramer in the late 1970s.

In the years immediately following the dismissal of the murder charges, MacDonald received an abundance of emotional and public support. He also wrote letters to several magazines and newspapers detailing his willingness to further publicize the background and legalities of his case.

==Further investigation==
Within days of the dismissal, MacDonald began granting press interviews and media appearances, most notably on the December 15, 1970, episode of &quot;The Dick Cavett Show&quot;, during which he appeared flippant as he complained about the Army investigation and their focus on him as a suspect. On this occasion he claimed to have sustained 23 wounds—some of which he claimed were &quot;potentially fatal&quot;.

MacDonald&#x27;s stepfather-in-law, Alfred Kassab, had initially believed in his stepson-in-law&#x27;s innocence. Both he and Colette&#x27;s mother, Mildred, had testified in support of MacDonald during the Army&#x27;s Article 32 hearing, informing the press, &quot;My wife and I feel very strongly about Captain MacDonald&#x27;s innocence. After all, it was our daughter and two grandchildren who were butchered.&quot; However, by November 1970, Kassab had grown suspicious of MacDonald&#x27;s repeated reluctance to provide him with a copy of the 2,000-page transcript of the Article 32 hearing. In an apparent effort to discourage Kassab&#x27;s efforts to obtain a copy of this transcript in his pursuit of the killers, MacDonald told his stepfather-in-law that he and some Army colleagues had actually tracked down, tortured, and eventually murdered one of the four alleged murderers. Kassab&#x27;s suspicion greatly increased following MacDonald&#x27;s casual and dismissive demeanor on &quot;The Dick Cavett Show&quot;—just days after he had himself hand-delivered 500 copies of an eleven-page letter to members of Congress requesting a congressionally mandated re-investigation of the murders—and he and his wife publicly turned against MacDonald.

Kassab successfully obtained a copy of the Article 32 transcript from the Army in February 1971. He repeatedly studied the document, realizing MacDonald&#x27;s claims were inconsistent with the physical facts and concluding his account was nothing more than a &quot;tissue of lies&quot; that repeatedly contradicted the known facts of the case. One example was MacDonald&#x27;s assertion that he had sustained life-threatening injuries—including ten ice pick wounds—during the alleged physical assault at the hands of his assailants; Kassab had met MacDonald in the hospital less than 18 hours after the attack and had observed him sitting up in bed, eating a meal, with very little bandaging or other medical dressing on his body. An examination of hospital records confirmed MacDonald had received no such wounds. Kassab also discovered that, within weeks of the murders of his family, MacDonald had begun dating a young woman employed at Fort Bragg. He and his wife also later discovered that, by 1969, he had rekindled his relationship with Penny Wells.

With the cooperation of Colonel Kriwanek and other Army investigators, Kassab visited the crime scene for several hours in order to compare the physical evidence against MacDonald&#x27;s testimony in March 1971. This personal assessment ultimately convinced Kassab of MacDonald&#x27;s guilt, and he resolved to devote his life to pursuing all legal avenues to bring MacDonald to justice. As the Army&#x27;s investigation was completed, the only way Kassab could bring MacDonald to trial was via a citizen&#x27;s complaint filed through the United States Department of Justice. He filed this complaint in early 1972; however, because the murders had occurred while MacDonald was serving in the Army, and he had since been discharged, the citizen&#x27;s complaint was declared moot. The FBI refused to take on the case.

===Legal maneuvers===
Between 1972 and 1974, the case remained trapped in limbo in the Department of Justice as legal issues were raised and debated over whether sufficient evidence and probable cause existed for indictment and prosecution. On April 30, 1974, the Kassabs, their attorney, Richard Cahn, and CID agent Peter Kearns presented a citizen&#x27;s complaint against MacDonald to US Chief District Court Judge Algernon Butler, requesting the convening of a grand jury to indict MacDonald for the murders. The following month, Justice Department attorney Victor Woerheide ruled the case worthy of prosecution.

==Grand jury==
On August 12, 1974, a grand jury convened before U.S. District Judge Franklin Dupree in Raleigh, North Carolina, to hear the legal proceedings. Seventy-five witnesses were called to testify. MacDonald was the first individual to testify at this hearing. His testimony lasted five days, during which he conceded that although he had publicly resolved to pursue all legal avenues following the 1970 dismissal of the murder charges against him, and to hire investigators, he had failed to do so. Nonetheless, he was adamant he had made his own efforts to identify the perpetrators and to locate Helena Stoeckley. He also claimed the numerous fabrications he had provided to the Kassabs and to sections of the media in the intervening years were to placate his in-laws, and that he had received more stab and puncture wounds to his body than recorded in contemporary medical records (which he blamed on malpractice). When asked by Victor Woerheide if he would submit to either a polygraph or sodium amytal test to verify his version of events, MacDonald read a statement prepared by his attorneys denying their request.
Other witnesses to testify included surgeons on duty at Womack Hospital who had examined MacDonald and who testified that, aside from his punctured lung, MacDonald was &quot;not in any great danger, medically&quot;, and that, save for a superficial stab wound to his upper left arm and abdomen, MacDonald had no other stab wounds to his body. A reporter who had covered the Article 32 hearing and who interviewed MacDonald after the charges were dropped also stated that, in his experience, individuals under the influence of LSD seldom become violent and that, by contrast, those who consume amphetamines frequently do.

On December 12, a former chief of psychiatry who had also testified at the Article 32 hearing, Bruce Bailey, testified. Bailey stated that, when discussing his family and the events surrounding their deaths with him, MacDonald would occasionally &quot;become emotional, become tearful, but he recovered quickly&quot;. Bailey also testified he found MacDonald to be a controlling individual who was &quot;extremely dependent on what others thought of him&quot; and that he would often launch into a verbal &quot;tirade&quot; to allow his deep-seated emotions to become expressed by other means. When questioned as to whether MacDonald suffered from a mental disorder, Bailey testified he did not, although he could not discount the possibility of him murdering members of his family in a situation of extreme stress. This testimony was followed by a Philadelphia-based psychologist who conceded that, had MacDonald committed such an act of violence, he would successfully &quot;completely block&quot; the episode from his mind.

The chief of the FBI&#x27;s crime laboratory chemistry section, Paul Stombaugh, then testified the pajama top placed over Colette&#x27;s body had been heavily bloodstained before the garment was torn, and that—contrary to MacDonald&#x27;s claims—a lack of tearing at the edges of these holes proved that all 48 holes within this item of clothing had been inflicted while the garment was stationary, rather than in motion. Stombaugh also testified all the cuts within all garments other than the pajama top had been inflicted with the &quot;Old Hickory&quot; kitchen knife found outside the family home and not the paring knife he claimed to have removed from Colette&#x27;s body, that the majority of this blood had belonged to Colette, and her blood had transferred onto the garment on at least four locations prior to the garment being torn. Furthermore, the club used to bludgeon Colette and Kimberley, which MacDonald had denied any knowledge of, had also been sawed from one of the mattress slats in Kimberley&#x27;s bedroom, and a single hair found in Colette&#x27;s right palm had been sourced from her own body and not a blonde-haired intruder.

===Further testimony===
MacDonald was recalled to testify before the grand jury on January 21, 1975. On this occasion, he was markedly arrogant and sarcastic when questioned with regards to issues such as his infidelity or the prosecution&#x27;s illustration of forensic contradictions between his version of events and the physical evidence, on one occasion shouting, &quot;I have no idea! I don&#x27;t even know what crap you&#x27;re trying to feed me!&quot; in response to a question as to how his blood and Colette&#x27;s blood had transferred onto a sheet taken from Kristen&#x27;s bedroom into the master bedroom. He also refused to discuss the results of a private polygraph test to which he had consented in 1970, the results of which had been given to Bernard Segal, indicating he would have to speak with his attorney on this matter before consenting to this line of inquiry.

Following a brief recess, MacDonald read a statement prepared by his attorneys denying the prosecution&#x27;s request to discuss the results of his 1970 polygraph examination, contending Woerheide had violated attorney-client privilege. He then read his own statement to the jury, claiming &quot;five long years&quot; had passed since the murder of his family and his efforts to start life afresh, and that the questions posed by the prosecution were ones he had had to &quot;live with for five years&quot;.

==Indictment==
On January 24, 1975, the grand jury formally indicted MacDonald on three counts of murder. Within the hour, he was arrested in California. On January 31, he was freed upon a $100,000 bail raised by friends and colleagues, pending disposition of the charges, although he was arraigned on May 23, and pleaded not guilty to the murders on this date. On July 29, Judge Dupree denied the double jeopardy and speedy trial arguments successively filed by his attorneys, and allowed the proposed trial date of August 18, 1975, to stand, although the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled to stay the proceedings on August 15. The panel of this court ordered the indictment dismissed on the grounds of a defendant&#x27;s right to a speedy trial on January 23, 1976. MacDonald himself later claimed to weep &quot;tears of relief rather than tears of joy&quot; upon hearing this news, and later recollected to return to a &quot;big celebration&quot; that his ordeal was now over.

The Government appealed to the United States Supreme Court, which ruled on May 1, 1978, that the Fourth Circuit erred in dismissing the indictment for a speedy trial violation before the case had been tried. In response to this decision, Alfred Kassab informed the press he and his wife welcomed the developments, stating, &quot;It has been [a] tremendous personal pressure to have someone running around that you are convinced killed your daughter and grandchildren.&quot; On October 27, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals rejected MacDonald&#x27;s double jeopardy arguments. The Supreme Court refused to review this decision on March 19, 1979.

==Trial==
MacDonald was brought to trial on July 16, 1979, charged with three counts of murder. He was tried in Raleigh, North Carolina, before Judge Dupree, and pleaded not guilty to the charges. MacDonald was defended by Bernard Segal and Wade Smith; James Blackburn and Brian Murtagh prosecuted the case. Initial jury selection began on this date, and would continue for three days.

Although MacDonald&#x27;s lawyers had been confident of an acquittal, there were successive rulings against the defense. The first such ruling was Judge Dupree&#x27;s refusal to admit into evidence a 1979 psychiatric evaluation of MacDonald, which suggested that an individual of his personality and mindset was highly unlikely to be capable of killing his family. Dupree justified this refusal by stating that, as MacDonald&#x27;s attorneys had not entered an insanity plea for their client, he did not wish for the trial to be hindered by opinionated and contradictory psychiatric testimony from prosecution and defense witnesses. A further defense setback was the judge&#x27;s ruling against a motion to suppress the introduction of MacDonald&#x27;s pajama top as evidence.

On the first day of the trial, Judge Dupree allowed the prosecution to admit into evidence the March 1970 copy of &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine, found in the MacDonald house, part of which contained the lengthy article relating to the Manson Family murders. However, Dupree also refused the prosecution&#x27;s request to allow any sections of the earlier Article 32 transcripts from MacDonald&#x27;s 1970 Army hearing to be produced as evidence, ruling that as the current trial was a civilian trial and the Article 32 military hearing held several reports from the military investigators, which had suggested that MacDonald had murdered his family in a drug-induced rage, this evidence was also opinionated.

===Opening statements===
In his opening statement to the jury, delivered on July 19, James Blackburn outlined the burden of proof the prosecution faced in proving MacDonald&#x27;s guilt, that the prosecution intended to meet this burden, and that the murders had been committed with malice aforethought. Blackburn then outlined the prosecution&#x27;s intention to outline both physical and circumstantial evidence indicating MacDonald&#x27;s guilt, and to introduce numerous witnesses, imploring the jurors to &quot;listen to the evidence that comes from the witness stand, [to] examine the evidence, as it is shown to you, and reach your own conclusion&quot;. Blackburn finished his opening statement by stating to the jurors: &quot;Basically, we believe that the physical evidence points to the fact that, unfortunately, one person—not two, three, four or more—killed Colette, Kimberley, and Kristen, and that person is the defendant.&quot;

Wade Smith then argued on behalf of the defense. Smith referenced the events of February 17, 1970, the Army investigation and subsequent dismissal of all charges. Repeatedly emphasizing the case had occurred over nine years ago, and that, in the intervening years, &quot;Jeff&quot; had done his utmost to rebuild his life while &quot;others&quot; would not allow him to forget his painful past, their client had now been brought to trial to face the charges of murdering his wife and children, Smith emphasized to the jurors their ability to relieve their client of his ongoing ordeal by acquitting him of all charges.

===Testimony===
One of the chief prosecution witnesses to testify was Paul Stombaugh, whom the prosecution summoned to testify on August 7. Stombaugh demonstrated to the jurors how MacDonald&#x27;s pajama top had been pierced by 48 small, smooth, and cylindrical ice pick holes after the garment had been placed atop his wife&#x27;s chest. Stombaugh contended that, in order for the holes to have been as smooth and devoid of fraying or tearing, the garment would have had to remain stationary, an extremely unlikely occurrence if, as MacDonald contended, he had wrapped it around his hands to defend himself from blows from an attacker wielding an ice pick or club. Furthermore, Stombaugh demonstrated that by folding the garment in the manner depicted in the crime scene photographs, all 48 holes could have been made by 21 thrusts of the ice pick through the garment, and in an identical pattern, implying Colette had been repeatedly stabbed through the pajama top while the garment was lying on her body. Although Segal subjected Stombaugh to a harsh cross-examination—repeatedly raising his voice as he challenged Stombaugh&#x27;s credentials and forensic methods—Stombaugh remained steadfast as to his conclusions.

A further piece of damaging evidence against MacDonald was an audio tape made of the April 6, 1970 interview by military investigators, which was played in the courtroom immediately after the jurors had returned from visiting the still-intact crime scene. The jury heard MacDonald&#x27;s matter-of-fact, indifferent recitation of the murders. They heard him become angry, defensive, and emotional in response to suggestions by the investigators that he had committed the murders. He asked the investigators why would they think he, who had a beautiful family and &quot;everything going for [him]&quot;, could have murdered his family in cold blood for no reason. The jury also heard investigators later confront him with their knowledge of his extramarital affairs, to which MacDonald murmured, &quot;Oh... you guys are more thorough than I thought.&quot;

Despite earlier rulings against the defense counsel, the prosecution was also hampered by the lack of an obvious motive for MacDonald to have committed the murders. He had no history of violence or domestic abuse against his wife or children. The defense also argued the crime scene was hopelessly compromised during the investigation and potential evidence either was destroyed, was lost, or remained uncollected.

MacDonald&#x27;s defense attorneys also called several favorable character witnesses, plus a forensic expert named James Thornton, to the stand. Thornton attempted to rebut Stombaugh&#x27;s contention that the pajama top was stationary on Colette&#x27;s chest, rather than wrapped around MacDonald&#x27;s wrists as he warded off blows, stating that he had attempted to stab a pajama top wrapped around a ham with an ice pick as an assistant moved the item back and forth, resulting in perfectly cylindrical holes with no tearing around the edges of the garment.

Following Thornton&#x27;s testimony, prosecutors Murtagh and Blackburn staged an impromptu re-enactment of the alleged attack on MacDonald. Murtagh wrapped a pajama top of the same material around his hands and attempted to fend off a series of blows that Blackburn attempted to inflict on him with the ice pick used in the murders. The resulting ice pick holes in the pajama top were jagged and elongated, not smoothly cylindrical like the ones within the garment recovered upon Colette&#x27;s body. Furthermore, Murtagh received a small wound on his right arm. MacDonald had received no defensive wounds on his arms or hands consistent with a struggle. In addition, aside from a small smear of blood discovered upon the &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine and a single speck of blood upon MacDonald&#x27;s spectacles, no other traces of blood were recovered from the room in which MacDonald claimed to have fought for his life.

====Helena Stoeckley====
One of the final defense witnesses Segal subpoenaed to testify was Helena Stoeckley. Intent on extracting a confession from her that she had been one of the intruders MacDonald claimed had entered his house, murdered his family and attacked him, Segal talked to Stoeckley in private for over two hours, attempting to persuade her to confess to end MacDonald&#x27;s years of &quot;suffering unjustly&quot;—also promising her immunity from prosecution due to the expiration of the statute of limitations. Stoeckley repeatedly informed Segal she was unable to help him. She also denied ever having seen MacDonald, and refused to testify to acts she was adamant she did not commit.

Under oath, Stoeckley denied any culpability in murders, and any knowledge of who may have committed the acts. Stoeckley was insistent that she was unable to recall her whereabouts on the date of the murders; she emphasized her extensive drug use in 1970 and the intervening years, adding that the night of February 16–17, 1970 was &quot;by no means&quot; the first or last night in which she was unable to recall her whereabouts. Following this testimony, Murtagh and Segal alternately argued before Judge Dupree for the dismissal, or introduction of, testimony from several witnesses to whom Stoeckley had earlier allegedly confessed. On August 20, Dupree refused the introduction of this testimony, citing legal trustworthiness requisites and stating the introduction of these witnesses would add no further value to the proceedings than what they had experienced from Stoeckley&#x27;s own testimony.

===Defendant&#x27;s testimony===
The final witness to testify on behalf of the defense was MacDonald himself, who testified on his own behalf on August 23 and 24.

MacDonald was first questioned by Bernard Segal, who sought to humanize his client in the eyes of the jury. He began his questioning by asking MacDonald about his family. MacDonald described each family member and their individual personalities, stating the family &quot;shared almost everything ... we were all friends. Colette and I shared the children growing up. We shared our life experiences.&quot; He also claimed the reason he had never remarried was the fact he was unable to forget his wife and children, whom he thought about daily. Segal then asked MacDonald to recount his family background, his career at Fort Bragg, and his family&#x27;s general lifestyle in February 1970. He then produced several family photographs and artifacts, asking MacDonald to describe each item or the circumstances surrounding each photograph, and to identify the individual in each image. MacDonald then recounted his life in the years since the deaths of his family, describing his decision to relocate to California as an effort to distance himself from well-wishers and insisting the reason he worked up to eighty hours a week was that it was &quot;easier than sitting and thinking&quot; about his family.

The following day, James Blackburn cross-examined MacDonald. He outlined every piece of physical and circumstantial evidence recovered at the crime scene which contradicted MacDonald&#x27;s own accounts of &quot;the assailants&quot; attacking him and murdering his family and instead indicated his own guilt. Blackburn typically began each question with a statement to the effect of: &quot;Dr. MacDonald. Should the jury find from the evidence...&quot; MacDonald was unable to offer any plausible explanations for these discrepancies. For example, he was unable to explain how the piece of lumber used as a weapon came from a mattress slat on Kimberley&#x27;s bed, but claimed there &quot;may have been&quot; some wood in the utility room, later adding his insistence the club which had struck him across the head was &quot;sort of smooth&quot; and may have been a baseball bat as opposed to a wooden instrument. He also claimed the earlier testimony of Army investigators pertaining to his questioning on April 6, 1970, was unreliable due to the poor conduct of the investigators, and the fact several weeks had elapsed between the murders and his formal questioning.

When questioning MacDonald in regard to various discrepancies in his accounts of his movements, the injuries he sustained, and the positioning of his pajama top upon his body throughout the night of the murders with regards to the tearing and fiber evidence sourcing from the garment, Blackburn succeeded in highlighting several discrepancies in MacDonald&#x27;s accounts by comparison to previous interview transcripts and his current claims, and the contradictions of this testimony with the forensic evidence. In response, Segal repeatedly raised objections to this line of questioning, claiming the discrepancies were misleading. His objections were frequently overruled.

Following a brief recess, Blackburn resumed his cross-examination. On this occasion, he illustrated instances of MacDonald adjusting his testimony regarding having moved his wife&#x27;s body after learning fibers from his pajama top were found beneath her body. He then asked direct questions regarding the location of blood, fiber, and other physical evidence within his apartment which directly contradicted his accounts of his movements and those of members of his family. Blackburn frequently accompanied these questions with a hypothetical suggestion that &quot;if the jury should find from the evidence&quot;— forensic or circumstantial evidence which contradicted MacDonald&#x27;s testimony—would he have any plausible explanation for these discrepancies. MacDonald did frequently attempt to rebuff this line of questioning, but was typically unable to offer any explanation for this evidence.

===Closing arguments===
On August 28, 1979, both counsels delivered their closing arguments before the jury. James Blackburn argued first, beginning by contrasting the injuries inflicted upon Colette, Kimberley, and Kristen with those suffered by MacDonald. He then outlined the medical testimony which listed the sole serious injury MacDonald had sustained as the pneumothorax wound to his chest, stating that even if the prosecution conceded the wound was potentially life-threatening, the wound was the sole serious injury he had sustained. Referencing the life-and-death struggle MacDonald claimed to have engaged in with the alleged intruders, Blackburn stated the evidence indicated a struggle had occurred in the MacDonald home, but this struggle was between &quot;only one white male and one white female. The white female was Colette and the white male was her husband.&quot;

Blackburn then poured scorn on the character witnesses who had earlier testified MacDonald had been a good husband and father, then returned to the evidence, stating: &quot;If we convince you, by the evidence, he &quot;did&quot; it, we don&#x27;t have to show you he is the sort of person that &quot;could&quot; have done it.&quot; He then closed his initial argument by stating: &quot;I can only tell you from the physical evidence that... things do not lie. But I suggest that people can, and do.&quot;

The following day, Bernard Segal and Wade Smith delivered their closing arguments on behalf of the defense. Segal focused much of his closing argument upon the &quot;campaign of persecution&quot; his client had been subjected to by the legal system for almost a decade in an attempt to frame him for the murder of his family, describing the prosecution&#x27;s case as a &quot;house built on sand&quot;. Portraying MacDonald as a loving husband and father, Segal then emphasized MacDonald&#x27;s insistence from the outset that four intruders had been responsible for the murders. Segal spoke for over three hours, using virtually all of the defense&#x27;s allotted time. Blackburn and Murtagh agreed to forfeit 10 minutes of their allocated rebuttal time to allow Smith to make an argument to the jury.

Following a brief recess, Smith appealed to the jurors to question the lack of an obvious motive for MacDonald to have committed the murders. He referenced the family photographs of MacDonald enjoying the company of his wife and children in the years, and even weeks, before their deaths, stating: &quot;It makes no sense. There is no motive.&quot; He then appealed to the jurors to give MacDonald &quot;the peace&quot; he had sought for almost a decade.

In his rebuttal argument, James Blackburn referenced Smith&#x27;s earlier observation regarding &quot;the unbelievability&quot; of a successful doctor murdering his family, but contended the events of February 17, 1970, occurred &quot;because events overtook themselves too fast... everything else, ladies and gentlemen, we say, in that crime scene, flowed from that moment&quot;. He then referred once again to the physical evidence, stating the evidence unequivocally illustrated the chain of events which occurred and which only pointed to MacDonald&#x27;s guilt. Blackburn closed his rebuttal argument by stating that, although the prosecution was convinced that MacDonald was guilty, they only wished he was not, given the final moments of the victims and &quot;who it was that was going to make them die&quot;, adding that the defendant would never have peace.

In a final address to the jury, Judge Dupree informed the panel they had three choices to choose from: To find MacDonald not guilty; to find him guilty of first-degree murder; or guilty of second-degree murder in each case.

==Conviction and incarceration==
Shortly after 4:00 p.m. on August 29, 1979, the jury, having deliberated for six-and-a-half hours, announced they had reached their verdict. MacDonald was convicted of one count of first-degree murder in the death of Kristen and two counts of second-degree murder in the deaths of Colette and Kimberley. Four jurors wept as they announced their verdicts, and MacDonald&#x27;s mother rushed out of the courtroom. MacDonald himself displayed no emotion. Judge Dupree imposed a life sentence for each of the murders, to be served consecutively. Bail was revoked, and MacDonald was temporarily transferred to a Butner County jail, prior to his permanent transferral to the Federal Correctional Institution in Terminal Island, California.
Immediately following the verdict, Alfred Kassab telephoned the family lawyer, Richard Cahn. Kassab thanked the lawyer for his exhaustive efforts over the years, stating: &quot;Hi, Dick, I just got what I wanted. Three life sentences. Thanks for everything. We couldn&#x27;t have done it without your help!&quot; The Kassabs also informed the press: &quot;This was something that had to be done. Now, we can rest in peace.&quot;

MacDonald appealed Dupree&#x27;s bail revocation ruling, requesting that bail be granted pending the outcome of his appeal. This application was rejected on September 7. A further appeal to be freed on bail was rejected by the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals on November 20.

==Post-conviction==
===Appeals===
On July 29, 1980, a panel of the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals reversed MacDonald&#x27;s conviction, ruling via a 2–1 margin that the nine-year delay in bringing him to trial violated his Sixth Amendment rights to a speedy trial.&lt;ref name=&quot;United States of America 07/29/80&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; He was released on August 22, having posted $100,000 bail, and subsequently returned to work as the Director of Emergency Medicine at St. Mary&#x27;s Medical Center in Long Beach, California. He would later announce his engagement to his fiancée, Randi Dee Markwith, in March 1982.

Six months later, on December 18, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals voted 5–5 to hear the appeal &quot;en banc&quot;. As a majority did not vote to hear this appeal, the application was accordingly denied, upholding the previous ruling. This decision was appealed, and on May 26, 1981, the US Supreme Court accepted the case for consideration, hearing oral arguments on December 7. On March 31, 1982, the Supreme Court ruled 6–3 that MacDonald&#x27;s rights to a speedy trial had not been violated, stating the time interval between the dismissal of the military charges and the indictment on civilian charges should &quot;not be considered in determining whether the delay in bringing [MacDonald] to trial violated his right to a speedy trial under the Sixth Amendment&quot;. He was rearrested and returned to federal prison and his original sentence of three consecutive life terms reinstated. The following year, MacDonald dismissed Segal as his legal representative.

Defense lawyers filed a new motion for MacDonald to be freed on bail pending appeal, but the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals refused. His remaining points of appeal—including his contention the evidence presented at trial did not justify the finding of his guilt beyond a reasonable doubt—were heard on June 9, 1982, although his conviction was unanimously affirmed on August 16. Shortly thereafter, MacDonald&#x27;s licenses to practice medicine in both North Carolina and California were revoked.

MacDonald again appealed this decision, contending his conviction should be overturned due to suppressed exculpatory evidence. Dupree rejected these defense motions on March 1, 1985. The Supreme Court upheld the lower court&#x27;s decision October 6, 1986. A further defense motion that MacDonald should be granted a new murder trial on the grounds of prosecutorial misconduct was denied on July 8, 1991. This ruling was appealed on the grounds of judicial bias on October 3, but was denied.

A further appeal was argued before the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in February 1992. This appeal listed newly discovered evidence which MacDonald contended was suppressed at his trial and which, he claimed, corroborated his exculpatory account of the murders. This appeal contended that, had Judge Dupree permitted this evidence, the jurors would have learned that all of the doctors hired by the defense, who had worked for the Army, or the government at Walter Reed Hospital, had concluded that MacDonald was psychologically incapable of committing such acts of violence.

The court ruled against awarding a new trial on June 2,&lt;ref name=&quot;United States of America (06/02/92)&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; stating Judge Dupree had acted correctly when he refused to allow the jury to view a transcript of the 1970 Article 32 hearing, and because this was not an insanity trial, he had also acted properly in not allowing the jurors to hear any of the psychiatric testimony. This ruling also stated that Helena Stoeckley&#x27;s confessions of guilt pertaining to the murders were unreliable and conflicted with the established facts of the case, and accordingly, the judge&#x27;s ruling against her being allowed to testify at MacDonald&#x27;s 1979 trial was valid.

On September 2, 1997, the district court granted MacDonald&#x27;s motion to file a supplemental affidavit with the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. This affidavit contended that, although several saran fibers found at the crime scene which did not match any evidentiary item recovered had most likely sourced from a doll and not a wig, these fibers were also used in the manufacture of human wigs prior to 1970, and thus added to &quot;the weight of previously amassed exculpatory evidence&quot;. His motion for DNA testing upon these fibers was transferred from the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals to the district court. MacDonald&#x27;s lawyers were also given the right to pursue DNA tests on limited hair and blood evidence on October 17, 1997. This testing began in December 2000, with MacDonald&#x27;s lawyers hoping the results would tie Stoeckley and her then-boyfriend, Gregory Mitchell, to the crime scene.

On March 10, 2006, the Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory announced that the results of this DNA testing revealed that the DNA of neither Stoeckley nor Mitchell matched that upon any of the exhibits tested. Furthermore, although a single hair found within Colette&#x27;s left palm was also cited by MacDonald as belonging to one of the alleged intruders, this testing also revealed the hair to have come from his own body. This hair was also a precise match with others recovered from the bedspread within the master bedroom and upon the top sheet of Kristen&#x27;s bed. A hair found in Colette&#x27;s right palm was also determined to be her own. Three hairs, one from the bed sheet, one found in Colette&#x27;s body outline in the area of her legs, and a single hair measuring one-fifth of an inch found beneath Kristen&#x27;s fingernail did not match the DNA profile of any MacDonald family member or known suspect.

In September 2012, the district court conducted a formal evidentiary hearing regarding DNA evidence and statements relating to key witnesses who offered testimony indicating MacDonald&#x27;s innocence. On July 24, 2014, the district court rejected these claims in their entirety and re-affirmed MacDonald&#x27;s conviction on all counts. Reportedly, MacDonald was disappointed, but not surprised, with this ruling. He presented a motion to alter or amend this judgment to the district court, although this was denied in November 2014. He then appealed the denial of this motion to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. On December 21, 2018, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court&#x27;s ruling.

In April 2021, MacDonald was denied a request for compassionate release upon the grounds of his ailing health, with Judge Terrence Boyle citing the compassionate release law applies only to individuals whose crimes occurred on or after November 1, 1987. A further appeal against this ruling was dismissed by the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit on September 16, 2021.

===Later confession of Helena Stoeckley===
Shortly after MacDonald&#x27;s initial release from prison in August 1980, his supporters hired a retired FBI Special Agent and private investigator named Ted Gunderson to assist in overturning his conviction. Gunderson contacted Helena Stoeckley, who on this occasion confessed that she and five members of what she described as a &quot;drug cult&quot; had developed a deep grudge against MacDonald as he had &quot;refused to treat heroin- and opium-addicted&quot; patients. Accordingly, she and other members of this group had plotted revenge against MacDonald, intending specifically to murder his family but leave him alive.

According to Stoeckley, she had telephoned the MacDonald residence late in the evening of February 16 to determine all members of the family were present in the house. Colette had answered and stated a babysitter would be there in the early evening but that after she had left, all the family would be present and alone. The group had then &quot;dropped mescaline&quot; before driving to the MacDonald residence. She and four others had entered the house and confronted MacDonald, intent on him signing a Dexedrine prescription, although the situation quickly deteriorated, with MacDonald attempting to fight his attackers before quickly lapsing into unconsciousness. Stoeckley alleged she then ran into the master bedroom to &quot;find &#x27;Death to All Pigs&#x27; or something like that&quot; scrawled on the headboard and two of her friends bludgeoning Colette on the bed as her child lay asleep next to her. Stoeckley was adamant she had worn a beige, floppy hat on the evening in question.

Stoeckley had submitted to a polygraph test in April 1971, with the military examiner stating: &quot;It is concluded that Miss Stoeckley is convinced in her mind that she knows the identity of those person(s) who killed Colette, Kimberley, and Christine MacDonald. It is further concluded that Miss Stoeckley is convinced in her mind that she was physically present when the three members of the MacDonald family were killed. No abnormal physiological responses were noted in the polygraph tracings: however, due to Miss Stoeckley&#x27;s admitted confused state of mind and her excessive drug use during and immediately following the homicides in question, a conclusion cannot be reached as to whether she, in fact, knows who perpetrated the homicides or whether she, in fact, was present at the scene of the murders.&quot;

On April 16, 2007, MacDonald&#x27;s attorneys filed an affidavit on behalf of Stoeckley&#x27;s mother, Helena Teresa Stoeckley, who stated that her daughter had twice confessed to her that she was present in the MacDonald house on the evening of the murders and that her daughter was afraid of the prosecutors. MacDonald requested to expand his then-outstanding appeal to include this affidavit alongside all the evidence amassed at trial, the developments which he claimed had been subsequently discovered (including the 2006 results of DNA testing), and the statements of individuals to whom Stoeckley had made these confessions. This appeal also alleged that the trial statements of prosecutor James Blackburn should be considered unreliable as he had been convicted of fraud, forgery, and embezzlement, and subsequently disbarred in 1993.

MacDonald&#x27;s motions regarding the DNA results and the affidavit of Stoeckley&#x27;s mother were denied. The denial of these two motions was based on jurisdictional issues, specifically that MacDonald had not obtained the required pre-filing authorization from the Circuit Court for these motions to the district court. Nonetheless, the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals granted MacDonald&#x27;s motion for a successive habeas petition and remanded the matter back to the District Court Eastern Division.

===Britt affidavit===
On January 12, 2006, MacDonald was granted leave to file a further appeal based upon a November 2005 affidavit of retired Deputy United States Marshal Jim Britt, who had served in this role during the trial. Britt stated that he had overheard Helena Stoeckley admit to prosecutor James Blackburn she had actually been present at the MacDonald house at the time of the murders and that Blackburn had threatened her with prosecution if she testified as a defense witness admitting this claim. (Stoeckley had earlier met with the defense counsel prior to this alleged meeting with Blackburn, and informed them she had no memory of her whereabouts on the night in question.)

In November 2008, Judge James Carroll Fox denied this appeal. This denial was based on the merits of the claim, specifically that, as Stoeckley had made many contradictory statements regarding her participation, or lack thereof, in the murders, her claims were unreliable. In addition, MacDonald&#x27;s claim that Stoeckley had been expected to testify in a manner favorable to him at trial until she had been threatened by Blackburn is contradicted by the official trial records.

Subsequent to this November 2008 decision, a government motion to modify the decision to negate Britt&#x27;s claims was denied. Included within the motion was jail documentation establishing that Stoeckley was originally confined to the jail in Pickens, South Carolina, not Greenville, South Carolina, as Britt had claimed. Also included were custody commitment and release forms indicating that, although Britt and fellow Deputy United States Marshal Geraldine Holden had escorted Stoeckley into the Raleigh courthouse on August 16, 1979, agents other than Britt and Holden had actually transported Stoeckley to the 1979 trial. MacDonald appealed the district court&#x27;s denial of his claim to the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals. In 2011, the Court of Appeals reversed this decision, remanding MacDonald&#x27;s claims back to the district court for further consideration.

MacDonald faced several legal obstacles in his efforts to incorporate a motion relating to the earlier results of DNA testing of hair and fiber evidence recovered from 544 Castle Drive into his motion regarding the claims made in Britt&#x27;s affidavit, with the court stating he must obtain a pre-authorization for what should be a separate motion filed in relation to the results of the DNA testing. On April 19, 2011, the United States Court of Appeals granted a pre-filing authorization relating to his DNA claims, reversing the decision of the district court, and remanding his appeals for further proceedings.

An evidentiary hearing relating to the claims within the Britt affidavit, the hair and fiber evidence, and further testimony pertaining to Stoeckley&#x27;s verbal confessions, was held in September 2012. However, in July 2014, Judge Fox ruled against MacDonald&#x27;s appeal, upholding his convictions.

===&quot;Fatal Vision&quot;===
In June 1979, MacDonald invited author Joe McGinniss to write a book about his case. Initially unsure of MacDonald&#x27;s guilt or innocence, McGinniss agreed to his request, and was given full access to MacDonald and his defense team during the upcoming trial.

The book McGinniss wrote relating to the murders, &quot;Fatal Vision,&quot; portrays MacDonald as &quot;a narcissistic sociopath&quot; who was guilty of murdering his family and who believed in his ongoing capabilities to deceive both legal personnel and personal acquaintances. McGinniss quotes a 1979 report compiled by a psychologist named Hirsch Lazzaar Silverman, who stated MacDonald &quot;handled his conflicts by denying that they even exist&quot;, adding that MacDonald lacked any sense of guilt, had been capable of committing &quot;asocial acts with impunity&quot;, and had been &quot;incapable of [forming] emotionally close&quot; relationships with females of any age. Silverman further states MacDonald had avoided and resented his commitments as a husband and father and that, given his ongoing &quot;denial of truth&quot;, he would continually seek both attention and approval.

&quot;Fatal Vision&quot; also alleges a possible motive for the killings. As MacDonald was regularly taking the amphetamine Eskatrol in an effort to lose weight via a weight-control program for his Green Beret unit, McGinniss suggests MacDonald may have murdered his family in a spur-of-the-moment fit of psychotic rage as a result of his frequent consumption of the amphetamines. Furthermore, the book emphasizes the fact MacDonald worked extremely long hours in several medical employment roles in 1969 and 1970, and his extensive social and family commitments, resulted in his suffering from an increasing lack of sleep.

Reportedly, MacDonald had expected McGinniss&#x27;s book to profess his innocence and the ongoing miscarriage of justice to which he had been subjected. In 1987, he sued McGinniss for fraud, claiming that the author had agreed to hear his innermost thoughts in order to write a positive account of his ongoing fight for justice for himself and his family, but had actually falsely claimed to believe his claims of innocence after he had already reached a conclusion of his guilt, in order that he (MacDonald) continue cooperating with him on the project. This lawsuit resulted in a mistrial on August 21, 1987. The two later settled out of court for $325,000, although the Kassabs subsequently filed their own countersuit against MacDonald, citing an inheritance clause, resulting in MacDonald receiving only $50,000.

==Aftermath==

Colette, Kimberley, and Kristen MacDonald were laid to rest side by side in Washington Memorial Park, Suffolk County, Long Island, on February 23, 1970. Each grave was initially inscribed with the surname of MacDonald, although the gravestones were later changed to Colette&#x27;s maiden name of Stevenson.

MacDonald is currently serving his life sentence at a federal prison in Cumberland, Maryland, and continues to maintain his innocence. Several individuals believe MacDonald&#x27;s claims of innocence, and he remains determined to clear his name.

In 2017, MacDonald stated: &quot;I am not going to get out saying a falsehood to the parole commission in order for them to give me a break. If it takes me saying &#x27;I killed my family&#x27; to the parole commission to get out of here and go home, I&#x27;m never going home.&quot;

MacDonald&#x27;s lawyers have repeatedly used the Freedom of Information Act to locate any evidence not presented by either counsel at his 1979 trial, citing suppression of evidence as justification for a retrial. All efforts have proved unsuccessful, as successive courts have ruled that these uncovered and stipulated items do not establish any proof of innocence and thus would not have influenced the verdict of the jury.

MacDonald claims that unidentified fingerprint and fiber evidence uncovered inside his home has never been matched to any individual known to have been in the premises prior to or after the murders, and that these prints are evidence of his claim of home intruders. Further evidence he contends has been withheld include two unidentified 22 inch (56 cm) long synthetic hairs found in a hairbrush, but which were not made available to his defense at trial, and a minute spot of blood of either type O or type B origin (either his blood type or that of his younger daughter, Kristen) that was uncovered in the hallway. His supporters also point to unsourced black woolen fibers found upon Colette MacDonald&#x27;s mouth and shoulder as evidence of intruders which, they contend, were also deliberately withheld by the government from the defense from presenting as evidence supporting MacDonald&#x27;s contention.

In August 2002, MacDonald married a former children&#x27;s drama school owner/operator named Kathryn Kurichh. The two had first met in Baltimore decades previously, but became reacquainted in 1997 after Kurichh wrote MacDonald a letter offering to assist with his legal case. Their friendship gradually became romantic, and their marriage occurred while MacDonald was incarcerated at a federal prison in California. MacDonald was later transferred to the Federal Correctional Institution at Cumberland, Maryland, which is closer to his new legal state of residence as well as to his wife.
MacDonald became eligible for parole in March 1991, but he did not apply for parole at that time. At the urging of his second wife and his attorneys, MacDonald applied for a May 2005 parole hearing. His parole request was immediately denied. His next potential parole hearing was in May 2020, although it is unknown whether he applied for parole on this date. 

Gregory Mitchell, whom Helena Stoeckley accused of murdering Colette MacDonald, died of cirrhosis of the liver on June 2, 1982, at the age of 31. Like Stoeckley, Mitchell is known to have been a heavy narcotics user. Prior to his death, Mitchell allegedly confessed to multiple people of his involvement in the murders, although he had previously passed a polygraph test in 1971 and the CID had cleared him of any involvement.

Helena Werle Stoeckley died at the age of 30 in January 1983. Her body was found inside her Seneca, South Carolina apartment, with her death estimated to have occurred five days before her body was discovered on January 14. Her autopsy indicates she died of acute pneumonia and cirrhosis. In the years prior to her death, Stoeckley had undergone several years of treatment for drug addiction and psychiatric care.

On December 17, 1995, Judge Franklin Dupree died at the age of 82 following a short illness. Bernard Segal, MacDonald&#x27;s lead defense attorney, died in California in 2011. James Blackburn, a lead prosecutor in the 1979 trial, later admitted that between 1990 and 1991 he had forged several court documents unrelated to the MacDonald case, and illegally wired money from his law firm&#x27;s bank account. In 1993, Blackburn pleaded guilty to fraud, embezzlement, forgery and obstruction of justice. He was disbarred and served three-and-a-half months in jail.

Colette MacDonald&#x27;s mother and stepfather, Mildred and Alfred Kassab, both died in 1994; she on January 19 and he on October 24. Alfred Kassab had initially believed MacDonald&#x27;s testimony and been a staunch and vocal supporter of his son-in-law, but he drastically changed his opinion and became one of MacDonald&#x27;s fiercest adversaries. Initially, Mildred had welcomed a 1971 diagnosis of breast cancer, writing in her diary the cancer would help her in her &quot;desire to just die&quot; following the murders of her daughter and grandchildren. However, her husband&#x27;s steadfast determination to see MacDonald brought to justice compelled her to assist him in his quest for justice, and she consented to submit to radiation therapy.

In 1984, Kassab reflected on the impact the events made on his marriage to Colette&#x27;s mother, stating: &quot;Most people who go through traumatic things like this, nowhere near as lengthy, almost always end up in divorce, but, with us, it&#x27;s drawn us closer.&quot; With his own health in decline, in 1989 Kassab recorded a message on a tape recorder, stating he wished the recording to be played at any future parole hearings. In this recorded message, Kassab stated: &quot;I want to be sure he serves out his sentence the way it should be served out. I don&#x27;t want him walking the streets.&quot;

==Media==
===Television===
* The team behind the long-running television documentary series &quot;Unsolved Mysteries&quot; briefly produced a spin-off show titled &quot;Final Appeal: From the Files of Unsolved Mysteries&quot;. This episode was first broadcast in September 1992.
* The 1984 American television miniseries &quot;Fatal Vision&quot; is directly based on McGinniss&#x27;s 1983 book focusing upon the MacDonald murders. The series casts Gary Cole as Jeffrey MacDonald, and was first broadcast on NBC on November 18, 1984.
* Investigation Discovery has also broadcast an 85-minute adaptation of Joe McGinniss&#x27;s second book about the MacDonald murders, &quot;Final Vision: The Last Word on Jeffrey MacDonald&quot;. Directed by Nicholas McCarthy, this made-for-TV film was first broadcast on December 10, 2017.

===Bibliography===
* 

===Documentary===
* The BBC documentary television series &quot;Great Crimes and Trials of the Twentieth Century&quot; has broadcast an episode focusing upon the MacDonald family murders. This 25-minute episode, titled &quot;The Green Beret Killings&quot;, was first broadcast in 1993.
* &quot;False Witness&quot; (1989). Directed by Christopher Olgiati, this 90-minute documentary first aired on July 12, 1989, and includes interviews with Jeffrey MacDonald and Helena Werle Stoeckley.
* The 2020 documentary series &quot;A Wilderness of Error&quot; focuses upon the MacDonald murders. Commissioned by FX Channel, this documentary is directed by Marc Smerling and based on the book &quot;A Wilderness of Error: The Trials of Jeffrey MacDonald&quot; by Errol Morris.
==See also==

* Crime in North Carolina
* Familicide
* Fatal Vision controversy
* Filicide
* Infanticide
* List of murdered American children

==Notes==
==References==
==Cited works and further reading==
* Begg, Paul; Fido, Martin. &quot;Great Crimes and Trials of the Twentieth Century&quot;. Carlton Publishing, 1993. 
* Bost, Fred; Potter, Jerry. &quot;Fatal Justice: Re-investigating the MacDonald Murders&quot;. W.W. Norton, 1995. 
* Evans, Colin. &quot;A Question of Evidence: The Casebook of Great Forensic Controversies, from Napoleon to O.J.&quot;. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 2003. 
* Evans, Colin. &quot;The Casebook of Forensic Detection&quot;. John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., 1996. 
* Hickey Ph.D., Eric. &quot;Encyclopedia of Murder and Violent Crime&quot;. Sage Publications, 2003. 
* Houck, Max M. &quot;Mute Witnesses: Trace Evidence Analysis&quot;. Academic Press, 2001. 
* Kelly, John F.; Wearne, Philip. &quot;Tainting Evidence: Inside the Scandals at the FBI Crime Lab&quot;. Free Press, 1998. 
* Lynton, Jonathan; Lyndall, Terri. &quot;Legal Ethics and Professional Responsibility&quot;. Delmar Publishers Inc., 1994. 
* Kohn, George C. &quot;The New Encyclopedia of American Scandal&quot;. Facts On File, Inc., 2000. 
* Lord, Vivian; Cowan, Allen. &quot;Interviewing in Criminal Justice: Victims, Witnesses, Clients, and Suspects&quot;. Jones &amp; Bartlett, 2011. 
* Masewicz, Christina. &quot;Scales of Justice: The Jeffrey MacDonald Story&quot;. AuthorHouse, 2004. 
* Malcolm, Janet. &quot;The Journalist and the Murderer&quot;. Vintage, 1990. 
* McGinniss, Joe. &quot;Fatal Vision&quot;. Signet, 1984. 
* Morris, Errol. &quot;A Wilderness of Error: The Trials of Jeffrey MacDonald&quot;. Penguin Publishing Group, 2014. 
* Nickell, Joe; Fischer, John F. &quot;Crime Science: Methods of Forensic Detection&quot;. The University Press of Kentucky, 1998. 
* Philbin, Tom; Philbin, Michael. &quot;The Killer Book of Infamous Murders: Incredible Stories, Facts, and Trivia from the World&#x27;s Most Notorious Murderers&quot;. Sourcebooks, Inc., 2011. 
* Rudin, Norah; Inman, Keith. &quot;An Introduction to Forensic DNA Analysis, Second Edition&quot;. CRC Press, 2002. 
* Shoester, Maria. &quot;Forensics in Law Enforcement&quot;. Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 2006. 
* Upton, Julian. &quot;Shocking and Sensational: The Stories Behind Famous True Crime and Scandal Books&quot;. Exposit Publishing, 2018. 
* Whittington-Egan, Richard; Whittington-Egan, Molly. &quot;Murder On File: The World&#x27;s Most Notorious Killers&quot;. Neil Wilson Publishing, 1992. 

==External links==
*February 20, 1970 &quot;New York Times&quot; news article pertaining to the MacDonald family murders
*Contemporary &quot;news article&quot; detailing MacDonald&#x27;s 1979 conviction of the murders of his wife and children
*1980 &quot;The Day&quot; &quot;news article&quot; detailing MacDonald&#x27;s appeal against his conviction
*2012 &quot;WRAL-TV&quot; &quot;news article&quot; detailing MacDonald&#x27;s parole hearing. This article contains family photographs and crime scene images
*United States of America v. Jeffrey R. MacDonald: Details of MacDonald&#x27;s 1998 appeal against his convictions
*2013 &quot;Guardian&quot; news article pertaining to the validity of MacDonald&#x27;s murder convictions
*2020 &quot;News &amp; Observer&quot; &quot;article&quot; focusing on the MacDonald murders
*&quot;Fort Bragg Murder Case Intrigues 50 Years Later&quot;: A 2020 &quot;Fayetteville Observer&quot; article focusing on the MacDonald murders
*&quot;themacdonaldcase.com&quot;: An unofficial website focusing on the MacDonald murders
*crimearchives.net &quot;webpage&quot; detailing the MacDonald murders
*&quot;thejeffreymacdonaldcase.com&quot; : A website devoted to the MacDonald murders hosted by family members of the decedents. This website includes numerous documents pertaining to the case including trial transcripts, polygraph records, legal depositions, psychological and psychiatric evaluations, and family photographs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1686465" start="0" end="24" title="Jeffrey R. MacDonald" label="Jeffrey Robert MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="71" end="85" title="Doctor of medicine" label="medical doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="90" end="108" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q482421" start="236" end="255" title="United States Army Special Forces" label="Army Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="256" end="265" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q991369" start="464" end="474" title="Fort Bragg" label="Fort Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="476" end="490" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q586319" start="580" end="588" title="ice pick" label="ice pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="607" end="622" title="appellate court" label="appellate court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581386" start="647" end="664" title="Real evidence" label="physical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440107" start="725" end="757" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Cumberland" label="Federal Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="761" end="781" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="834" end="843" title="lawsuit" label="litigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320403" start="933" end="958" title="Jamaica, Queens, New York" label="Jamaica, Queens, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="1017" end="1020" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="1076" end="1087" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315911" start="1096" end="1110" title="disciplinarian" label="disciplinarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q14707156" start="1245" end="1274" title="Patchogue-Medford High School" label="Patchogue-Medford High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384579" start="2129" end="2143" title="A Summer Place (film)" label="A Summer Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990206" start="2260" end="2285" title="Theme from A Summer Place" label="Theme from A Summer Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418789" start="2413" end="2424" title="Fire Island" label="Fire Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2683" end="2703" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535073" start="2901" end="2917" title="Skidmore College" label="Skidmore College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144357" start="2921" end="2937" title="Saratoga Springs, New York" label="Saratoga Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="3449" end="3457" title="pregnancy" label="pregnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="3614" end="3627" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190070" start="3679" end="3688" title="Wedding reception" label="reception"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="3752" end="3760" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="3993" end="4000" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="4054" end="4077" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441562" start="4078" end="4092" title="Feinberg School of Medicine" label="Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q819548" start="4568" end="4591" title="Bergenfield, New Jersey" label="Bergenfield, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q975653" start="4637" end="4673" title="Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center" label="Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q9645" start="4703" end="4711" title="thorax" label="thoracic"/>
<link wikidata="Q21203" start="5081" end="5086" title="Aruba" label="Aruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5170" end="5188" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438706" start="5219" end="5235" title="Fort Sam Houston" label="Fort Sam Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="5237" end="5242" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="5485" end="5495" title="Fort Moore" label="Fort Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="5497" end="5504" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q540280" start="5560" end="5571" title="United States Army Airborne School" label="paratrooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5673" end="5684" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636968" start="5830" end="5865" title="3rd Special Forces Group (United States)" label="3rd Special Forces Group (Airborne)"/>
<link wikidata="Q991369" start="5869" end="5881" title="Fort Liberty" label="Fort Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q991369" start="5897" end="5907" title="Fort Bragg, North Carolina" label="Fort Bragg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="5910" end="5924" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="6103" end="6111" title="Officer (armed forces)" label="officers"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="6426" end="6448" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="6452" end="6470" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q866081" start="6573" end="6581" title="femininity" label="feminine"/>
<link wikidata="Q845799" start="6626" end="6632" title="tomboy" label="tomboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870432" start="6928" end="6946" title="1st Special Forces Command (Airborne)" label="1st Special Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q214720" start="7143" end="7156" title="Shetland pony" label="Shetland pony"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="7215" end="7226" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="7764" end="7771" title="Captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="7827" end="7842" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235088" start="8668" end="8676" title="Rowan &amp;amp; Martin&amp;#x27;s Laugh-In" label="Laugh-In"/>
<link wikidata="Q6057742" start="8891" end="8930" title="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson" label="The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson"/>
<link wikidata="Q210815" start="9420" end="9435" title="military police" label="military police"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="9510" end="9530" title="Domestic violence" label="domestic disturbance"/>
<link wikidata="Q8030615" start="9912" end="9918" title="Womack Army Medical Center" label="Womack"/>
<link wikidata="Q175449" start="10423" end="10430" title="trachea" label="trachea"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="10864" end="10872" title="Club (weapon)" label="bludgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971607" start="11010" end="11019" title="Skull fracture" label="fractured"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="11275" end="11279" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q336254" start="11695" end="11708" title="defense wound" label="defense wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q23807837" start="11937" end="11950" title="mouth-to-mouth resuscitation" label="resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="12064" end="12068" title="LSD" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="12635" end="12645" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="12896" end="12904" title="Pneumothorax" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431587" start="12983" end="13014" title="United States Army Criminal Investigation Command" label="Criminal Investigation Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q318005" start="13209" end="13212" title="bedwetting" label="wet"/>
<link wikidata="Q178541" start="13761" end="13769" title="Medical glove" label="surgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q12829165" start="14428" end="14439" title="unconsciousness" label="unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q191733" start="14851" end="14856" title="pulse" label="pulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q178022" start="15787" end="15798" title="fingerprint" label="fingerprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581386" start="15914" end="15931" title="Real evidence" label="physical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q602507" start="16102" end="16116" title="Hand-to-hand combat" label="unarmed combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407432" start="16253" end="16265" title="coffee table" label="coffee table"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="16818" end="16825" title="Colonel" label="Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252814" start="16858" end="16873" title="provost marshal" label="provost marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="16891" end="16894" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314618" start="18609" end="18625" title="Forensic identification" label="forensic testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q47657" start="19649" end="19659" title="blood type" label="blood type"/>
<link wikidata="Q93263576" start="20100" end="20112" title="blood typing" label="blood typing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144101" start="20739" end="20750" title="Serous fluid" label="brain serum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722708" start="21758" end="21771" title="Manson Family" label="Manson Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q24930704" start="21772" end="21779" title="Tate-LaBianca murders" label="murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="21839" end="21846" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207172" start="22337" end="22344" title="scalpel" label="scalpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q203601" start="23087" end="23099" title="pneumothorax" label="pneumothorax"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583280" start="24090" end="24096" title="Motive (law)" label="motive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314618" start="24949" end="24966" title="forensic evidence" label="forensic evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="25584" end="25598" title="polygraph test" label="polygraph test"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800877" start="26573" end="26591" title="Article 32 hearing" label="Article 32 hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360677" start="26992" end="27003" title="crime scene" label="crime scene"/>
<link wikidata="Q193140" start="30065" end="30074" title="mescaline" label="mescaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5608642" start="30362" end="30370" title="subpoena" label="subpoena"/>
<link wikidata="Q211346" start="30622" end="30634" title="psychiatrist" label="psychiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162621" start="31546" end="31560" title="Penetrating trauma" label="puncture wound"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32078" end="32099" title="Clinical psychology#Professional practice" label="clinical psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973381" start="32516" end="32523" title="Reduced affect display" label="blunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q373752" start="32635" end="32645" title="Victimisation" label="victimized"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="32685" end="32691" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="32879" end="32900" title="Burden of proof (law)" label="insufficient evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q843610" start="33423" end="33442" title="honorable discharge" label="honorable discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="33555" end="33565" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33567" end="33577" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7590505" start="33795" end="33818" title="St. Mary Medical Center (Long Beach)" label="St. Mary Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="33887" end="33891" title="University of California, Los Angeles" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q9220" start="33934" end="33955" title="United States Grand Prix West" label="Long Beach Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="34083" end="34112" title="cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="cardiopulmonary resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917" start="34161" end="34177" title="Huntington Beach" label="Huntington Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730121" start="34834" end="34854" title="The Dick Cavett Show" label="The Dick Cavett Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="36218" end="36226" title="United States Congress" label="Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="37952" end="37987" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q883942" start="38187" end="38191" title="Mootness" label="moot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624821" start="38417" end="38431" title="probable cause" label="probable cause"/>
<link wikidata="Q17310301" start="38444" end="38454" title="indictment" label="indictment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724158" start="38649" end="38664" title="Algernon Butler" label="Algernon Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323789" start="38696" end="38706" title="grand jury" label="grand jury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491886" start="38933" end="38948" title="Franklin Dupree" label="Franklin Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q41087" start="38952" end="38975" title="Raleigh, North Carolina" label="Raleigh, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q415850" start="39852" end="39865" title="Amobarbital" label="sodium amytal"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="40573" end="40584" title="amphetamine" label="amphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q338754" start="40969" end="40980" title="Control (psychology)" label="controlling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="41451" end="41463" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162351" start="44378" end="44382" title="bail" label="bail"/>
<link wikidata="Q865927" start="44469" end="44478" title="arraignment" label="arraigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253920" start="44578" end="44593" title="double jeopardy" label="double jeopardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905918" start="44598" end="44610" title="speedy trial" label="speedy trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q250463" start="44737" end="44768" title="Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals" label="Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505473" start="44778" end="44798" title="Stay of proceedings" label="stay the proceedings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="45196" end="45223" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322999" start="46129" end="46143" title="voir dire" label="jury selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454723" start="46259" end="46268" title="acquittal" label="acquittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633203" start="46405" end="46427" title="psychiatric evaluation" label="psychiatric evaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="46661" end="46674" title="insanity plea" label="insanity plea"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634263" start="46907" end="46915" title="Suppression of evidence" label="suppress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096527" start="47719" end="47736" title="opening statement" label="opening statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="47801" end="47816" title="Burden of proof (law)" label="burden of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q567057" start="47970" end="47989" title="malice aforethought" label="malice aforethought"/>
<link wikidata="Q634260" start="48077" end="48100" title="circumstantial evidence" label="circumstantial evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q195414" start="50306" end="50323" title="cross-examination" label="cross-examination"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50535" end="50545" title="audio tape" label="audio tape"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="51528" end="51542" title="domestic abuse" label="domestic abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899048" start="53737" end="53759" title="statute of limitations" label="statute of limitations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446355" start="57623" end="57637" title="Fiber analysis" label="fiber evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410600" start="61618" end="61626" title="rebuttal" label="rebuttal"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="62634" end="62653" title="first-degree murder" label="first-degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q132821" start="62668" end="62688" title="second-degree murder" label="second-degree murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q68676" start="63212" end="63225" title="life sentence" label="life sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q578225" start="63344" end="63357" title="Butner, North Carolina" label="Butner County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440156" start="63406" end="63438" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Terminal Island" label="Federal Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059628" start="63442" end="63457" title="Terminal Island" label="Terminal Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="64017" end="64023" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q246624" start="64401" end="64416" title="Sixth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Sixth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905918" start="64429" end="64441" title="speedy trial" label="speedy trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375046" start="64905" end="64912" title="en banc" label="en banc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905670" start="66046" end="66062" title="reasonable doubt" label="reasonable doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419722" start="66379" end="66399" title="exculpatory evidence" label="exculpatory evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250575" start="66626" end="66650" title="prosecutorial misconduct" label="prosecutorial misconduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964998" start="66978" end="66990" title="Corroborating evidence" label="corroborated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473658" start="67227" end="67247" title="Walter Reed Army Medical Center" label="Walter Reed Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q705920" start="67634" end="67642" title="insanity defense" label="insanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q454263" start="68134" end="68143" title="affidavit" label="affidavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q911423" start="68234" end="68239" title="Saran (plastic)" label="saran"/>
<link wikidata="Q285223" start="68550" end="68561" title="Genetic testing" label="DNA testing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="68644" end="68658" title="United States district court" label="district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="68721" end="68724" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q4792980" start="68979" end="69021" title="Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory" label="Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q250463" start="70528" end="70581" title="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit" label="United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337540" start="70676" end="70697" title="compassionate release" label="compassionate release"/>
<link wikidata="Q7703444" start="70748" end="70762" title="Terrence Boyle" label="Terrence Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517026" start="71214" end="71227" title="Ted Gunderson" label="Ted Gunderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706418" start="72194" end="72203" title="Dexedrine" label="Dexedrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="72715" end="72729" title="polygraph test" label="polygraph test"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="73124" end="73137" title="physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q157833" start="74304" end="74316" title="embezzlement" label="embezzlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281373" start="74335" end="74344" title="Disbarment" label="disbarred"/>
<link wikidata="Q220596" start="74777" end="74783" title="habeas corpus" label="habeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q934866" start="75014" end="75035" title="United States Marshal" label="United States Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131080" start="75581" end="75598" title="James Carroll Fox" label="James Carroll Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1864258" start="76284" end="76307" title="Pickens, South Carolina" label="Pickens, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q574192" start="76313" end="76339" title="Greenville, South Carolina" label="Greenville, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211232" start="77907" end="77920" title="Joe McGinniss" label="Joe McGinniss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437311" start="78187" end="78199" title="Fatal Vision" label="Fatal Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q186529" start="78237" end="78249" title="narcissistic" label="narcissistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q118418" start="78250" end="78259" title="antisocial personality disorder" label="sociopath"/>
<link wikidata="Q180684" start="78539" end="78548" title="Conflict (process)" label="conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398032" start="79150" end="79158" title="Eskatrol" label="Eskatrol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124012" start="79749" end="79771" title="miscarriage of justice" label="miscarriage of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="79835" end="79840" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016240" start="80233" end="80241" title="mistrial (law)" label="mistrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q167412" start="80276" end="80296" title="legal settlement" label="settled out of court"/>
<link wikidata="Q54065" start="80587" end="80601" title="Suffolk County, New York" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440107" start="80847" end="80861" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Cumberland" label="federal prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="80865" end="80875" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391" start="80877" end="80885" title="Maryland" label="Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003780" start="81375" end="81401" title="Freedom of Information Act (United States)" label="Freedom of Information Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634263" start="81483" end="81506" title="suppression of evidence" label="suppression of evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q147778" start="83704" end="83726" title="cirrhosis" label="cirrhosis of the liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679162" start="84136" end="84158" title="Seneca, South Carolina" label="Seneca, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="84308" end="84317" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281373" start="84968" end="84977" title="Disbarment" label="disbarred"/>
<link wikidata="Q180507" start="85757" end="85774" title="radiation therapy" label="radiation therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887148" start="86485" end="86503" title="Unsolved Mysteries" label="Unsolved Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259759" start="86686" end="86707" title="miniseries" label="television miniseries"/>
<link wikidata="Q315864" start="86835" end="86844" title="Gary Cole" label="Gary Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="86894" end="86897" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q668203" start="86922" end="86945" title="Investigation Discovery" label="Investigation Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732228" start="87128" end="87145" title="Nicholas McCarthy (director)" label="Nicholas McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="87259" end="87262" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603925" start="87263" end="87292" title="Television documentary" label="documentary television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109827" start="87299" end="87347" title="Great Crimes and Trials" label="Great Crimes and Trials of the Twentieth Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q97627792" start="87758" end="87779" title="A Wilderness of Error (TV series)" label="A Wilderness of Error"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="87838" end="87848" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20002466" start="87882" end="87895" title="Marc Smerling" label="Marc Smerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660653" start="87924" end="87978" title="A Wilderness of Error" label="A Wilderness of Error: The Trials of Jeffrey MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q977546" start="87988" end="88000" title="Errol Morris" label="Errol Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185354" start="88018" end="88041" title="Crime in North Carolina" label="Crime in North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400895" start="88044" end="88054" title="Familicide" label="Familicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437311" start="88057" end="88081" title="Fatal Vision controversy" label="Fatal Vision controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000508" start="88084" end="88092" title="Filicide" label="Filicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q916412" start="88095" end="88106" title="Infanticide" label="Infanticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q21068476" start="88109" end="88143" title="List of murdered American children" label="List of murdered American children"/>
<link wikidata="Q5729795" start="88220" end="88232" title="Martin Fido" label="Fido, Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6153486" start="89494" end="89508" title="Janet Malcolm" label="Malcolm, Janet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5392238" start="89516" end="89547" title="The Journalist and the Murderer" label="The Journalist and the Murderer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211232" start="89573" end="89587" title="Joe McGinniss" label="McGinniss, Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437311" start="89595" end="89607" title="Fatal Vision" label="Fatal Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="90629" end="90643" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7729145" start="90840" end="90847" title="The Day (New London)" label="The Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390360" start="90948" end="90955" title="WRAL-TV" label="WRAL-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="91221" end="91229" title="The Guardian" label="Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753904" start="91327" end="91346" title="The News &amp;amp; Observer" label="News &amp;amp; Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733570" start="91482" end="91503" title="The Fayetteville Observer" label="Fayetteville Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190767" start="91936" end="91945" title="polygraph test" label="polygraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260784" start="91961" end="91972" title="Deposition (law)" label="depositions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633203" start="91974" end="91987" title="Psychological evaluation" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633203" start="91992" end="92014" title="psychiatric evaluation" label="psychiatric evaluation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019717" wikidata="Q3207459" url="?curid=1019717" title="Collège La Cité">
<text>Collège La Cité, commonly known as La Cité and formerly &quot;La Cité collégiale&quot;, is a French-language public college in Ontario, Canada. Founded in 1989 in Ottawa (with a satellite campus in Hawkesbury and a business office in Toronto), it is the largest French-language college in Ontario and offers more than 90 programs to some 5,000 full-time students from Ontario, other parts of Canada, and foreign countries.

In 2011, La Cité ranked first among the 24 Ontario colleges in terms of student satisfaction, graduate employment rate, usefulness of knowledge and skills acquired, overall quality of learning experiences, and overall quality of services; according to the results of an annual survey by the Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities. The college ranked second in terms of overall quality of the facilities.

In 2012 and 2013, La Cité was also recognized through Mediacorp Canada Inc.&#x27;s annual study ranking Canada&#x27;s top employers as one of the National Capital Region’s top 25 employers, while being also named among the 200 most recommended employers in the country.

==History==
The Government of Ontario created a network of colleges in 1967. Certain colleges, including Algonquin College, in Ottawa, and St. Lawrence College, in Cornwall, offer French-language programs. As early as the 1970s, the possibility of creating a 23rd – French-language – college in Ontario was put forth. In 1987, a working group was given the mandate, by the Government of Ontario, of considering the appropriateness of designating certain colleges as organisations offering services in French under Bill 8, the Ontario law on French-language services. The group concluded that the idea of creating a French college should be given priority over the college designation plan. The Minister of Colleges and Universities and Minister Responsible for Francophone Affairs agreed. In August 1988, the Ontario Cabinet approved, in principle, the creation of a French-language college with an exclusive mandate to deliver services in French. In 1989, the Ministry of Training, Colleges and Universities and the Department of the Secretary of State of Canada arrived at a cost-sharing agreement relating to the establishment of such a college in Eastern Ontario, a college bearing the official name « Collège d’arts appliqués et de technologie La Cité ».

La Cité opened its doors to 2,300 students in September 1990, in temporary facilities on St-Laurent Blvd in Ottawa. In 1993, the college purchased, from the Department of Public Works of Canada, the land on which sat the former Carson School of Languages, contiguous to Aviation Parkway. Construction began the same year and the permanent campus of La Cité collégiale was ready for the start of the 1995–1996 school year. Sitting on of land, the campus included eight buildings designed by Brisbin Brook Beynon Architects (BBB Architects), Panzini Architectes and Paquet: &quot;The primary issue raised at the time of conception arose from a singular statement concerned with the affirmation of one culture in the midst of another; the underlying significance of La Cité as a symbol of the Franco Ontarian identity within the community at large.&quot;

Through the years, enrolment has grown and the range of training opportunities offered has continued to widen.

In 2013, the college went through a rebranding exercise with a new logo and a new brand, La Cité.

==Presidents==
The first president of the college, Andrée Lortie, helmed the establishment until her retirement in March 2010. She was replaced by Lise Bourgeois, who had been head of the Conseil des écoles catholiques du Centre-Est (CECCE) (Ontario) (Central-Eastern Catholic School Board), the largest French school board in Canada outside of the province of Québec.

==Campuses==
The main campus of La Cité is in Ottawa. It has ten buildings built on of land, all of which are connected by skyways or tunnels. In September 2010, another campus, the Alphonse-Desjardins campus, was inaugurated in Orléans, an eastern suburb of Ottawa. It houses the college&#x27;s Centre des métiers Minto, a training centre specializing in the construction trades. In September 2011, the 911 Institute, an emergency services training centre, opened its doors on the main campus. La Cité also has a satellite campus in Hawkesbury, an Eastern Ontario town about from Ottawa. The college now offers a few programs in Toronto.

==Programs==
Many of its more than 90 training programs include the teaching of terminology in both of Canada&#x27;s official languages (French and English). The college also offers apprenticeship programs, in French, in the construction, motive power, service, and industrial sectors. La Cité offers postsecondary training in the following fields:
* Administration
* Applied sciences
* Apprenticeship programs
* Arts and design
* Communications
* Computers
* Construction and mechanics
* Electronics
* Aesthetics and hairdressing
* Forest environment
* Health sciences
* Hospitality
* Housing and interior design
* Legal services
* Media
* Preparatory programs
* Security
* Social sciences
* Tourism and leisure
La Cité offers one degree program:
* Baccalauréat en technologie appliquée (Biotechnologie) 

==Residence==
The student residence at La Cité opened in 2002. The four-storey building, close to the college&#x27;s main campus, has 124 units and houses 251 students.

==Logo==

La Cité has used three different logos throughout its existence:
* The first was the letter &quot;C&quot; formed with 18 angle brackets, each representing a smaller C. The text &quot;La Cité collégiale&quot; was written underneath it, using the Century Gothic typeface. The logo features a light green colour. It was sometimes accompanied with the generic slogan &quot;Le collège d&#x27;arts appliqués et de technologie&quot;, which is also used in several institutions&#x27; full names, such as Algonquin College.
* The second featured the college name written in a new, all-lowercase black font, with bold text used for &quot;cité&quot;. A blue, C-shaped swoosh-like form circled the logo. The text and then-slogan, &quot;Le Collège des meilleures pratiques&quot;, was written underneath using italics.
* The third logo maintains the black colours, but omits blue symbolism and uses a new font with all-capital letters. The college name is shortened to &quot;La Cité&quot;, written in bold. The font resembles that used in the TFO logo, a French-language television network with which the college is partnered. To the right of this name is a green circle, representing the college&#x27;s circular building. The &quot;meilleurs pratiques&quot; slogan is replaced with first logo&#x27;s generic slogan, written in regular typeface.
These logos received mixed reception.
==Partnerships==
La Cité has signed articulation agreements with universities from across Canada. Those agreements allow college graduates to pursue undergraduate or graduate university studies in various fields, including administration, mechanical engineering, computer sciences, journalism.

La Cité has also partnered with elearnnetwork.ca to help promote their online courses and programs.

Internationally, the college has several partnerships with institutions in other countries to transfer expertise through technical assistance and training programs.

==Scholarships==
The Foundation of La Cité offers hundreds of scholarships to college students, including 250 entrance awards.

==Sports==
La Cité&#x27;s athletic teams, known as Coyotes, are managed by the school&#x27;s student association, the &quot;Association Étudiante de La Cité&quot;. They participate in intercollegiate competitions in men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s soccer (football), men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s volleyball, and men&#x27;s basketball. The college is a member of the Ontario Colleges Athletic Association (OCAA) and the Canadian Colleges Athletic Association (CCAA).

==Media==
La Cité offers a campus and internet radio station, Lab Radio, as part of its media course. It uses call sign CKS608 and broadcasts as an ultra-low power radio station on 91.9 FM.

== See also ==

* Canadian government scientific research organizations
* Canadian industrial research and development organizations
* Canadian university scientific research organizations
* Higher education in Ontario
* List of colleges in Ontario
* List of universities in Ontario

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3207459" start="0" end="15" title="Collège La Cité" label="Collège La Cité"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207459" start="35" end="42" title="Collège La Cité" label="La Cité"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="127" end="134" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="163" end="169" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983704" start="1214" end="1231" title="Algonquin College" label="Algonquin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589480" start="1248" end="1268" title="St. Lawrence College, Ontario" label="St. Lawrence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q956690" start="1273" end="1281" title="Cornwall, Ontario" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573770" start="4338" end="4348" title="Hawkesbury, Ontario" label="Hawkesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q174565" start="5558" end="5565" title="bracket" label="bracket"/>
<link wikidata="Q472836" start="5676" end="5690" title="Century Gothic" label="Century Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983704" start="5927" end="5944" title="Algonquin College" label="Algonquin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q653927" start="6088" end="6094" title="swoosh" label="swoosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q750213" start="6460" end="6463" title="TFO" label="TFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="7980" end="7986" title="Campus radio" label="campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184973" start="7991" end="8013" title="internet radio station" label="internet radio station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030812" start="8162" end="8215" title="Canadian government scientific research organizations" label="Canadian government scientific research organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030823" start="8218" end="8276" title="Canadian industrial research and development organizations" label="Canadian industrial research and development organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030895" start="8279" end="8332" title="Canadian university scientific research organizations" label="Canadian university scientific research organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758374" start="8335" end="8362" title="Higher education in Ontario" label="Higher education in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610706" start="8365" end="8392" title="List of colleges in Ontario" label="List of colleges in Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232697" start="8395" end="8426" title="List of universities in Ontario" label="List of universities in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019720" wikidata="Q629415" url="?curid=1019720" title="Heikendorf">
<text>Heikendorf is a municipality in the district of Plön, in Schleswig-Holstein, Germany. It is a seaside resort off the Baltic Sea, located approximately 10 km from Kiel. The oldest part of the town is the Old Viking settlement in Möltenort.

==Notable people linked with Heikendorf==
* Adolf Dethmann (1896-1979) engineer and communist activist
* Robert Habeck (born 2 September 1969 in Lübeck) writer and politician of Alliance &#x27;90/The Greens
* Freya Hoffmeister (born 1964), business owner and athlete who holds several sea kayaking endurance records
* Klaus-Dieter Flick (born 1937 in Germany) lawyer and financial broker, known as convicted Nazi art and military equipment collector from Kitzeberg, a wealthy suburb of Heikendorf
* Fritz Lau (1872–1966), Low German playwright and author

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q629415" start="0" end="10" title="Heikendorf" label="Heikendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970" start="36" end="52" title="Plön (district)" label="district of Plön"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="57" end="75" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="77" end="84" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="94" end="108" title="seaside resort" label="seaside resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="117" end="127" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="162" end="166" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21663982" start="284" end="298" title="Adolf Dethmann" label="Adolf Dethmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q109943" start="345" end="358" title="Robert Habeck" label="Robert Habeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q98391" start="449" end="466" title="Freya Hoffmeister" label="Freya Hoffmeister"/>
<link wikidata="Q108301320" start="558" end="576" title="Klaus-Dieter Flick" label="Klaus-Dieter Flick"/>
<link wikidata="Q105073" start="739" end="748" title="Fritz Lau" label="Fritz Lau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019722" wikidata="Q229058" url="?curid=1019722" title="ISRO">
<text>The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO ) is India&#x27;s national space agency. It serves as the principal research and development arm of the Department of Space (DoS), overseen by the Prime Minister of India, with the Chairman of ISRO also serving as the chief executive of the DoS. It is primarily responsible for space-based operations, space exploration, international space cooperation and the development of related technologies. The agency maintains a constellation of imaging, communication and remote sensing satellites. It operates the GAGAN and IRNSS satellite navigation systems. It has sent three missions to the Moon and one mission to Mars.

Formerly known as the Indian National Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR), ISRO was set up in 1962 by then-Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru on the recommendation of scientist Vikram Sarabhai. It was renamed as ISRO in 1969 and was subsumed into the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). The establishment of ISRO institutionalised space research activities in India. In 1972, the Government set up a Space Commission and the DoS, bringing ISRO under its purview. It has since then been managed by the DoS, which also governs various other institutions in the domain of astronomy and space technology.

ISRO built India&#x27;s first satellite Aryabhata which was launched by the Soviet space agency Interkosmos in 1975. In 1980, it launched the satellite RS-1 onboard the indigenously built launch vehicle SLV-3, making India the seventh country to undertake orbital launches. It has subsequently developed various small-lift and medium-lift launch vehicles, enabling the agency to launch various satellites and deep space missions. It is one of the six government space agencies in the world that possess full launch capabilities with the ability to deploy cryogenic engines, launch extraterrestrial missions and artificial satellites. It is also the only one of four governmental space agencies to have demonstrated unmanned soft landing capabilities.

ISRO&#x27;s programmes have played a significant role in socio-economic development. It has supported both civilian and military domains in various aspects such as disaster management, telemedicine, navigation and reconnaissance. ISRO&#x27;s spin-off technologies have also aided in new innovations in engineering and other allied domains.

== History ==
=== Formative years ===
Modern space research in India can be traced to the 1920s, when scientist S. K. Mitra conducted a series of experiments sounding the ionosphere through ground-based radio in Kolkata. Later, Indian scientists like C. V. Raman and Meghnad Saha contributed to scientific principles applicable in space sciences. After 1945, important developments were made in coordinated space research in India by two scientists: Vikram Sarabhai, founder of the Physical Research Laboratory at Ahmedabad, and Homi Bhabha, who established the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in 1945. Initial experiments in space sciences included the study of cosmic radiation, high-altitude and airborne testing, deep underground experimentation at the Kolar mines—one of the deepest mining sites in the world—and studies of the upper atmosphere. These studies were done at research laboratories, universities, and independent locations.

In 1950, the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) was founded with Bhabha as its secretary. It provided funding for space research throughout India. During this time, tests continued on aspects of meteorology and the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field, a topic that had been studied in India since the establishment of the Colaba Observatory in 1823. In 1954, the Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences (ARIES) was established in the foothills of the Himalayas. The Rangpur Observatory was set up in 1957 at Osmania University, Hyderabad. Space research was further encouraged by the government of India. In 1957, the Soviet Union launched Sputnik 1 and opened up possibilities for the rest of the world to conduct a space launch.

The Indian National Committee for Space Research (INCOSPAR) was set up in 1962 by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru on the suggestion of Dr. Vikram Sarabhai. Initially there was no dedicated ministry for the space programme and all activities of INCOSPAR relating to space technology continued to function within the DAE. IOFS officers were drawn from the Indian Ordnance Factories to harness their knowledge of propellants and advanced light materials used to build rockets. H. G. S. Murthy, an IOFS officer, was appointed the first director of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station, where sounding rockets were fired, marking the start of upper atmospheric research in India. An indigenous series of sounding rockets named Rohini was subsequently developed and started undergoing launches from 1967 onwards. Waman Dattatreya Patwardhan, another IOFS officer, developed the propellant for the rockets.

=== 1970&#x27;s and 1980&#x27;s ===
Under the government of Indira Gandhi, INCOSPAR was superseded by ISRO. Later in 1972, a space commission and Department of Space (DoS) were set up to oversee space technology development in India specifically. ISRO was brought under DoS, institutionalising space research in India and forging the Indian space programme into its existing form. India joined the Soviet Interkosmos programme for space cooperation and got its first satellite Aryabhata in orbit through a Soviet rocket.

Efforts to develop an orbital launch vehicle began after mastering sounding rocket technology. The concept was to develop a launcher capable of providing sufficient velocity for a mass of to enter low Earth orbit. It took 7 years for ISRO to develop Satellite Launch Vehicle capable of putting into a orbit. An SLV Launch Pad, ground stations, tracking networks, radars and other communications were set up for a launch campaign. The SLV&#x27;s first launch in 1979 carried a Rohini technology payload but could not inject the satellite into its desired orbit. It was followed by a successful launch in 1980 carrying a Rohini Series-I satellite, making India the seventh country to reach Earth&#x27;s orbit after the USSR, the US, France, the UK, China and Japan. RS-1 was the third Indian satellite to reach orbit as Bhaskara had been launched from the USSR in 1979. Efforts to develop a medium-lift launch vehicle capable of putting class spacecrafts into Sun-synchronous orbit had already begun in 1978. They would later lead to the development of the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). The SLV-3 later had two more launches before discontinuation in 1983. ISRO&#x27;s Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC) was set up in 1985 and started working on a more powerful engine, Vikas, based upon the French Viking. Two years later, facilities to test liquid-fuelled rocket engines were established and development and testing of various rocket engines thrusters began.

At the same time, another solid-fuelled rocket, the Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV), whose design was based upon SLV-3 was being developed, with technologies to launch satellites into geostationary orbit (GTO). The ASLV had limited success and multiple launch failures; it was soon discontinued. Alongside these developments, communication satellite technologies for the Indian National Satellite System and the Indian Remote Sensing Programme for earth observation satellites were developed and launches from overseas were initiated. The number of satellites eventually grew and the systems were established as among the largest satellite constellations in the world, with multi-band communication, radar imaging, optical imaging and meteorological satellites.

=== 1990s ===
The arrival of the PSLV in 1990s was a major boost for the Indian space programme. With the exception of its first flight in 1994 and two partial failures later, the PSLV had a streak of more than 50 successful flights. The PSLV enabled India to launch all of its low Earth orbit satellites, small payloads to GTO and hundreds of foreign satellites. Along with the PSLV flights, development of a new rocket, a Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) was going on. India tried to obtain upper-stage cryogenic engines from Russia&#x27;s Glavkosmos but was blocked by the US from doing so. As a result, KVD-1 engines were imported from Russia under a new agreement which had limited success and a project to develop indigenous cryogenic technology was launched in 1994, taking two decades to reach fulfillment. A new agreement was signed with Russia for seven KVD-1 cryogenic stages and a ground mock-up stage with no technology transfer, instead of five cryogenic stages along with the technology and design in the earlier agreement. These engines were used for the initial flights and were named GSLV Mk.1. ISRO was under US government sanctions between 6 May 1992 to 6 May 1994. After the United States refused to help India with Global Positioning System (GPS) technology during the Kargil war, ISRO was prompted to develop its own satellite navigation system IRNSS (now NaVIC i.e. Navigation with Indian Constellation) which it is now expanding further.

=== 21st century ===
In 2003, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee urged scientists to develop technologies to land humans on the Moon and programmes for lunar, planetary and crewed missions were started. ISRO launched Chandrayaan-1 aboard PSLV in 2008, purportedly the first probe to verify the presence of water on the Moon. 

ISRO launched the Mars Orbiter Mission (or Mangalyaan) aboard a PSLV in 2013, which later became the first Asian spacecraft to enter Martian orbit, making India the first country to succeed at this on its first attempt. 

Subsequently, the cryogenic upper stage for GSLV rocket became operational, making India the sixth country to have full launch capabilities. A new heavier-lift launcher LVM3 was introduced in 2014 for heavier satellites and future human space missions.

On 23 August 2023, India achieved its first soft landing on an extraterrestrial body and became the first nation to successfully land a spacecraft near the lunar south pole and fourth nation to successfully land a spacecraft on the Moon with ISRO&#x27;s Chandrayaan-3, the third Moon mission. Indian moon mission, Chandrayaan-3 (lit. &quot;Mooncraft&quot;), saw the successful soft landing of its &quot;Vikram&quot; lander at 6.04 pm IST (12:34 pm GMT) near the little-explored southern pole of the Moon in a world&#x27;s first for any space programme. 

India then successfully launched its first solar probe, the Aditya-L1, aboard a PSLV on 2 September 2023.

On 30 December 2024, ISRO successfully launched the SpaDeX mission, pioneering spacecraft rendezvous, docking, and undocking using two small satellites. On 16 January 2025, the ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network&#x27;s Mission Operations Complex verified that the docking process was successful. India became the 4th country — after USA, Russia and China — to achieve successful Space Docking. ISRO also successfully managed to control two satellites as a single entity after docking.

=== Agency logo ===
ISRO has an official logo since 2002. It consists of an orange arrow shooting upwards attached with two blue coloured satellite panels with the name of ISRO written in two sets of text, orange-coloured Devanagari on the left and blue-coloured English in the Prakrta typeface on the right.

== Goals and objectives ==

As the national space agency of India, ISRO&#x27;s purpose is the pursuit of all space-based applications such as research, reconnaissance, and communications. It undertakes the design and development of space rockets and satellites, and undertakes explores upper atmosphere and deep space exploration missions. ISRO has also incubated technologies in India&#x27;s private space sector, boosting its growth.

On the topic of the importance of a space programme to India as a developing nation, Vikram Sarabhai as INCOSPAR chairman said in 1969:

The former president of India and chairman of DRDO, A. P. J. Abdul Kalam, said:
India&#x27;s economic progress has made its space programme more visible and active as the country aims for greater self-reliance in space technology. In 2008, India launched as many as 11satellites, including nine from other countries, and went on to become the first nation to launch 10satellites on onerocket. ISRO has put into operation two major satellite systems: the Indian National Satellite System (INSAT) for communication services, and the Indian Remote Sensing Programme (IRS) satellites for management of natural resources.

== Organisation structure and facilities ==
ISRO is managed by the DOS, which itself falls under the authority of the Space Commission and manages the following agencies and institutes:
* Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO)
* Antrix Corporation – The marketing arm of ISRO, Bengaluru
* Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), Ahmedabad
* National Atmospheric Research Laboratory (NARL), Gadanki, Andhra Pradesh
* NewSpace India Limited – Commercial wing, Bengaluru
* North-Eastern Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC), Umiam
* Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST), Thiruvananthapuram – India&#x27;s space university

=== Research facilities ===
=== Test facilities ===
=== Construction and launch facilities ===
=== Tracking and control facilities ===
=== Human resource development ===
=== Antrix Corporation Limited (Commercial Wing) ===

Set up as the marketing arm of ISRO, Antrix&#x27;s job is to promote products, services and technology developed by ISRO.

=== NewSpace India Limited (Commercial Wing) ===

Set up for marketing spin-off technologies, tech transfers through industry interface and scale up industry participation in the space programmes.

=== Space Technology Incubation Centre ===
ISRO has opened Space Technology Incubation Centres (S-TIC) at premier technical universities in India which will incubate startups to build applications and products in tandem with the industry and for use in future space missions. The S-TIC will bring the industry, academia and ISRO under one umbrella to contribute towards research and development (R&amp;D) initiatives relevant to the Indian Space Programme. S-TICs are at the National Institute of Technology, Agartala serving for east region, National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar for the north region, and the National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli for the south region of India.

=== Advanced Space Research Group ===
Similar to NASA&#x27;s CalTech-operated Jet Propulsion Laboratory, ISRO and the Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology (IIST) implemented a joint working framework in 2021, wherein ISRO will approve all short-, medium- and long-term space research projects of common interest between the two. In return, an Advanced Space Research Group (ASRG) formed at IIST under the guidance of the EOC will have full access to ISRO facilities. This was done with the aim of &quot;transforming&quot; the IIST into a premier space research and engineering institute with the capability of leading future space exploration missions for ISRO.

=== Directorate of Space Situational Awareness and Management ===
To reduce dependency on North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) for space situational awareness and protect the civilian and military assets, ISRO is setting up telescopes and radars in four locations to cover each direction. Leh, Mount Abu and Ponmudi were selected to station the telescopes and radars that will cover North, West and South of Indian territory. The last one will be in Northeast India to cover the entire eastern region. Satish Dhawan Space Centre at Sriharikota already supports Multi-Object Tracking Radar (MOTR). All the telescopes and radars will come under Directorate of Space Situational Awareness and Management (DSSAM) in Bengaluru. It will collect tracking data on inactive satellites and will also perform research on active debris removal, space debris modelling and mitigation.

For early warning, ISRO began a ₹400 crore (4 billion; US$53 million) project called Network for Space Object Tracking and Analysis (NETRA). It will help the country track atmospheric entry, intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), anti-satellite weapon and other space-based attacks. All the radars and telescopes will be connected through NETRA. The system will support remote and scheduled operations. NETRA will follow the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IASDCC) and United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs (UNOSA) guidelines. The objective of NETRA is to track objects at a distance of in GTO.

India signed a memorandum of understanding on the Space Situational Awareness Data Sharing Pact with the US in April 2022. It will enable Department of Space to collaborate with the Combined Space Operation Center (CSpOC) to protect the space-based assets of both nations from natural and man-made threats. On 11 July 2022, ISRO System for Safe and Sustainable Space Operations Management (IS4OM) at Space Situational Awareness Control Centre, in Peenya was inaugurated by Jitender Singh. It will help provide information on on-orbit collision, fragmentation, atmospheric re-entry risk, space-based strategic information, hazardous asteroids, and space weather forecast. IS4OM will safeguard all the operational space assets, identify and monitor other operational spacecraft with close approaches which have overpasses over Indian subcontinent and those which conduct intentional manoeuvres with suspicious motives or seek re-entry within South Asia.

==== ISRO System for Safe and Sustainable Space Operations Management ====
On 7 March 2023, ISRO System for Safe and Sustainable Space Operations Management (IS4OM) conducted successful controlled re-entry of decommissioned satellite Megha-Tropiques after firing four on-board 11 Newton thrusters for 20 minutes each. A series of 20 manoeuvres were performed since August 2022 by spending 120 kg fuel. The final telemetry data confirmed disintegtration over Pacific Ocean. It was part of a compliance effort following international guidelines on space debris mitigation.

Speaking at the 42nd annual meeting of the Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC) in Bengaluru, S. Somanath stated that the long-term goal is for all Indian space actors—both governmental and non-governmental—to accomplish debris-free space missions by 2030.

=== Other facilities ===

* Balasore Rocket Launching Station (BRLS) – Balasore
* Bhaskaracharya Institute For Space Applications and Geo-Informatics (BISAG), Gandhinagar
* Human Space Flight Centre (HSFC), Bengaluru
* Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System (IRNSS)
* Indian Space Science Data Centre (ISSDC)
* Integrated Space Cell
* Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA)
* ISRO Inertial Systems Unit (IISU) – Thiruvananthapuram
* Master Control Facility
* National Deep Space Observation Centre (NDSPO)
* Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres (RRSSC)

== General satellite programmes ==

Since the launch of Aryabhata in 1975, a number of satellite series and constellations have been deployed by Indian and foreign launchers. At present, ISRO operates one of the largest constellations of active communication and earth imaging satellites for military and civilian uses.

=== The IRS series ===

The Indian Remote Sensing satellites (IRS) are India&#x27;s earth observation satellites. They are the largest collection of remote sensing satellites for civilian use in operation today, providing remote sensing services. All the satellites are placed in polar Sun-synchronous orbit (except GISATs) and provide data in a variety of spatial, spectral and temporal resolutions to enable several programs to be undertaken relevant to national development. The initial versions are composed of the 1 (A, B, C, D) nomenclature while the later versions were divided into sub-classes named based on their functioning and uses including Oceansat, Cartosat, HySIS, EMISAT and ResourceSat etc. Their names were unified under the prefix &quot;EOS&quot; regardless of functioning in 2020. They support a wide range of applications including optical, radar and electronic reconnaissance for Indian agencies, city planning, oceanography and environmental studies.
=== The INSAT series ===
The Indian National Satellite System (INSAT) is the country&#x27;s telecommunication system. It is a series of multipurpose geostationary satellites built and launched by ISRO to satisfy the telecommunications, broadcasting, meteorology and search-and-rescue needs. Since the introduction of the first one in 1983, INSAT has become the largest domestic communication system in the Asia-Pacific Region. It is a joint venture of DOS, the Department of Telecommunications, India Meteorological Department, All India Radio and Doordarshan. The overall coordination and management of INSAT system rests with the Secretary-level INSAT Coordination Committee. The nomenclature of the series was changed to &quot;GSAT&quot; from &quot;INSAT&quot;, then further changed to &quot;CMS&quot; from 2020 onwards. These satellites have been used by the Indian Armed Forces as well. GSAT-9 or &quot;SAARC Satellite&quot; provides communication services for India&#x27;s smaller neighbors.

=== Gagan Satellite Navigation System ===

The Ministry of Civil Aviation has decided to implement an indigenous Satellite-Based Regional GPS Augmentation System also known as Space-Based Augmentation System (SBAS) as part of the Satellite-Based Communications, Navigation, Surveillance and Air Traffic Management plan for civil aviation. The Indian SBAS system has been given the acronym GAGAN – GPS Aided GEO Augmented Navigation. A national plan for satellite navigation including implementation of a Technology Demonstration System (TDS) over Indian airspace as a proof of concept has been prepared jointly by Airports Authority of India and ISRO. The TDS was completed during 2007 with the installation of eight Indian Reference Stations at different airports linked to the Master Control Centre located near Bengaluru.

=== Navigation with Indian Constellation (NavIC) ===

IRNSS with an operational name NavIC is an independent regional navigation satellite system developed by India. It is designed to provide accurate position information service to users in India as well as the region extending up to from its borders, which is its primary service area. IRNSS provides two types of services, namely, Standard Positioning Service (SPS) and Restricted Service (RS), providing a position accuracy of better than in the primary service area.
=== Other satellites ===

Kalpana-1 (MetSat-1) was ISRO&#x27;s first dedicated meteorological satellite. Indo-French satellite SARAL on 25 February 2013. SARAL (or &quot;Satellite with ARgos and AltiKa&quot;) is a cooperative altimetry technology mission, used for monitoring the oceans&#x27; surface and sea levels. AltiKa measures ocean surface topography with an accuracy of , compared to on average using altimeters, and with a spatial resolution of .

== Launch vehicles ==

During the 1960s and 1970s, India initiated its own launch vehicles owing to geopolitical and economic considerations. In the 1960s–1970s, the country developed a sounding rocket, and by the 1980s, research had yielded the Satellite Launch Vehicle-3 and the more advanced Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV), complete with operational supporting infrastructure.

=== Satellite Launch Vehicle ===
The Satellite Launch Vehicle (known as SLV-3) was the first space rocket to be developed by India. The initial launch in 1979 was a failure followed by a successful launch in 1980 making India the sixth country in world with orbital launch capability. The development of bigger rockets began afterwards.

=== Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle ===
Augmented or Advanced Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) was another small launch vehicle released in 1980s to develop technologies required to place satellites into geostationary orbit. ISRO did not have adequate funds to develop ASLV and PSLV at once. Since ASLV suffered repeated failures, it was dropped in favour of a new project.

=== Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle ===
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle or PSLV is the first medium-lift launch vehicle from India which enabled India to launch all its remote-sensing satellites into Sun-synchronous orbit. PSLV had a failure in its maiden launch in 1993. Besides two other partial failures, PSLV has become the primary workhorse for ISRO with more than 50 launches placing hundreds of Indian and foreign satellites into orbit.

Decade-wise summary of PSLV launches:
=== Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle ===
Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle was envisaged in 1990s to transfer significant payloads to geostationary orbit. ISRO initially had a great problem realising GSLV as the development of CE-7.5 in India took a decade. The US had blocked India from obtaining cryogenic technology from Russia, leading India to develop its own cryogenic engines.

Decade-wise summary of GSLV Launches:
=== Launch Vehicle Mark-3 ===
Launch Vehicle Mark-3 (LVM3), previously known as GSLV Mk III, is the heaviest rocket in operational service with ISRO. Equipped with a more powerful cryogenic engine and boosters than GSLV, it has significantly higher payload capacity and allows India to launch all its communication satellites. LVM3 is expected to carry India&#x27;s first crewed mission to space and will be the testbed for SCE-200 engine which will power India&#x27;s heavy-lift rockets in the future.

Decade-wise summary of LVM3 launches:
=== Small Satellite Launch Vehicle ===
The Small Satellite Launch Vehicle (SSLV) is a small-lift launch vehicle developed by the ISRO with payload capacity to deliver to low Earth orbit () or to Sun-synchronous orbit () for launching small satellites, with the capability to support multiple orbital drop-offs.

Decade-wise summary of SSLV launches:
=== Rohini Sounding Rockets ===
Rohini is a series of sounding rockets developed by ISRO for meteorological and atmospheric study. These sounding rockets are capable of carrying payloads of between altitudes of . The ISRO currently uses RH-200, RH-300,Mk-II, RH-560 Mk-II and RH-560 Mk-III rockets, which are launched from the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) in Thumba and the Satish Dhawan Space Centre in Sriharikota.

== Launch facilities ==
* Satish Dhawan Space Centre
* Kulasekarapattinam Spaceport
* Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station

== Human spaceflight programme ==

The first proposal to send humans into space was discussed by ISRO in 2006, leading to work on the required infrastructure and spacecraft. The trials for crewed space missions began in 2007 with the Space Capsule Recovery Experiment (SRE), launched using the Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) rocket, and safely returned to earth 12 days later.

In 2009, the Indian Space Research Organisation proposed a budget of for its human spaceflight programme. An unmanned demonstration flight was expected after seven years from the final approval and a crewed mission was to be launched after seven years of funding. A crewed mission initially was not a priority and left on the backburner for several years. A space capsule recovery experiment in 2014 and a pad abort test in 2018 were followed by Prime Minister Narendra Modi&#x27;s announcement in his 2018 Independence Day address that India will send astronauts into space by 2022 on the new &quot;Gaganyaan&quot; spacecraft. To date, ISRO has developed most of the technologies needed, such as the crew module and crew escape system, space food, and life support systems. The project would cost less than 100 billion (US$1.3 billion) and would include sending two or three Indians to space, at an altitude of , for at least seven days, using a GSLV Mk-III launch vehicle.

=== Astronaut training and other facilities ===
The newly established Human Space Flight Centre (HSFC) will coordinate the IHSF campaign. ISRO will set up an astronaut training centre in Bengaluru to prepare personnel for flights in the crewed vehicle. It will use simulation facilities to train the selected astronauts in rescue and recovery operations and survival in microgravity, and will undertake studies of the radiation environment of space. ISRO had to build centrifuges to prepare astronauts for the acceleration phase of the launch. Existing launch facilities at Satish Dhawan Space Centre will have to be upgraded for the Indian human spaceflight campaign. Human Space Flight Centre and Glavcosmos signed an agreement on 1 July 2019 for the selection, support, medical examination and space training of Indian astronauts. An ISRO Technical Liaison Unit (ITLU) was to be set up in Moscow to facilitate the development of some key technologies and establishment of special facilities which are essential to support life in space. Four Indian Air Force personnel finished training at Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center in March 2021.

=== Crewed spacecraft ===

ISRO is working towards an orbital crewed spacecraft that can operate for seven days in low Earth orbit. The spacecraft, called &quot;Gaganyaan&quot;, will be the basis of the Indian Human Spaceflight Programme. The spacecraft is being developed to carry up to three people, and a planned upgraded version will be equipped with a rendezvous and docking capability. In its first crewed mission, ISRO&#x27;s largely autonomous spacecraft will orbit the Earth at altitude for up to seven days with a two-person crew on board. A source in April 2023 suggested that ISRO was aiming for a 2025 launch.

=== Space station ===

India plans to build a space station as a follow-up programme to &quot;Gaganyaan&quot;. ISRO chairman K. Sivan has said that India will not join the International Space Station programme and will instead build a space station on its own. It is expected to be placed in a low Earth orbit at altitude and be capable of harbouring three humans for 1520 days. The rough time-frame is five to seven years after completion of the &quot;Gaganyaan&quot; project. &quot;Giving out broad contours of the planned space station, Dr. Sivan said it has been envisaged to weigh 20 tonnes and will be placed in an orbit of 400 km above earth where astronauts can stay for 15-20 days. The time frame is 5-7 years after Gaganyaan,&quot; he stated.

As per S. Somanath, the Phase1 will be ready by 2028 and the entire space station will be completed by 2035. The space station will be an international platform for collaborative research on future interplanetary missions, microgravity studies, space biology, medicine and research.

== Planetary sciences and astronomy ==
ISRO and Tata Institute of Fundamental Research have operated a balloon launch base at Hyderabad since 1967. Its proximity to the geo-magnetic equator, where both primary and secondary cosmic ray fluxes are low, makes it an ideal location to study diffuse cosmic X-ray background.

ISRO played a role in the discovery of three species of bacteria in the upper stratosphere at an altitude between . The bacteria, highly resistant to ultra-violet radiation, are not found elsewhere on Earth, leading to speculation on whether they are extraterrestrial in origin. They are considered extremophiles, and named as &quot;Bacillus isronensis&quot; in recognition of ISRO&#x27;s contribution in the balloon experiments, which led to its discovery, &quot;Bacillus aryabhata&quot; after India&#x27;s celebrated ancient astronomer Aryabhata and &quot;Janibacter hoylei&quot; after the distinguished astrophysicist Fred Hoyle.

=== Astrosat ===
Launched in 2015, Astrosat is India&#x27;s first dedicated multi-wavelength space observatory. Its observation study includes active galactic nuclei, hot white dwarfs, pulsations of pulsars, binary star systems, and supermassive black holes located at the centre of the galaxy.

=== XPoSat ===
The X-ray Polarimeter Satellite (XPoSat) is a satellite for studying black holes and polarisation. The spacecraft carries the Polarimeter Instrument in X-rays (POLIX) payload which will study the degree and angle of polarisation of bright astronomical X-ray sources in the energy range 5–30 keV. It launched on 1 January 2024 on a PSLV-DL rocket, and it has an expected operational lifespan of at least five years.

== Extraterrestrial exploration ==
=== Lunar exploration ===

Chandryaan () are India&#x27;s series of lunar exploration spacecraft. The initial mission included an orbiter and controlled impact probe while later missions include landers, rovers and sampling missions.

;Chandrayaan-1
Chandrayaan-1 was India&#x27;s first mission to the Moon. The robotic lunar exploration mission included a lunar orbiter and an impactor called the Moon Impact Probe. ISRO launched it using a modified version of the PSLV on 22 October 2008 from Satish Dhawan Space Centre. It entered lunar orbit on 8 November 2008, carrying high-resolution remote sensing equipment for visible, near infrared, and soft and hard X-ray frequencies. During its 312-day operational period (two years were planned), it surveyed the lunar surface to produce a complete map of its chemical characteristics and three-dimensional topography. The polar regions were of special interest, as they had possible ice deposits. Chandrayaan-1 carried 11 instruments: five Indian and six from foreign institutes and space agencies (including NASA, ESA, the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Brown University and other European and North American institutions and companies), which were carried for free. The mission team was awarded the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics SPACE 2009 award, the International Lunar Exploration Working Group&#x27;s International Co-operation award in 2008, and the National Space Society&#x27;s 2009 Space Pioneer Award in the science and engineering category.

;Chandrayaan-2
Chandrayaan-2, the second mission to the Moon, which included an orbiter, a lander and a rover. It was launched on a Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle Mark III (GSLV Mk III) on 22 July 2019, consisting of a lunar orbiter, the Vikram lander, and the Pragyan lunar rover, all developed in India. It was the first mission meant to explore the little-explored lunar south pole region. The objective of the Chandrayaan-2 mission was to land a robotic rover to conduct various studies on the lunar surface.

The &quot;Vikram&quot; lander, carrying the &quot;Pragyan&quot; rover, was scheduled to land on the near side of the Moon, in the south polar region at a latitude of about 70° S at approximately 1:50 am(IST) on 7 September 2019. However, the lander deviated from its intended trajectory starting from an altitude of , and telemetry was lost seconds before touchdown was expected. A review board concluded that the crash-landing was caused by a software glitch. The lunar orbiter was efficiently positioned in an optimal lunar orbit, extending its expected service time from one year to seven. It was planned that there will be another attempt to soft-land on the Moon in 2023, without an orbiter.

;Chandrayaan-3
Chandryaan-3 is India&#x27;s second attempt to soft-land on the Moon after the partial failure of Chandrayaan-2. The mission only included a lander-rover set and communicated with the orbiter from the previous mission.

On 23 August 2023, ISRO became the first space agency to successfully land a spacecraft near the lunar south pole. ISRO is the fourth space agency ever to land on the Moon.

=== Mars exploration ===
;Mars Orbiter Mission &quot;(MOM)&quot; or &quot;(Mangalyaan-1)&quot;
The Mars Orbiter Mission (MOM), informally known as &quot;Mangalyaan (eng: &quot;MarsCraft&quot;&quot; ) was launched into Earth orbit on 5 November 2013 by the Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and has entered Mars orbit on 24 September 2014. India thus became the first country to have a space probe enter Mars orbit on its first attempt. It was completed at a record low cost of $74 million.

MOM was placed into Mars orbit on 24 September 2014. The spacecraft had a launch mass of , with of five scientific instruments as payload.

The National Space Society awarded the Mars Orbiter Mission team the 2015 Space Pioneer Award in the science and engineering category.

=== Mars and Moon analogue research station ===

Researchers from the Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences (BSIP) and Indian Institute of Science (IISc) have determined that Ladakh is the best site for India&#x27;s first Mars and Moon analogue research station. The study project is being conducted by BSIP&#x27;s Binita Phartiyal, IISc&#x27;s Aloke Kumar who pioneered the idea of building space-bricks from biologically solidified lunar and martian regolith, and Gaganyaan astronaut Shubhanshu Shukla. An analog research station is a location where plans and exercises intended for the Moon and Mars are made. The projected research station would be used for geological and astrobiological research, human studies, crew training, advancing Technology Readiness Levels (TRL), testing space technologies, and engineering integration.

In Ladakh, Aaka Space Studio and ISRO will be leading a 21-day Mars and Moon analog mission. An important step forward in India&#x27;s efforts to develop human spaceflight and analog research in support of the Gaganyaan program and future missions like Bharatiya Antariksha Station. It will replicate the harsh conditions of extraterrestrial environments. The expedition will test human health and endurance in isolation, acquire biometric data, simulate extraterrestrial landscape, investigate circadian lighting, and test life support technologies. The startup has experimented with technology, human endurance, and habitat design in Rann of Kutch in 2023, simulating lunar conditions.

=== Solar probes ===
;Aditya-L1
On 2 September 2023, ISRO launched the Aditya-L1 mission to study the solar corona. It is the first Indian space-based solar coronagraph to study the corona in visible and near-infrared bands. The main objective of the mission is to study coronal mass ejections (CMEs), their properties (the structure and evolution of their magnetic fields for example), and consequently constrain parameters that affect space weather. On 6 January 2024, Aditya-L1 spacecraft, India&#x27;s first solar mission, has successfully entered its final orbit around the first Sun-Earth Lagrangian point (L1), approximately 1.5 million kilometers from Earth.

== Future projects ==
ISRO is developing and operationalising more powerful and less pollutive rocket engines so it can eventually develop much heavier rockets. It also plans space station above earth where astronauts can stay for 15–20 days. The time frame is 5–7 years after Gaganyaan, he stated, to develop electric and nuclear propulsion for satellites and spacecraft to reduce their weight and extend their service lives. Long-term plans may include crewed landings on Moon and other planets as well.

=== Engines and launch vehicles ===
;Semi-cryogenic engine

SCE-200 is a rocket-grade kerosene (dubbed &quot;ISROsene&quot;) and liquid oxygen (LOX)-based semi-cryogenic rocket engine inspired by RD-120. The engine will be less polluting and far more powerful. When combined with the LVM3, it will boost its payload capacity; it will be clustered in future to power India&#x27;s heavy rockets.

;Methalox engine
Reusable methane and LOX-based engines are under development. Methane is less pollutive, leaves no residue and hence the engine needs very little refurbishment. The LPSC began cold flow tests of engine prototypes in 2020.

;Modular heavy rockets

India&#x27;s own rockets lack the capacity for launching very heavy satellites to the geostationary orbit beyond 4 ton class, a problem that is planned to be fixed with the introduction of the NGLV.
ISRO is studying heavy (HLV) and super-heavy lift launch vehicles (SHLV). Modular launchers are being designed, with interchangeable parts, to reduce production time. A capacity HLV and an SHLV capable of delivering into orbit have been mentioned in statements and presentations from ISRO officials.

The agency intends to develop a launcher in the 2020s which can carry nearly to geostationary transfer orbit, nearly four times the capacity of the existing LVM3. A rocket family of five medium to heavy-lift class modular rockets described as &quot;Next Generation Launch Vehicle or NGLV&quot; (initially planned as &quot;Unified Modular Launch Vehicle&quot; or &quot;Unified Launch Vehicle&quot;) are being planned which will share parts and will replace ISRO&#x27;s existing PSLV, GSLV and LVM3 rockets completely. The rocket family will be powered by SCE-200 cryogenic engine and will have a capacity of lifting from to to geostationary transfer orbit.

;Reusable launch vehicles
There have been two reusable launcher projects ongoing at ISRO. One is the ADMIRE test vehicle, conceived as a VTVL system and another is RLV-TD programme, being run to develop an autonomous spacecraft which will be launched vertically but land like a plane.

To realise a fully re-usable two-stage-to-orbit (TSTO) launch vehicle, a series of technology demonstration missions have been conceived. For this purpose, the winged Reusable Launch Vehicle Technology Demonstrator (RLV-TD) has been configured. The RLV-TD acts as a flying testbed to evaluate various technologies such as hypersonic flight, autonomous landing, powered cruise flight, and hypersonic flight using air-breathing propulsion. First in the series of demonstration trials was the Hypersonic Flight Experiment (HEX). ISRO launched the prototype&#x27;s test flight, RLV-TD, from the Sriharikota spaceport in February 2016. It weighs around and flew up to a height of . HEX was completed five months later. A scaled-up version of it could serve as fly-back booster stage for the winged TSTO concept. HEX will be followed by a landing experiment (LEX) and return flight experiment (REX).

=== Spacecraft propulsion and power ===
;Electric thrusters

India has been working on replacing conventional chemical propulsion with Hall-effect and plasma thrusters which would make spacecraft lighter. GSAT-4 was the first Indian spacecraft to carry electric thrusters, but it failed to reach orbit. GSAT-9 launched later in 2017, had xenon-based electric propulsion system for in-orbit functions of the spacecraft. GSAT-20 is expected to be the first fully electric satellite from India.

;Alpha source thermoelectric propulsion technology

Radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG), also called alpha source thermoelectric technology by ISRO, is a type of atomic battery which uses nuclear decay heat from radioactive material to power the spacecraft. In January 2021, the U R Rao Satellite Centre issued an Expression of Interest (EoI) for design and development of a 100-watt RTG. RTGs ensure much longer spacecraft life and have less mass than solar panels on satellites. Development of RTGs will allow ISRO to undertake long-duration deep space missions to the outer planets.

Radioisotope heater unit

ISRO included two radioisotope heater units developed by the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in the propulsion module of Chandrayaan-3 on a trial basis which worked flawlessly.

Nuclear propulsion

ISRO has plans for collaboration with Department of Atomic Energy to power future space missions using nuclear propulsion technology.

=== Quantum technology ===
Satellite-based quantum communication

At the Indian Mobile Congress (IMC) 2023, ISRO presented its satellite-based quantum communication technology. It&#x27;s called quantum key distribution (QKD) technology. According to ISRO, it is creating technologies to thwart quantum computers, which have the ability to readily breach the current generation of encrypted secure communication. A significant milestone for unconditionally secured satellite data communication was reached in September 2023 when ISRO demonstrated free-space quantum communication across a 300-meter distance, including live video conferencing using quantum-key encrypted signals.

=== Extraterrestrial probes ===
;Lunar exploration

The Lunar Polar Exploration mission (LUPEX) is a planned robotic lunar mission concept by Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) that would send a lunar rover and lander to explore the south pole region of the Moon no earlier than 2026. JAXA is likely to provide the under-development H3 launch vehicle and the rover, while ISRO would be responsible for the lander.

Crewed Lunar Landing

ISRO aims to put an astronaut on the lunar surface by 2040.

;Mars exploration

The next Mars mission, Mars Lander Mission or Mangalyaan 2, has been proposed for launch in 2024. The new mission plan includes a rover, helicopter, sky crane and a supersonic parachute.
;Venus exploration

ISRO is considering an orbiter mission to Venus called Venus Orbiter Mission, that could launch as early as 2023 to study the planet&#x27;s atmosphere. Some funds for preliminary studies were allocated in the 2017–18 Indian budget under Space Sciences; solicitations for potential instruments were requested in 2017 and 2018. A mission to Venus is scheduled for 2025 that will include a payload instrument called Venus Infrared Atmospheric Gases Linker (VIRAL) which has been co-developed with the Laboratoire atmosphères, milieux, observations spatiales (LATMOS) under French National Centre for Scientific Research (CNRS) and Roscosmos.

The Venus Orbiter Mission (VOM), which is intended to orbit a spacecraft in the orbit of planet Venus for a better understanding of the Venusian surface and subsurface, atmospheric processes, and influence of Sun on Venusian atmosphere, was approved by the Union Cabinet on September 18, 2024, under the direction of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Understanding the fundamental processes that have transformed Venus—which is thought to have once been habitable and very comparable to Earth—will be crucial to comprehending the development of Earth and Venus, the sister planets. A total of has been sanctioned for the Venus Orbiter Mission, of which would go toward the spacecraft.

;Asteroids and outer solar system
Conceptual studies are underway for spacecraft destined for the asteroids and Jupiter, as well, in the long term. The ideal launch window to send a spacecraft to Jupiter occurs every 33 months. If the mission to Jupiter is launched, a flyby of Venus would be required. Development of RTEG power might allow the agency to further undertake deeper space missions to the other outer planets.

=== Space telescopes and observatories ===
;AstroSat-2

AstroSat-2 is the successor to the AstroSat mission.

;Exoworlds
Exoworlds is a joint proposal by ISRO, IIST and the University of Cambridge for a space telescope dedicated for atmospheric studies of exoplanets, planned for 2025. ExoWorlds is proposed as a dedicated mission for exoplanet spectroscopy in the NUV-VISIBLE-IR ranges. It would be placed in a stable orbit around the earth-sun L2 point.

==== Indian Spectroscopic and Imaging Space Telescope (INSIST) ====
The Indian Spectroscopic and Imaging Space Telescope (INSIST) will produce high-resolution deep UV-optical images, and will also have capabilities to carry out low to medium resolution spectroscopy.The INSIST proposal was recommended by ISRO for pre-project phase with seed funding in March 2019.Collaboration with the Canadian Space Agency is also being proposed.

=== Forthcoming satellites ===

Geospatial intelligence satellites

A family of 50 artificial intelligence based satellites will be launched by ISRO between 2024 and 2028 to collect geospatial intelligence (GEOINT) in different orbits to track military movements and photograph areas of interest. For the sake of national security, the satellites will monitor the neighboring areas and the international border. It will use thermal, optical, synthetic aperture radar (SAR), among other technologies, for GEOINT application. Each satellite using artificial intelligence will have the ability to communicate and collaborate with the remaining satellites in space at different orbits to monitor the environment for intelligence gathering operations.

=== Upcoming launch facilities ===
;Kulasekarapattinam Spaceport
Kulasekharapatnam Spaceport is an under-development spaceport in Thoothukudi district of Tamil Nadu. After completion, it would serve as the second launch facility of ISRO. This spaceport will mainly be used by ISRO for launching small payloads.

== Applications ==
=== Telecommunication ===
India uses its satellite communication network – one of the largest in the world – for applications such as land management, water resources management, natural disaster forecasting, radio networking, weather forecasting, meteorological imaging and computer communication. Business, administrative services, and schemes such as the National Informatics Centre (NIC) are direct beneficiaries of applied satellite technology.

=== Military ===

The Integrated Space Cell, under the Integrated Defence Staff headquarters of the Ministry of Defence, has been set up to utilise more effectively the country&#x27;s space-based assets for military purposes and to look into threats to these assets. This command will leverage space technology including satellites. Unlike an aerospace command, where the Air Force controls most of its activities, the Integrated Space Cell envisages cooperation and coordination between the three services as well as civilian agencies dealing with space.

With 14 satellites, including GSAT-7A for exclusive military use and the rest as dual-use satellites, India has the fourth largest number of satellites active in the sky which includes satellites for the exclusive use of its air force (IAF) and navy. GSAT-7A, an advanced military communications satellite built exclusively for the Air Force, is similar to the Navy&#x27;s GSAT-7, and GSAT-7A will enhance the IAF&#x27;s network-centric warfare capabilities by interlinking different ground radar stations, ground airbases and airborne early warning and control (AWACS) aircraft such as the Beriev A-50 Phalcon and DRDO AEW&amp;CS.

GSAT-7A will also be used by the Army&#x27;s Aviation Corps for its helicopters and unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) operations. In 2013, ISRO launched GSAT-7 for the exclusive use of the Navy to monitor the Indian Ocean Region (IOR) with the satellite&#x27;s &#x27;footprint&#x27; and real-time input capabilities to Indian warships, submarines and maritime aircraft. To boost the network-centric operations of the IAF, ISRO launched GSAT-7A in December 2018. The RISAT series of radar-imaging earth observation satellites is also meant for Military use. ISRO launched EMISAT on 1 April 2019. EMISAT is a electronic intelligence (ELINT) satellite. It will improve the situational awareness of the Indian Armed Forces by providing information and the location of hostile radars.

India&#x27;s satellites and satellite launch vehicles have had military spin-offs. While India&#x27;s range Prithvi missile is not derived from the Indian space programme, the intermediate range Agni missile is derived from the Indian space programme&#x27;s SLV-3. In its early years, under Sarabhai and Dhawan, ISRO opposed military applications for its dual-use projects such as the SLV-3. Eventually, the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)-based missile programme borrowed staff and technology from ISRO. Missile scientist A.P.J. Abdul Kalam (later elected president), who had headed the SLV-3 project at ISRO, took over as missile programme at DRDO. About a dozen scientists accompanied him, helping to design the Agni missile using the SLV-3&#x27;s solid fuel first stage and a liquid-fuel (Prithvi-missile-derived) second stage. The IRS and INSAT satellites were primarily intended, and used, for civilian-economic applications, but they also offered military spin-offs. In 1996 the Ministry of Defence temporarily blocked the use of IRS-1C by India&#x27;s environmental and agricultural ministries in order to monitor ballistic missiles near India&#x27;s borders. In 1997, the Air Force&#x27;s &quot;Airpower Doctrine&quot; aspired to use space assets for surveillance and battle management.

=== Academic ===
Institutions like the Indira Gandhi National Open University and the Indian Institutes of Technology use satellites for educational applications. Between 1975 and 1976, India conducted its largest sociological programme using space technology, reaching 2,400villages through video programming in local languages aimed at educational development via ATS-6 technology developed by NASA. This experiment—named Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE)—conducted large-scale video broadcasts resulting in significant improvement in rural education.

=== Telemedicine ===
ISRO has applied its technology for telemedicine, directly connecting patients in rural areas to medical professionals in urban locations via satellite. Since high-quality healthcare is not universally available in some of the remote areas of India, patients in those areas are diagnosed and analysed by doctors in urban centers in real time via video conferencing. The patient is then advised on medicine and treatment, and treated by the staff at one of the &#x27;super-specialty hospitals&#x27; per instructions from those doctors. Mobile telemedicine vans are also deployed to visit locations in far-flung areas and provide diagnosis and support to patients.

=== Biodiversity Information System ===
ISRO has also helped implement India&#x27;s Biodiversity Information System, completed in October 2002. Nirupa Sen details the programme: &quot;Based on intensive field sampling and mapping using satellite remote sensing and geospatial modeling tools, maps have been made of vegetation cover on a 1: 250,000 scale. This has been put together in a web-enabled database that links gene-level information of plant species with spatial information in a BIOSPEC database of the ecological hot spot regions, namely northeastern India, Western Ghats, Western Himalayas and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. This has been made possible with collaboration between the Department of Biotechnology and ISRO.&quot;

=== Cartography ===
The Indian IRS-P5 (CARTOSAT-1) was equipped with high-resolution panchromatic equipment to enable it for cartographic purposes. IRS-P5 (CARTOSAT-1) was followed by a more advanced model named IRS-P6 developed also for agricultural applications. The CARTOSAT-2 project, equipped with single panchromatic camera that supported scene-specific on-spot images, succeeded the CARTOSAT-1 project.

=== Spin-offs ===

ISRO&#x27;s research has been diverted into spin-offs to develop various technologies for other sectors. Examples include bionic limbs for people without limbs, silica aerogel to keep Indian soldiers serving in extremely cold areas warm, distress alert transmitters for accidents, Doppler weather radar and various sensors and machines for inspection work in engineering industries.

== International cooperations ==
ISRO has signed various formal cooperative arrangements in the form of either Agreements or Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) or Framework Agreements with Afghanistan, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bolivia, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Maldives, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Norway, Peru, Portugal, South Korea, Russia, São Tomé and Príncipe, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Oman, Sweden, Syria, Tajikistan, Thailand, Netherlands, Tunisia, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States, Uzbekistan, Venezuela and Vietnam. Formal cooperative instruments have been signed with international multilateral bodies including European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF), European Commission, European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites (EUMETSAT), European Space Agency (ESA) and South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC).

=== Notable collaborative projects ===
* Chandrayaan-1 also carried scientific payloads to the Moon from NASA, ESA, Bulgarian Space Agency, and other institutions/companies in North America and Europe.
*For the Gaganyaan mission, ISRO signed a Technical Implementing Plan (TIP) with ESA to provide ground station support.

;Indo-French satellite missions
ISRO has two collaborative satellite missions with France&#x27;s CNES, namely the now retired Megha-Tropiques to study water cycle in the tropical atmosphere and the presently avtive SARAL for altimetry. A third mission consisting of an Earth observation satellite with a thermal infrared imager, TRISHNA (Thermal infraRed Imaging Satellite for High resolution Natural resource Assessment) is being planned by the two countries.
;LUPEX
The Lunar Polar Exploration Mission (LUPEX) is a joint Indo-Japanese mission to study the polar surface of the Moon where India is tasked with providing soft landing technologies.

;NISAR
NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) is a joint Indo-US radar project carrying an L Band and an S Band radar. It will be world&#x27;s first radar imaging satellite to use dual frequencies.

Some other notable collaborations include:
* ISRO operates LUT/MCC under the international COSPAS/SARSAT Programme for Search and Rescue.
* India has established a Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (CSSTE-AP) that is sponsored by the United Nations.
* India is a member of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space, Cospas-Sarsat, International Astronautical Federation, Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee (IADC), International Space University, and the Committee on Earth Observation Satellite (CEOS).
* Contributing to planned BRICS virtual constellation for remote sensing.

== Statistics ==
Last updated: 26 March 2023
* Total number of foreign satellites launched by ISRO: 417 (34 countries)
* Spacecraft missions: 116
* Launch missions: 86
* Student satellites: 13 
* Re-entry missions: 2

=== Budget for the Department of Space ===
== Corporate affairs ==

=== S-band spectrum scam ===

In India, electromagnetic spectrum, a scarce resource for wireless communication, is auctioned by the Government of India to telecom companies for use. As an example of its value, in 2010, 20 MHz of 3G spectrum was auctioned for . This part of the spectrum is allocated for terrestrial communication (cell phones). However, in January 2005, Antrix Corporation (commercial arm of ISRO) signed an agreement with Devas Multimedia (a private company formed by former ISRO employees and venture capitalists from the US) for lease of S band transponders (amounting to 70 MHz of spectrum) on two ISRO satellites (GSAT 6 and GSAT 6A) for a price of , to be paid over a period of 12 years. The spectrum used in these satellites (2500 MHz and above) is allocated by the International Telecommunication Union specifically for satellite-based communication in India. Hypothetically, if the spectrum allocation is changed for utilisation for terrestrial transmission and if this 70 MHz of spectrum were sold at the 2010 auction price of the 3G spectrum, its value would have been over . This was a hypothetical situation. However, the Comptroller and Auditor-General considered this hypothetical situation and estimated the difference between the prices as a loss to the Indian Government.

There were lapses on implementing official procedures. Antrix/ISRO had allocated the capacity of the above two satellites exclusively to Devas Multimedia, while the rules said it should always be non-exclusive. The Cabinet was misinformed in November 2005 that several service providers were interested in using satellite capacity, while the Devas deal was already signed. Also, the Space Commission was not informed when approving the second satellite (its cost was diluted so that Cabinet approval was not needed). ISRO committed to spending of public money on building, launching, and operating two satellites that were leased out for Devas.
In late 2009, some ISRO insiders exposed information about the Devas-Antrix deal, and the ensuing investigations led to the deal&#x27;s annulment. G. Madhavan Nair (ISRO Chairperson when the agreement was signed) was barred from holding any post under the Department of Space. Some former scientists were found guilty of &quot;acts of commission&quot; or &quot;acts of omission&quot;. Devas and Deutsche Telekom demanded US$2 billion and US$1 billion, respectively, in damages. The Department of Revenue and Ministry of Corporate Affairs began an inquiry into Devas shareholding.

The Central Bureau of Investigation registered a case against the accused in the Antrix-Devas deal under Section 120-B, besides Section 420 of IPC and Section 13(2) read with 13(1)(d) of PC Act, 1988 in March 2015 against the then executive director of Antrix Corporation, two officials of a USA-based company, a Bengaluru-based private multimedia company, and other unknown officials of the Antrix Corporation or the Department of Space.

Devas Multimedia started arbitration proceedings against Antrix in June 2011. In September 2015, the International Court of Arbitration of the International Chamber of Commerce ruled in favour of Devas, and directed Antrix to pay US$672 million (Rs 44.35 billion) in damages to Devas. Antrix opposed the Devas plea for tribunal award in the Delhi High Court.

== Heads of ISRO ==

List of Chairmen (since 1963) of ISRO.

#Vikram Sarabhai (1963–1971)
#M. G. K. Menon (1972)
#Satish Dhawan (1973–1984)
#U. R. Rao (1984–1994)
#K. Kasturirangan (1994–2003)
#G. Madhavan Nair (2003–2009)
#K. Radhakrishnan (2009–2014)
#Shailesh Nayak (2015)
#A. S. Kiran Kumar (2015–2018)
#K. Sivan (2018–2022)
#S. Somanath (2022–2025)
#V. Narayanan (2025–present)

== See also ==

* Deep Ocean mission
* Defence Space Agency
* Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology
* List of government space agencies
* List of ISRO missions
* NewSpace India Limited
* IN–SPACe
* Indian Space Association
* Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar
* Science and technology in India
* Space industry of India
* Swami Vivekananda Planetarium
* Telecommunications in India
* Timeline of Solar System exploration
* National Space Science Symposium

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
* &quot;The Economics of India&#x27;s Space Programme&quot;, by U. Sankar, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2007, 
* &quot;The Indian Space Programme&quot;, by Gurbir Singh, Astrotalkuk Publications, 
* &quot;Reach For the Stars: The Evolution of India&#x27;s Rocket Programme&quot;, by Gopal Raj, 
* &quot;From Fishing Hamlet to Red Planet: India&#x27;s Space Journey&quot;, by ISRO, 
* &quot;Brief History of Rocketry in ISRO&quot;, by P V Manoranjan Rao and P Radhakrishnan, 
* &quot;India&#x27;s Rise as a Space Power&quot;, by U R Rao, 

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="4" end="38" title="ISRO" label="Indian Space Research Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q229058" start="40" end="44" title="ISRO" label="ISRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q22991" start="72" end="84" title="List of government space agencies" label="space agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158548" start="149" end="168" title="Department of Space" label="Department of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="192" end="215" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068094" start="226" end="242" title="Chairman of ISRO" label="Chairman of ISRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q180046" start="347" end="364" title="space exploration" label="space exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="483" end="490" title="imaging satellite" label="imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q149918" start="492" end="505" title="communication satellite" label="communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="510" end="535" title="remote sensing satellites" label="remote sensing satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486567" start="553" end="558" title="GPS-aided GEO augmented navigation" label="GAGAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q94915" start="563" end="568" title="Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System" label="IRNSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q179435" start="569" end="589" title="satellite navigation" label="satellite navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406955" start="611" end="625" title="Chandrayaan programme" label="three missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="633" end="637" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156739" start="642" end="653" title="Mars Orbiter Mission" label="one mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="657" end="661" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021041" start="686" end="730" title="Indian National Committee for Space Research" label="Indian National Committee for Space Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="790" end="806" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q325470" start="842" end="857" title="Vikram Sarabhai" label="Vikram Sarabhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523073" start="916" end="943" title="Department of Atomic Energy" label="Department of Atomic Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19706" start="1306" end="1315" title="Aryabhata (satellite)" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1342" end="1348" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q828585" start="1362" end="1373" title="Interkosmos" label="Interkosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341480" start="1418" end="1422" title="Rohini (satellite)" label="RS-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752243" start="1469" end="1474" title="Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="SLV-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039031" start="1493" end="1508" title="Timeline of first orbital launches by country" label="seventh country"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908850" start="1578" end="1588" title="small-lift launch vehicle" label="small-lift"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906832" start="1593" end="1619" title="medium-lift launch vehicle" label="medium-lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190528" start="1821" end="1838" title="Cryogenic rocket engine" label="cryogenic engines"/>
<link wikidata="Q672801" start="1847" end="1872" title="List of Solar System probes" label="extraterrestrial missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="1877" end="1898" title="Satellite" label="artificial satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044984" start="1990" end="2002" title="soft landing" label="soft landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460420" start="2182" end="2201" title="Emergency management" label="disaster management"/>
<link wikidata="Q46994" start="2203" end="2215" title="Telehealth" label="telemedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850746" start="2248" end="2281" title="ISRO spin-off technologies" label="ISRO&amp;#x27;s spin-off technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530836" start="2471" end="2482" title="Sisir Kumar Mitra" label="S. K. Mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q162219" start="2530" end="2540" title="ionosphere" label="ionosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="2571" end="2578" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q60429" start="2610" end="2621" title="C. V. Raman" label="C. V. Raman"/>
<link wikidata="Q377898" start="2626" end="2638" title="Meghnad Saha" label="Meghnad Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722209" start="2841" end="2869" title="Physical Research Laboratory" label="Physical Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070" start="2873" end="2882" title="Ahmedabad" label="Ahmedabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q325611" start="2888" end="2899" title="Homi J. Bhabha" label="Homi Bhabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q142617" start="2921" end="2959" title="Tata Institute of Fundamental Research" label="Tata Institute of Fundamental Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="3029" end="3045" title="Cosmic ray" label="cosmic radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140497" start="3123" end="3134" title="Particle experiments at Kolar Gold Fields" label="Kolar mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="3199" end="3215" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="upper atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q28171812" start="3387" end="3396" title="Secretary to the Government of India" label="secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="3503" end="3514" title="meteorology" label="meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="3523" end="3550" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141859" start="3622" end="3640" title="Colaba Observatory" label="Colaba Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q717858" start="3663" end="3718" title="Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences" label="Aryabhatta Research Institute of Observational Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092358" start="3824" end="3842" title="Osmania University" label="Osmania University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361" start="3844" end="3853" title="Hyderabad" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="3956" end="3965" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021188" start="4368" end="4372" title="Indian Ordnance Factories Service" label="IOFS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150095" start="4402" end="4427" title="Directorate of Ordnance (Coordination &amp;amp; Services)" label="Indian Ordnance Factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q107555854" start="4522" end="4537" title="H. G. S. Murthy" label="H. G. S. Murthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q579036" start="4646" end="4661" title="sounding rocket" label="sounding rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359744" start="4780" end="4786" title="Rohini (rocket family)" label="Rohini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966898" start="4865" end="4892" title="Waman Dattatreya Patwardhan" label="Waman Dattatreya Patwardhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149" start="5019" end="5032" title="Indira Gandhi" label="Indira Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="5678" end="5693" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752243" start="5731" end="5755" title="Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Satellite Launch Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349167" start="5808" end="5823" title="Ground station" label="ground stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341480" start="5957" end="5982" title="Rohini (satellite)" label="Rohini technology payload"/>
<link wikidata="Q282184" start="6224" end="6226" title="Prospero (spacecraft)" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q25254" start="6299" end="6307" title="Bhaskara (satellites)" label="Bhaskara"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906832" start="6370" end="6396" title="medium-lift launch vehicle" label="medium-lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="6439" end="6460" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q221654" start="6536" end="6573" title="Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752243" start="6579" end="6584" title="SLV-3" label="SLV-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521698" start="6657" end="6689" title="Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre" label="Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7929406" start="6763" end="6768" title="Vikas (rocket engine)" label="Vikas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785401" start="6792" end="6798" title="Viking (rocket engine)" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q28454968" start="6937" end="6946" title="Thrusters (spacecraft)" label="thrusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15017" start="7007" end="7048" title="Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="7149" end="7168" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642195" start="7336" end="7368" title="Indian National Satellite System" label="Indian National Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661266" start="7377" end="7408" title="Indian Remote Sensing Programme" label="Indian Remote Sensing Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="8006" end="8021" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23931482" start="8072" end="8090" title="List of foreign satellites launched by India" label="foreign satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q249238" start="8152" end="8191" title="Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479908" start="8284" end="8294" title="Glavkosmos" label="Glavkosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q17007267" start="8349" end="8354" title="KVD-1" label="KVD-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="8979" end="9004" title="Global Positioning System" label="Global Positioning System"/>
<link wikidata="Q404517" start="9033" end="9043" title="Kargil war" label="Kargil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q94915" start="9110" end="9115" title="Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System" label="IRNSS"/>
<link wikidata="Q233289" start="9251" end="9271" title="Atal Bihari Vajpayee" label="Atal Bihari Vajpayee"/>
<link wikidata="Q49011" start="9424" end="9437" title="Chandrayaan-1" label="Chandrayaan-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156739" start="9552" end="9572" title="Mars Orbiter Mission" label="Mars Orbiter Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360911" start="9925" end="9929" title="LVM3" label="LVM3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703840" start="10166" end="10182" title="lunar south pole" label="lunar south pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049774" start="10324" end="10337" title="Chandrayaan-3" label="Chandrayaan-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824476" start="10625" end="10634" title="Aditya-L1" label="Aditya-L1"/>
<link wikidata="Q85798411" start="10724" end="10730" title="SpaDeX" label="SpaDeX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093759" start="10751" end="10772" title="Space rendezvous" label="spacecraft rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q557450" start="10774" end="10781" title="Docking and berthing of spacecraft" label="docking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021612" start="10849" end="10893" title="ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network" label="ISRO Telemetry, Tracking and Command Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q38592" start="11390" end="11400" title="Devanagari" label="Devanagari"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="12063" end="12081" title="president of India" label="president of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154393" start="12098" end="12102" title="Defence Research and Development Organisation" label="DRDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9513" start="12104" end="12124" title="A. P. J. Abdul Kalam" label="A. P. J. Abdul Kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341794" start="12248" end="12261" title="Self-sustainability" label="self-reliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642195" start="12506" end="12538" title="Indian National Satellite System" label="Indian National Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661266" start="12583" end="12614" title="Indian Remote Sensing Programme" label="Indian Remote Sensing Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220258" start="12902" end="12920" title="Antrix Corporation" label="Antrix Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722209" start="12962" end="12990" title="Physical Research Laboratory" label="Physical Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970824" start="13010" end="13050" title="National Atmospheric Research Laboratory" label="National Atmospheric Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="13068" end="13082" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q66758286" start="13085" end="13107" title="NewSpace India Limited" label="NewSpace India Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053544" start="13139" end="13178" title="North-Eastern Space Applications Centre" label="North-Eastern Space Applications Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339553" start="13197" end="13245" title="Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology" label="Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220258" start="13567" end="13573" title="Antrix Corporation" label="Antrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973730" start="14326" end="14368" title="National Institute of Technology Agartala" label="National Institute of Technology, Agartala"/>
<link wikidata="Q12430577" start="14394" end="14437" title="Dr. B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar" label="National Institute of Technology, Jalandhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521821" start="14468" end="14517" title="National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli" label="National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="14611" end="14618" title="California Institute of Technology" label="CalTech"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="14628" end="14653" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339553" start="14668" end="14716" title="Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology" label="Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q748010" start="15315" end="15355" title="North American Aerospace Defense Command" label="North American Aerospace Defense Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q230818" start="15526" end="15529" title="Leh" label="Leh"/>
<link wikidata="Q695221" start="15531" end="15540" title="Mount Abu" label="Mount Abu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724466" start="15545" end="15552" title="Ponmudi" label="Ponmudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="15687" end="15702" title="Northeast India" label="Northeast India"/>
<link wikidata="Q640273" start="15739" end="15765" title="Satish Dhawan Space Centre" label="Satish Dhawan Space Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q531716" start="16282" end="16299" title="atmospheric entry" label="atmospheric entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="16301" end="16335" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385916" start="16344" end="16365" title="anti-satellite weapon" label="anti-satellite weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135326" start="16484" end="16490" title="Remote work" label="remote"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153043" start="16539" end="16587" title="Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee" label="Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q699152" start="16601" end="16646" title="United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs" label="United Nations Office for Outer Space Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053964" start="16751" end="16778" title="memorandum of understanding" label="memorandum of understanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158548" start="16874" end="16893" title="Department of Space" label="Department of Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980822" start="16918" end="16949" title="Combined Space Operations Center" label="Combined Space Operation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6203277" start="17209" end="17223" title="Jitendra Singh (politician, born 1956)" label="Jitender Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q60140" start="17561" end="17580" title="Indian subcontinent" label="Indian subcontinent"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="17676" end="17686" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493326" start="17923" end="17938" title="Megha-Tropiques" label="Megha-Tropiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484657" start="18374" end="18385" title="S. Somanath" label="S. Somanath"/>
<link wikidata="Q641098" start="18609" end="18617" title="Balasore" label="Balasore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4901360" start="18620" end="18687" title="Bhaskaracharya Institute For Space Applications and Geo-Informatics" label="Bhaskaracharya Institute For Space Applications and Geo-Informatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042994" start="18711" end="18736" title="Human Space Flight Centre" label="Human Space Flight Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q94915" start="18757" end="18800" title="Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System" label="Indian Regional Navigation Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056312" start="18811" end="18843" title="Indian Space Science Data Centre" label="Indian Space Science Data Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042988" start="18854" end="18875" title="Integrated Space Cell" label="Integrated Space Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345391" start="18878" end="18932" title="Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics" label="Inter-University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5974490" start="18943" end="18969" title="ISRO Inertial Systems Unit" label="ISRO Inertial Systems Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520782" start="19000" end="19023" title="Master Control Facility" label="Master Control Facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q6020227" start="19026" end="19064" title="Indian Deep Space Network" label="National Deep Space Observation Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633295" start="19075" end="19114" title="National Remote Sensing Centre" label="Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661266" start="19473" end="19504" title="Indian Remote Sensing satellite" label="Indian Remote Sensing satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="19731" end="19752" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q28446396" start="19761" end="19766" title="GISAT" label="GISAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q14290935" start="19967" end="19968" title="IRS-1A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q14290893" start="19970" end="19971" title="IRS-1B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q14174557" start="19973" end="19974" title="IRS-1C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973578" start="19976" end="19977" title="IRS-1D" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q11885094" start="20099" end="20107" title="Oceansat" label="Oceansat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11383970" start="20109" end="20117" title="Cartosat" label="Cartosat"/>
<link wikidata="Q59284044" start="20119" end="20124" title="HySIS" label="HySIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566258" start="20126" end="20132" title="EMISAT" label="EMISAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="20329" end="20343" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642195" start="20449" end="20481" title="Indian National Satellite System" label="Indian National Satellite System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412630" start="20569" end="20593" title="Geosynchronous satellite" label="geostationary satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070940" start="20826" end="20838" title="Asia-Pacific" label="Asia-Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q5260503" start="20881" end="20913" title="Department of Telecommunications" label="Department of Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q923628" start="20915" end="20946" title="India Meteorological Department" label="India Meteorological Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321122" start="20948" end="20963" title="All India Radio" label="All India Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763315" start="20968" end="20979" title="Doordarshan" label="Doordarshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486855" start="21150" end="21154" title="GSAT" label="GSAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q320919" start="21283" end="21302" title="Indian Armed Forces" label="Indian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514536" start="21312" end="21318" title="GSAT-9" label="GSAT-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165162" start="21595" end="21633" title="GNSS augmentation" label="Space-Based Augmentation System (SBAS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486567" start="21808" end="21850" title="GPS-aided GEO augmented navigation" label="GAGAN – GPS Aided GEO Augmented Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201019" start="21987" end="22003" title="proof of concept" label="proof of concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630199" start="22033" end="22060" title="Airports Authority of India" label="Airports Authority of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q51518" start="22794" end="22803" title="Kalpana-1" label="Kalpana-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169551" start="22895" end="22900" title="SARAL" label="SARAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q697175" start="23300" end="23315" title="Launch vehicle" label="launch vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q579036" start="23411" end="23426" title="sounding rocket" label="sounding rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752243" start="23471" end="23495" title="Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Satellite Launch Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q15017" start="23520" end="23554" title="Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="24161" end="24180" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q22906832" start="24423" end="24449" title="medium-lift launch vehicle" label="medium-lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="24530" end="24551" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q249238" start="24861" end="24900" title="Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5010171" start="25053" end="25059" title="CE-7.5" label="CE-7.5"/>
<link wikidata="Q580809" start="25602" end="25644" title="Gaganyaan" label="India&amp;#x27;s first crewed mission to space"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600683" start="25673" end="25680" title="SCE-200" label="SCE-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q11222716" start="25718" end="25736" title="heavy-lift launch vehicle" label="heavy-lift rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q22908850" start="25877" end="25902" title="small-lift launch vehicle" label="small-lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="25961" end="25976" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q174241" start="25986" end="26007" title="Sun-synchronous orbit" label="Sun-synchronous orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q579036" start="26195" end="26211" title="sounding rockets" label="sounding rockets"/>
<link wikidata="Q25261" start="26234" end="26248" title="meteorological" label="meteorological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641034" start="26319" end="26327" title="Payload (air and space craft)" label="payloads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798824" start="26468" end="26510" title="Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station" label="Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522917" start="26522" end="26528" title="Thumba" label="Thumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q640273" start="26537" end="26563" title="Satish Dhawan Space Centre" label="Satish Dhawan Space Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816821" start="26567" end="26578" title="Sriharikota" label="Sriharikota"/>
<link wikidata="Q640273" start="26607" end="26633" title="Satish Dhawan Space Centre" label="Satish Dhawan Space Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q113628006" start="26636" end="26664" title="Kulasekarapattinam Spaceport" label="Kulasekarapattinam Spaceport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798824" start="26667" end="26709" title="Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station" label="Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057342" start="26945" end="26978" title="Space Capsule Recovery Experiment" label="Space Capsule Recovery Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q221654" start="27005" end="27035" title="Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18645641" start="27454" end="27487" title="Crew Module Atmospheric Re-entry Experiment" label="space capsule recovery experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="27557" end="27570" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56106" start="27603" end="27619" title="Independence Day (India)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q580809" start="27696" end="27705" title="Gaganyaan" label="Gaganyaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042994" start="28142" end="28167" title="Human Space Flight Centre" label="Human Space Flight Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4299309" start="28442" end="28454" title="microgravity" label="microgravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5754419" start="28540" end="28551" title="High-G training" label="centrifuges"/>
<link wikidata="Q640273" start="28646" end="28672" title="Satish Dhawan Space Centre" label="Satish Dhawan Space Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042994" start="28741" end="28766" title="Human Space Flight Centre" label="Human Space Flight Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479908" start="28771" end="28781" title="Glavcosmos" label="Glavcosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="28964" end="28970" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="29117" end="29133" title="Indian Air Force" label="Indian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q730282" start="29165" end="29203" title="Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center" label="Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q218455" start="29274" end="29281" title="orbital spaceflight" label="orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q663611" start="29335" end="29350" title="low Earth orbit" label="low Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q580809" start="29381" end="29390" title="Gaganyaan" label="Gaganyaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657160" start="29423" end="29457" title="Indian Human Spaceflight Programme" label="Indian Human Spaceflight Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q25956" start="29890" end="29903" title="space station" label="space station"/>
<link wikidata="Q580809" start="29938" end="29947" title="Gaganyaan" label="Gaganyaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820990" start="29969" end="29977" title="K. Sivan" label="K. Sivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6053567" start="30016" end="30053" title="International Space Station programme" label="International Space Station programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484657" start="30605" end="30616" title="S. Somanath" label="S. Somanath"/>
<link wikidata="Q142617" start="30930" end="30968" title="Tata Institute of Fundamental Research" label="Tata Institute of Fundamental Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="31106" end="31116" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154519" start="31169" end="31200" title="Diffuse X-ray background" label="diffuse cosmic X-ray background"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="31353" end="31375" title="ultra-violet radiation" label="ultra-violet radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q206912" start="31502" end="31514" title="extremophile" label="extremophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q11359" start="31741" end="31750" title="Aryabhata" label="Aryabhata"/>
<link wikidata="Q25860893" start="31761" end="31778" title="Janibacter hoylei" label="Janibacter hoylei"/>
<link wikidata="Q183397" start="31824" end="31834" title="Fred Hoyle" label="Fred Hoyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q148578" start="31930" end="31947" title="space observatory" label="space observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q46587" start="31980" end="32002" title="active galactic nuclei" label="active galactic nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="32008" end="32020" title="white dwarfs" label="white dwarfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4360" start="32036" end="32043" title="pulsars" label="pulsars"/>
<link wikidata="Q40392" start="32070" end="32093" title="supermassive black hole" label="supermassive black hole"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="32124" end="32130" title="galaxy" label="galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193760" start="32233" end="32245" title="Polarization (waves)" label="polarisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q34777" start="32400" end="32405" title="X-ray" label="X-ray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32479" end="32486" title="Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle#PSLV-DL" label="PSLV-DL"/>
<link wikidata="Q738559" start="32997" end="33014" title="Moon Impact Probe" label="Moon Impact Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037506" start="33531" end="33534" title="lunar ice" label="ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="33657" end="33661" title="National Aeronautics and Space Administration" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="33663" end="33666" title="European Space Agency" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003730" start="33672" end="33701" title="Bulgarian Academy of Sciences" label="Bulgarian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="33703" end="33719" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q465165" start="33849" end="33899" title="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics" label="American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790373" start="33922" end="33967" title="International Lunar Exploration Working Group" label="International Lunar Exploration Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903998" start="34025" end="34047" title="National Space Society" label="National Space Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q25051432" start="34060" end="34079" title="Space Pioneer Awards" label="Space Pioneer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360911" start="34254" end="34302" title="LVM3" label="Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle Mark III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703840" start="34499" end="34515" title="lunar south pole" label="lunar south pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="34967" end="34976" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="35089" end="35097" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703840" start="35675" end="35691" title="lunar south pole" label="lunar south pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130" start="35976" end="35981" title="orbit" label="orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18110623" start="36597" end="36637" title="Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences" label="Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeosciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q948720" start="36649" end="36676" title="Indian Institute of Science" label="Indian Institute of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q200667" start="36705" end="36711" title="Ladakh" label="Ladakh"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="36752" end="36756" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="36761" end="36765" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="36982" end="36990" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q580809" start="36996" end="37005" title="Gaganyaan" label="Gaganyaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124670652" start="37016" end="37033" title="Shubhanshu Shukla" label="Shubhanshu Shukla"/>
<link wikidata="Q411" start="37207" end="37222" title="astrobiological" label="astrobiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q115802913" start="37619" end="37647" title="Bharatiya Antariksha Station" label="Bharatiya Antariksha Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026866" start="38002" end="38015" title="Rann of Kutch" label="Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="38157" end="38169" title="solar corona" label="solar corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q835032" start="38212" end="38223" title="coronagraph" label="coronagraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="38264" end="38272" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q129890" start="38326" end="38347" title="coronal mass ejection" label="coronal mass ejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q584093" start="38492" end="38505" title="space weather" label="space weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824476" start="38526" end="38535" title="Aditya-L1" label="Aditya-L1"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="38650" end="38666" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="38715" end="38720" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q76904" start="39316" end="39324" title="kerosene" label="kerosene"/>
<link wikidata="Q618153" start="39359" end="39372" title="liquid oxygen" label="liquid oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q574440" start="39426" end="39432" title="RD-120" label="RD-120"/>
<link wikidata="Q37129" start="39651" end="39658" title="methane" label="methane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521829" start="39788" end="39801" title="remanufacturing" label="refurbishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521698" start="39807" end="39811" title="Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre" label="LPSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q192316" start="39975" end="39994" title="geostationary orbit" label="geostationary orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q18467778" start="40082" end="40086" title="Next Generation Launch Vehicle" label="NGLV"/>
<link wikidata="Q11222716" start="40105" end="40110" title="Heavy-lift launch vehicle" label="heavy"/>
<link wikidata="Q23759442" start="40121" end="40152" title="super-heavy lift launch vehicle" label="super-heavy lift launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138649" start="40469" end="40497" title="geostationary transfer orbit" label="geostationary transfer orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600683" start="40943" end="40950" title="SCE-200" label="SCE-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907628" start="41183" end="41187" title="VTVL" label="VTVL"/>
<link wikidata="Q20046585" start="41288" end="41329" title="VTHL" label="launched vertically but land like a plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q198055" start="41361" end="41379" title="two-stage-to-orbit" label="two-stage-to-orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276957" start="41548" end="41554" title="RLV-TD" label="RLV-TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318674" start="41605" end="41612" title="testbed" label="testbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276957" start="41822" end="41850" title="Hypersonic Flight Experiment" label="Hypersonic Flight Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193128" start="42362" end="42373" title="Hall-effect thruster" label="Hall-effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509676" start="42378" end="42384" title="Pulsed plasma thruster" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567386" start="42432" end="42438" title="GSAT-4" label="GSAT-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514536" start="42530" end="42536" title="GSAT-9" label="GSAT-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106" start="42565" end="42570" title="xenon" label="xenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18480143" start="42646" end="42653" title="GSAT-20" label="GSAT-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q195533" start="42890" end="42904" title="atomic battery" label="atomic battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662393" start="42924" end="42934" title="decay heat" label="decay heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520778" start="43007" end="43031" title="U R Rao Satellite Centre" label="U R Rao Satellite Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="43107" end="43111" title="watt" label="watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3523073" start="43402" end="43429" title="Department of Atomic Energy" label="Department of Atomic Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65049774" start="43464" end="43477" title="Chandrayaan-3" label="Chandrayaan-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q65080497" start="43749" end="43771" title="India Mobile Congress" label="Indian Mobile Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027298" start="43870" end="43894" title="quantum key distribution" label="quantum key distribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q17995793" start="43970" end="43987" title="quantum computers" label="quantum computers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11222053" start="44742" end="44759" title="H3 (rocket)" label="H3 launch vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q389459" start="45056" end="45061" title="Mars rover" label="rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773173" start="45063" end="45073" title="Mars aircraft" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q122452238" start="45075" end="45084" title="Sky crane (landing system)" label="sky crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941" start="45255" end="45283" title="Atmosphere of Venus" label="the planet&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214361" start="45631" end="45687" title="Laboratoire atmosphères, milieux, observations spatiales" label="Laboratoire atmosphères, milieux, observations spatiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q280413" start="45703" end="45749" title="French National Centre for Scientific Research" label="French National Centre for Scientific Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="45761" end="45770" title="Roscosmos" label="Roscosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q960484" start="46030" end="46043" title="Union Cabinet" label="Union Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="46090" end="46104" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058" start="46105" end="46118" title="Narendra Modi" label="Narendra Modi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="46567" end="46574" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="46701" end="46708" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="46733" end="46738" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q305208" start="46773" end="46777" title="Radioisotope thermoelectric generator" label="RTEG"/>
<link wikidata="Q55604343" start="46935" end="46945" title="AstroSat-2" label="AstroSat-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q298058" start="46970" end="46978" title="AstroSat" label="AstroSat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339553" start="47039" end="47043" title="Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology" label="IIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="47052" end="47075" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="47135" end="47144" title="exoplanet" label="exoplanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q212227" start="47723" end="47744" title="Canadian Space Agency" label="Canadian Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="47853" end="47876" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944004" start="47952" end="47975" title="geospatial intelligence" label="geospatial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q740686" start="48212" end="48236" title="Synthetic-aperture radar" label="synthetic aperture radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41562" start="48648" end="48659" title="Thoothukudi" label="Thoothukudi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="48672" end="48682" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q313019" start="49207" end="49234" title="National Informatics Centre" label="National Informatics Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6042988" start="49322" end="49343" title="Integrated Space Cell" label="Integrated Space Cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q60750084" start="49355" end="49379" title="Integrated Defence Staff" label="Integrated Defence Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641653" start="49400" end="49419" title="Ministry of Defence (India)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q26540" start="49621" end="49631" title="satellites" label="satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922584" start="49887" end="49894" title="GSAT-7A" label="GSAT-7A"/>
<link wikidata="Q330658" start="50082" end="50091" title="Indian Air Force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q356359" start="50102" end="50106" title="Indian Navy" label="navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13112185" start="50230" end="50236" title="GSAT-7" label="GSAT-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140666" start="50278" end="50301" title="network-centric warfare" label="network-centric warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q161341" start="50384" end="50418" title="airborne early warning and control" label="airborne early warning and control"/>
<link wikidata="Q499185" start="50448" end="50459" title="Beriev A-50" label="Beriev A-50"/>
<link wikidata="Q8694187" start="50460" end="50467" title="EL/W-2090" label="Phalcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5206025" start="50472" end="50487" title="DRDO AEW&amp;amp;CS" label="DRDO AEW&amp;amp;CS"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="50523" end="50527" title="Indian Army" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="50574" end="50597" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="50695" end="50707" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q18922584" start="50922" end="50929" title="GSAT-7A" label="GSAT-7A"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631031" start="50952" end="50957" title="RISAT" label="RISAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279985" start="50968" end="50981" title="Radar imaging" label="radar-imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q854845" start="50982" end="51009" title="earth observation satellite" label="earth observation satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q62566258" start="51057" end="51063" title="EMISAT" label="EMISAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q836610" start="51118" end="51123" title="ELINT" label="ELINT"/>
<link wikidata="Q320919" start="51185" end="51204" title="Indian Armed Forces" label="Indian Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194780" start="51375" end="51390" title="Prithvi missile" label="Prithvi missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q142645" start="51462" end="51474" title="Agni missile" label="Agni missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154393" start="51675" end="51720" title="Defence Research and Development Organisation" label="Defence Research and Development Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9513" start="51811" end="51829" title="A.P.J. Abdul Kalam" label="A.P.J. Abdul Kalam"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="51845" end="51854" title="president of India" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641653" start="52274" end="52293" title="Ministry of Defence (India)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q14174557" start="52325" end="52331" title="IRS-1C" label="IRS-1C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749442" start="52348" end="52361" title="Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q3634069" start="52366" end="52389" title="Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers&amp;#x27; Welfare" label="agricultural ministries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028659" start="52624" end="52662" title="Indira Gandhi National Open University" label="Indira Gandhi National Open University"/>
<link wikidata="Q622358" start="52671" end="52702" title="Indian Institutes of Technology" label="Indian Institutes of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819560" start="52951" end="52956" title="ATS-6" label="ATS-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7426046" start="53009" end="53054" title="Satellite Instructional Television Experiment" label="Satellite Instructional Television Experiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q46994" start="53216" end="53228" title="telemedicine" label="telemedicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="53526" end="53544" title="video conferencing" label="video conferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q863038" start="54393" end="54411" title="North-East India" label="northeastern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="54413" end="54426" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451" start="54428" end="54445" title="Himalayas" label="Western Himalayas"/>
<link wikidata="Q40888" start="54450" end="54477" title="Andaman and Nicobar Islands" label="Andaman and Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940667" start="54622" end="54632" title="CARTOSAT-1" label="CARTOSAT-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046007" start="54852" end="54862" title="CARTOSAT-2" label="CARTOSAT-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q181802" start="55135" end="55147" title="Prosthesis" label="bionic limbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q381490" start="55174" end="55188" title="silica aerogel" label="silica aerogel"/>
<link wikidata="Q863343" start="55294" end="55315" title="Doppler weather radar" label="Doppler weather radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039" start="55912" end="55933" title="São Tomé and Príncipe" label="São Tomé and Príncipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274195" start="56240" end="56290" title="European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts" label="European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q8880" start="56300" end="56319" title="European Commission" label="European Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q692163" start="56321" end="56392" title="European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites" label="European Organisation for the Exploitation of Meteorological Satellites"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="56405" end="56426" title="European Space Agency" label="European Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q145700" start="56437" end="56485" title="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation" label="South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q49011" start="56537" end="56550" title="Chandrayaan-1" label="Chandrayaan-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="56601" end="56605" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="56607" end="56610" title="ESA" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606872" start="56612" end="56634" title="Bulgarian Space Agency" label="Bulgarian Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q48756" start="56916" end="56920" title="CNES" label="CNES"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493326" start="56945" end="56960" title="Megha-Tropiques" label="Megha-Tropiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q81041" start="56970" end="56981" title="water cycle" label="water cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169551" start="57034" end="57039" title="SARAL" label="SARAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q133716" start="57044" end="57053" title="Acid–base titration" label="altimetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="57123" end="57139" title="Infrared" label="thermal infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q97273633" start="57148" end="57155" title="TRISHNA" label="TRISHNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q18128754" start="57475" end="57509" title="NISAR (satellite)" label="NASA-ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362353" start="57563" end="57569" title="L Band" label="L Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018880" start="57577" end="57583" title="S Band" label="S Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q605177" start="58050" end="58063" title="Cospas-Sarsat" label="Cospas-Sarsat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634011" start="58065" end="58103" title="International Astronautical Federation" label="International Astronautical Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115753" start="58105" end="58132" title="COSPAR" label="Committee on Space Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153043" start="58143" end="58191" title="Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee" label="Inter-Agency Space Debris Coordination Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q766034" start="58200" end="58230" title="International Space University" label="International Space University"/>
<link wikidata="Q243630" start="58315" end="58320" title="BRICS" label="BRICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q199687" start="58347" end="58361" title="remote sensing" label="remote sensing"/>
<link wikidata="Q133139" start="58690" end="58714" title="electromagnetic spectrum" label="electromagnetic spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="58872" end="58875" title="Megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q79692" start="58879" end="58881" title="3G" label="3G"/>
<link wikidata="Q6021720" start="58895" end="58904" title="Indian Telecom Spectrum Auction" label="auctioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018880" start="59208" end="59214" title="S band" label="S band"/>
<link wikidata="Q376150" start="59440" end="59477" title="International Telecommunication Union" label="International Telecommunication Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519973" start="59802" end="59833" title="Comptroller and Auditor General of India" label="Comptroller and Auditor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q960484" start="60173" end="60180" title="Cabinet of India" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484297" start="60750" end="60766" title="G. Madhavan Nair" label="G. Madhavan Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641068" start="61085" end="61106" title="Department of Revenue (India)" label="Department of Revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294596" start="61111" end="61140" title="Ministry of Corporate Affairs" label="Ministry of Corporate Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053734" start="61188" end="61219" title="Central Bureau of Investigation" label="Central Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220258" start="61437" end="61455" title="Antrix Corporation" label="Antrix Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q207946" start="61649" end="61660" title="arbitration" label="arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049936" start="61725" end="61759" title="International Court of Arbitration" label="International Court of Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q848633" start="61767" end="61800" title="International Chamber of Commerce" label="International Chamber of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184183" start="61965" end="61981" title="Delhi High Court" label="Delhi High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q325470" start="62046" end="62061" title="Vikram Sarabhai" label="Vikram Sarabhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11179743" start="62075" end="62089" title="M. G. K. Menon" label="M. G. K. Menon"/>
<link wikidata="Q325393" start="62098" end="62111" title="Satish Dhawan" label="Satish Dhawan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7877236" start="62125" end="62134" title="Udupi Ramachandra Rao" label="U. R. Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q735363" start="62148" end="62164" title="Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan" label="K. Kasturirangan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484297" start="62178" end="62194" title="G. Madhavan Nair" label="G. Madhavan Nair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724184" start="62208" end="62224" title="Koppillil Radhakrishnan" label="K. Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16185496" start="62238" end="62252" title="Shailesh Nayak" label="Shailesh Nayak"/>
<link wikidata="Q18761821" start="62261" end="62278" title="A. S. Kiran Kumar" label="A. S. Kiran Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20820990" start="62292" end="62300" title="K. Sivan" label="K. Sivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q47484657" start="62314" end="62325" title="S. Somanath" label="S. Somanath"/>
<link wikidata="Q131701943" start="62339" end="62351" title="V Narayanan" label="V. Narayanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122652" start="62386" end="62404" title="Deep Ocean mission" label="Deep Ocean mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756202" start="62407" end="62427" title="Defence Space Agency" label="Defence Space Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339553" start="62430" end="62478" title="Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology" label="Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q22991" start="62481" end="62514" title="List of government space agencies" label="List of government space agencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19893220" start="62517" end="62538" title="List of ISRO missions" label="List of ISRO missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q66758286" start="62541" end="62563" title="NewSpace India Limited" label="NewSpace India Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q97161858" start="62566" end="62574" title="Indian National Space Promotion and Authorisation Centre" label="IN–SPACe"/>
<link wikidata="Q110154627" start="62577" end="62601" title="Indian Space Association" label="Indian Space Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q129169426" start="62604" end="62629" title="Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar" label="Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282980" start="62632" end="62663" title="Science and technology in India" label="Science and technology in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q105730684" start="62666" end="62689" title="Space industry of India" label="Space industry of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q55634471" start="62692" end="62721" title="Swami Vivekananda Planetarium" label="Swami Vivekananda Planetarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668014" start="62724" end="62751" title="Telecommunications in India" label="Telecommunications in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368937" start="62754" end="62790" title="Timeline of Solar System exploration" label="Timeline of Solar System exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q23777539" start="62793" end="62825" title="National Space Science Symposium" label="National Space Science Symposium"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019723" wikidata="Q2916259" url="?curid=1019723" title="Rees's Cyclopædia">
<text>Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;, in full &quot;The Cyclopædia; or, Universal Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and Literature&quot;, was an important 19th-century British encyclopaedia edited by Rev. Abraham Rees (1743–1825), a Presbyterian minister and scholar who had edited previous editions of &quot;Chambers&#x27;s Cyclopædia&quot;.

==Background==
When Rees was planning his &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;, Europe was in the aftermath of the French Revolution, and during serialised publication (1802–1820) the Napoleonic Wars and War of 1812 occurred. Britain absorbed into its empire a number of the former French and Dutch colonies around the world; Romanticism came to the fore; evangelical Christianity flourished with the efforts of William Wilberforce; and factory manufacture burgeoned.

With this background, philosophical radicalism was suspect in Britain, and aspects of the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; were thought to be distinctly subversive and attracted the hostility of the Loyalist press. Contributors Jeremiah Joyce and Charles Sylvester had attracted the attention of the government and were tried for their views. The editor and authors went to great pains to emphasise their Englishness, to the extent of anglicising many French words: the French Kings Louis appear under the heading &quot;Lewis&quot;.

Scientific theorising about the atomic system, geological succession, and earth origins; natural history (botany, entomology, ornithology and zoology); and developments in technology, particularly in textiles manufacture, are all reflected in the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;.
Other topics include exploration and foreign travel which provide insights into how the world was viewed at that time. Agriculture and rural life also feature greatly.

==Format==
The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; appeared serially between January 1802 and August 1820, and ran to 39 volumes of text and 6 volumes of plates including an atlas. It contains around 39 million words, and around 500 of the articles are of monograph length. The sheets were produced weekly, and issued as half-volume sets several times a year. The dates of these can be seen on table 4.1 below. Only one set of the work in half-volumes (which also has some of the paper wrappers) is known to survive, in the library of the Natural History Museum, London.

===Plates===
The plates were published in 6 volumes: four covering general articles, one on natural history, and one atlas. They were issued as blocks and so do not appear to have been issued with the texts in the half-volumes. There are 1107 plates, and atlas with 61 folded maps 16&quot; by 10&quot; in size. Bound at the back of Volume 39 are lists of all the plates and an index to them.

===Later editions===
The American edition was published by Samuel F. Bradford (see :fr:Samuel F. Bradford), of Philadelphia. Bradford was a member of the famous family of American printers. The first volume appeared in May 1806 and the last in December 1820. The work extended to 41 volumes of text and 6 of plates. See section 5 below.

The growth of industrial archaeology led to the reprinting in the 1970s by the British publisher David and Charles of volumes covering manufacturing industry, naval architecture, and horology.

In the 1980s the Swiss publishing house IDC produced a microfiche edition.

==Background, reception, scholarship==
The first decades of the 19th century saw many encyclopaediae published in Britain. Examples included:
*The fourth, fifth and sixth editions of &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; in 20 volumes, 1801–1810, 1815–1817, and 1823–1824.
*&quot;Encyclopædia Perthensis&quot; or &quot;Universal Dictionary of Arts, Science and Literature&quot;, 23 volumes, Edinburgh 1807.
*&quot;Edinburgh Encyclopædia&quot;, 18 volumes, 1808–1830, ed. David Brewster.
*&quot;British Encyclopedia, or Dictionary of Arts and Sciences&quot;, 6 volumes, 1809, ed. William Nicholson.
*&quot;Pantologia&quot;, 12 volumes, 1813, ed. John Mason Good, Olinthus Gregory, Newton Bosworth.
*&quot;Encyclopædia Metropolitana&quot;, 28 volumes, 1817–1845, edited initially by Samuel Taylor Coleridge
*&quot;Encyclopaedia Londinensis&quot; 24 volumes,1810–1828, including 3 volumes of plates, ed. John Wilkes
These sources commonly fed off each other, and writers often contributed to more than one.

The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; had comparatively little reception on publication. The &quot;Anti-Jacobin Review&quot; published hostile reviews of half-volume 1 in 1802, and of volumes 2–4 in 1804-5. These reviews complained about its supposed antireligious aspects and radical standpoints attributed to its editor and contributors, and cited lack of article balance, confusing alphabetisation, and cross-references to then-unpublished volumes. The &quot;British Critic&quot; less stridently criticised lack of balance and confusion in volume 1. &quot;The Panoplist&quot; carried a serial review of both editions of Rees by Jedediah Morse in 1807–1810.

The &quot;Quarterly Review&quot; commented, &quot;Rees is the most extensive cyclopædia in English with many excellent articles it has generally been condemned as on the whole too diffuse and too commonplace.&quot;

The exhaustive article on encyclopaediae in the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica, 11th edition&quot; (1910) mentions Rees&#x27;s involvement with the editing of the original Chambers, but ignores completely the later work. The 15th edition of &quot;Britannica&quot; mentions Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; superficially.

&quot;Rees&#x27;s Cyclopædia&quot; seems to be in limbo in modern published studies of reference books. Superseded by more modern works and ignored by larger scholarship, the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; received modern scholarly attention from students of the history of science and the history of technology, after research into the life and times of Charles Burney and his writings on music. In 1948 Percy Scholes published his biography &quot;The Great Dr Burney&quot;, 2 vol., and devoted a chapter to Burney&#x27;s work for Rees. Scholes had his own copy of the work and used it profitably to discuss in some detail the faults of the work, in particular, the way the serial production caused major problems when editors were faced with new knowledge that appeared after the volume containing the appropriate section had been issued. They addressed this partially with an appendix in the last volume, and also by inventing contorted new subject titles in the main work (&quot;Cotton Manufacture&quot;, Vol. 10, 1808, and &quot;Manufacture of Cotton&quot;, Vol. 21, 1812). Later writers about Burney have investigated further his involvement with Rees. (See list of sources, below).

The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; lacks a classified index volume, and alphabetising is on occasion eccentric (&quot;York, New&quot;).

===The Rees Project===
The Rees Project was instigated by June Zimmerman Fullmer (1920–2000), a professor at Ohio State University, an authority on Humphry Davy and the chemistry of the early 19th century. Her work drew her to Rees and she indexed it. After tapping the invisible college of scholars who knew of Rees, she convened a summer 1986 meeting in London, following which she wrote a proposal to the American Foundation for the Humanities for funding to the project, setting out the object of producing a printed concordance to the contents of the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;. This was intended to make Rees much more widely accessible to the modern reader. Funding was not forthcoming, and the matter lapsed.

==Printing==
Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; was printed by Andrew Strahan, the King&#x27;s Printer. It was entirely hand-set (there being no mechanical means of composition at this date) and printed. At the commencement of the work Strahan had nine wooden presses and over 20,000 kg of type. By 1809 this had risen to fifteen wooden presses and of type. Since the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; was produced serially, with a few sheets being printed each week, only a small part of Strahan&#x27;s men and equipment would have ever been used on it at any one time. The work was printed on demy paper and folded to quarto format, with an uncropped size of . A limited number were advertised in the prospectus as being produced on royal paper, which when folded gave a format of . The paper is wove, with no chain lines. One watermark in the paper has been noted, with the legend W BALSTON, 1811. The supplier has not been identified, but it may be significant that a J. Dickinson was a member of the publishing syndicate.

The text matter was set in two columns measuring , with 67 lines per column. Ten lines of text measures deep. According to McKerrow&#x27;s formula this size of typeface was Long Primer. The typefounder is unknown, but the article on &quot;Printing&quot; in Volume 28 had, bound with the text, specimens of type cast by Fry and Steele of London and Alexander Wilson of Glasgow. Greek and Hebrew faces were sometimes used and occasionally special chemical, pharmaceutical, and other symbols appear.

The work followed the common practice of the time of conflating the entries for I and J and U and V into single lists.

At first a half-volume cost 18 shillings, and a large paper version with proof copies of the plates cost £1 16 shillings (according to the prospectuses). By 1820 the parts sold for £1 and £1 16 respectively. It is not clear if these prices were for the parts in wrappers. At the end of the project the work sold for £85 in the quarto edition and was reputed to have cost Longmans nearly £300,000. Most sets of Rees today are bound in calf, with two parts to the volume, but the quality of the leather used has meant that in many cases the hinges have rotted and the covers loosened, necessitating rebinding.

The publication of Rees followed the common system of a number of booksellers banding together to share the cost and eventual profit: the conger (syndicate). The syndicate comprised Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, &amp; Brown, Paternoster Row; F. C. and J. Rivington, publisher to the SPCK (publishers of the &quot;British Critic&quot;); A. Strahan, King&#x27;s Printer; and 24 smaller concerns. The full list is on the work&#x27;s title page.

No records of the publication survive, since the papers of Longmans were destroyed when their premises in Paternoster Row, London, were burnt out in the Blitz on the night of 29–30 December 1940.

===Publication dates===
== Content ==
Coincident with the appearance of volume 39, all 39 volumes, A through Z, were published as a set in 1819. The primary publishers of this set were the consortium of Longman, Hurst, Rees (who by then apparently held an equity share), Orme, and Brown, of Paternoster Row.

However, correct dating by half-volume or fascicle (1802–1820) can have serious implications for the accuracy of citations by modern writers, especially when discussing scientific priority: a list compiled in 1820 in &quot;Philosophical Magazine&quot; was designed to give proper priority to scientific discoveries. Volumes of plates were issued in blocks, and not with the texts to which they refer.

Botanical historian Benjamin Daydon Jackson, unaware of this list, attempted to compile a list based on contemporaneous advertisements in the trade press, on dates appearing on the plates (having assumed that the plates were issued at the same time as the accompanying texts), and some guesswork. He published his first list privately in 1877, he issued a corrected version in 1880, and a final version appeared in the &quot;Journal of Botany&quot; in 1896. Only 3 of Jackson&#x27;s dates accord with the 1820 dates listed above.

===Citation style===
Hundreds of articles in Rees are very long, and the work is unpaginated, so page reference is not easy. The following convention was adopted by the Rees Project, and is based on the method described by R. B. McKerrow. Each gathering has 8 pages, and each page 2 columns. The reference is cited by volume or half-volume details with accurate date between 1802 and 1820, article title, and then the gathering&#x27;s identifier, the page, and the column, separated by colons. The page containing the gathering identifier (e.g., &quot;B&quot;) is page 1 in each gathering (e.g., page &quot;B:1&quot;). Page 3 in each gathering typically contains the gathering identifier plus the figure 2 and should be ignored (e.g., &quot;B2&quot; appears on page &quot;B:3&quot;).

The account of the bell-crank steam engine may be referenced as &quot;&quot; (&quot;O&quot; is the 8-page gathering&#x27;s identifier.)

The gatherings in a typical volume of Rees are identified as follows. In each sequence the letters J and W are omitted and one letter U or V used but not both together.

*22 running from &quot;B&quot; to &quot;Z&quot;
*23 running from &quot;Aa&quot; to &quot;Zz&quot;
*23 running from &quot;3A&quot; to &quot;3Z&quot;
*23 running from &quot;4A&quot; to &quot;4Z&quot;
*23 running from &quot;5A&quot; to &quot;5Z&quot; or as far as needed

The David and Charles reprint of some of the manufacturing articles is paged, and many writers cite this pagination, which is useless for consulting the original article from a full set. These reprints are also not comprehensive, as they omit short pieces under about 350 words.

===References in Rees&#x27;s Cyclopaedia articles===
The long encyclopaedic articles in Rees commonly have a note at the end of the articles to the sources used in writing them. In other articles source references are run into the text. These are normally in a short-title form that will need decoding. Frequently these are in the format of surname of the author and a one or two word abbreviation of the book title. Collected works are similarly treated.

Thus, a small example covering biography:

* Bayle = Pierre Bayle, &quot;Dictionnaire Historique et Critique&quot; 1697
*Biog. Brit. = William Oldys, &quot;Biographia Britannica&quot;, 6 vol, 1774-1766
*Gen. Biog. = John Aikin et al. &quot;General biography or lives, critical and historical, of the most eminent persons of all ages, countries, conditions, and professions, arranged according to alphabetical order.&quot;, 10 vol, 1799–1815
*Gen. Dict. = Thomas Birch, &quot;General Dictionary...[of biography]&quot;, 10 vol, 1734–41
*Eloy, Dict. Hist. = , &quot;Dictionnaire Historique de la Medicine Ancienne at Moderne&quot;, 4 vol, 1778
*Haller, Bib. Bot. = Albrecht von Haller, &quot;Bibliotheca Botanica&quot;, 2 vol, 1771
*Haller, Bib. Chir. = Albrecht von Haller, &quot;Bibliotheca Chirurgica&quot;, 2 vol, 1774
*Haller, Bib. Anat. = Albrecht von Haller, &quot;Bibliotheca Anatomica&quot;, 2 vol, 1774
*Haller, Bib. Med. Pract. = Albrecht von Haller, &quot;Bibliotheca Medicinae Practicae&quot;, 4 vol, 1776–88
*Laborde = Jean-Benjamin François de la Borde, &quot;Essai sur la musique ancienne et moderne&quot; 4 vol, 1780
*Moreri = Louis Moréri, &quot;Le grand Dictionaire historique, ou le mélange curieux de l&#x27;histoire sacrée et profane&quot; 1674. The encyclopaedia focused particularly on historical and biographical articles. It was translated into English, German, Italian, Dutch and Spanish. A total of at least 20 different editions were published between 1674 (one volume) and 1759 (10 volumes).

Other sources cited include the &quot;Philosophical Transactions&quot; of the Royal Society and similar scientific publications, commentaries relating to biblical scholarship and accounts of travels.

===Notable articles===

Approximately 500 articles exceed 15 columns (11,000 words). The longest article is &quot;Canal&quot;, by John Farey, Sr., 289 columns (210,000 words). John Landseer wrote 4 articles on schools of European engraving totalling over 600 columns (460,000 words).

===Biographical articles===
&quot;Rees&#x27;s Cyclopaedia&quot; has 3789 biographical articles half a page (350 words) and longer, as well as numerous briefer ones. They range in time from Antiquity to the eighteenth century. Benjamin Heath Malkin, and Thomas Rees are noted as having written biographical articles, but there is no information about which. The rest of the authors cannot be positively identified except for William Tooke, who wrote about Catherine the Great. Many of the biographical articles are sourced to the biographical reference books noted in 3.3 above. In most cases Christian names are Anglicised – John for Johannes, for example.

===The music articles===

These were written by Charles Burney (1726–1814), with additional material by John Farey, sr (1766–1826), and John Farey, Jr (1791–1851), and illustrated by 53 plates as well a numerous examples of music typset within the articles. Charles Burney was well known as the author of &quot;A General History of Music&quot;, 4 vol 1776–1789 and two travel diaries recording his &quot;Musical Tours&quot; collecting information in France and Italy, and later Germany, 1+2 vol, 1771 and 1773, as well as the &quot;Commoration of Handel&quot;, 1785 and his &quot;Musical Memoirs of Metastasio&quot;, 1796. John Farey, sr was a polymath, well known today for his work as a geologist and for his investigations of mathematics. He was greatly interested in the mathematics of sound, and the schemes of temperamant used in tuning musical instruments then, and published much about it in contemporary periodicals. His son, John Farey, jr, was also polymathic in his interests. He contributed numerous drawings for the illustrations of mostly technological and scientific topics in Rees, and would have written the descriptions of them. They are always linked by key-letters to the details of the drawings. The procedure would have been for Farey to make the drawing first, after usually inspecting and measuring the object, then write the description of it, with the key letters, which were then engraved on the plate for final printing. The plates for dramatic machinery, the organ and barrel organ are by him.

==Contributors==

The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; was written by about 100 contributors, most of whom were Nonconformists. They were specialists in their fields, covering science, technology, medicine, manufacturing, agriculture, banking and transportation, as well as the arts and humanities. A number were members of the teaching staffs of the Royal Military Academy, and the Addiscombe Military Seminary of the East India Company. Other contributors were working journalists who wrote for scientific, medical and technical periodicals. Several of the contributors were active in radical politics; one was gaoled for sedition and another indicted for treason.

Amongst the eminent writers engaged by Rees were Lant Carpenter (1780–1870) on education, mental and moral philosophy; Tiberius Cavallo (1799–1809) on electricity and magnetism; John Flaxman (1755–1826) on sculpture; Luke Howard (1772–1867) on meteorology; John Landseer (1769–1852) on engraving; Sir William Lawrence, (1783–1867) on human and comparative anatomy; Sir James Edward Smith (1759–1828) on botany; David Mushet on metallurgy and chemistry; Rev. William Pearson (1767–1847) on astronomy; Sir Thomas Phillips (1770–1875) on painting.

Among the artists and engravers employed were Aaron Arrowsmith (1750–1823) who engraved the maps; William Blake (1757–1827) who made engravings to illustrate some of the sculpture articles; Thomas Milton (1743–1827) who engraved most of the natural history plates; Wilson Lowry (1762–1824) who engraved numerous of the plates especially those relating to architecture, machinery and scientific instruments.

Except for some of the botanical articles by Sir James Edward Smith, none of the articles are signed. Names were recorded in the &quot;Prospectus&quot; of 1802, the introduction at the start of the first volume, the paper covers of the unbound parts which have survived, and in a paper in the &quot;Philosophical Magazine&quot;, published in 1820. The alphabetical List of contributors to Rees&#x27;s Cyclopædia has been compiled from the foregoing sources. The majority appear in the &quot;Dictionary of National Biography&quot;, and in sources listed in the &quot;British Biographical Index&quot;, but these accounts rarely record an involvement with the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;.

==American edition==

The American edition was published by Samuel F. Bradford, of Philadelphia.(see :fr:Samuel F. Bradford). Bradford was a member of the famous family of American printers. The first volume appeared in May 1806 and the last in December 1820. The work extended to 41 volumes of text and 6 of plates. There were 1,851 subscribers recorded. The initial print run was set at 2,500 copies, but Bradford was beset by financial problems, and the project passed to Murray, Draper Fairman and Company who reduced the run to 2,000 copies. The work sold at $4 per half volume or $8 per volume. The full bound set cost $400 in 1820.

The religious content of the first volumes was re-written to reflect American sensibilities by Bishop William White, an Episcopalian, and Ashbel Green a Presbyterian. Additional American material was incorporated into the text.

==References and sources==
;References

;Chronological list of sources
*Anon, &quot;Dr Rees&#x27;s &quot;New Cyclopædia&quot; – On Saturday, 2 January 1802, will be published...&quot;, 3 page printed prospectus, 1801
*Anon, &quot;Dr Rees&#x27;s &quot;New Cyclopædia&quot; – Samuel F. Bradford is preparing to publish by subscription ...&quot; 1 page broadside prospectus of the American edition, n. d. [c.1805] 
*Anon., Review of Vol 1 in the &quot;Annual Review and History of Literature&quot;, vol 1, 1802, pp 859–66
*Anon., Review of Vol 1 in the &quot;Anti-Jacobin Review&quot;, vol 12, 1802, pp 178–90 and vol 13, 1802, pp 40–53
*Anon., Review of Vols 2, 3 and 4 in the &quot;Anti-Jacobin Review&quot;, vol 19, 1804, pp 365–376 and vol 20, 1805, pp 44–55
*Anon., Review of Vol 1 in the &quot;British Critic&quot;, vol 25/26, 1805, pp 225–244 and vol 27/28, 1806, pp 64–77
*Morse, Jedediah, comparative reviews of both editions in &quot;The Panoplist&quot;, Vol 3, 1807, pp 129–134, 178–183, 270–274, 507–511, Vol 4 (N.S. vol 1) 1808-9, pp 131–138, 177–183, 214–217, 273–274, 318–324, 368–371, 407–413, 514–518, Vol 5, (N.S. Vol 2) 1809–10, pp 29–34, 81–85, 123–127.
*Anon., Review in &quot;Eclectic Review&quot;, vol 5, 1809, pp 551–552
*Anon., Review in &quot;Ackermann&#x27;s Repository&quot;, vol 2, 1816, p 307
*Anon., Review in &quot;Gentleman&#x27;s magazine&quot;, vol 84, pt 1, 1816, pp 539–40
*Anon, Notice of the completion of the publication of the work, &quot;Monthly Repository&quot;, 1820, vol 15, p 624
*Scholes, P. A., &quot;The Puritans and Early Music in England and New England&quot;, OUP, 1934 [Occasional references to Burney&#x27;s articles in Rees]
*Scholes, P. A., &quot;The Oxford Companion to Music&quot;, 1938 (and later eds) [Frequent citations to Burney&#x27;s Rees articles, and also some illustrations from the work.]
*Scholes, P. A., &#x27;A New Enquiry into the Life and Work of Dr Burney&#x27;, &quot;Proceedings of the Musical Association&quot; 67th Session, 1940–1941, pp 1–30. [pp 24–5 has section &#x27;Burney an Encyclopaedist&#x27;.]
*Scholes, P. A., &quot;The Great Dr Burney&quot;, 1948, Vol 2, pp 184–201, chapter LVIII, &quot;Virtues and vagaries of a septuagenarian encyclopædist&quot; [Throughout his biography Scholes made reference to, and some times quoted from, Burney&#x27;s articles in Rees.]
*Mackarness, E. D. &#x27;Dr Burney, Biographer&#x27;, &quot;The Contemporary Review&quot;, vol 189 (1956) pp 352–357. [A brief account of Burney&#x27;s biographical writings, including those in Rees.]
*Scholes, P. A., &quot;Dr Burney&#x27;s Musical Tours in Europe&quot;, 2 vol, OUP 1959, [Scholes makes a number of references to, and quotations from Burney&#x27;s Rees articles]
*Oldman, C.B., &#x27;Dr Burney and Mozart&#x27;, &quot;Mozart Jahnbuch 1962/63&quot;. (1964), pp 73–81. [Includes extracts from Burney&#x27;s Rees articles about Mozart.]
*Bentley, G. E. jr., &amp; Nurmi, Martin K., &quot;A Blake Bibliography, Annotated lists of Works, Studies, and Blakeana&quot;, University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1964, pp 145–148. [Detailed discussion of the 7 plates that William Blake engraved for the &quot;Cyclopaedia&quot;.]
*Lonsdale, Roger, &quot;Dr Charles Burney: a Literary Biography&quot;, OUP 1965, pp 407–431, chapter X, &quot;Burney and Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;&quot;
*Cossons, Neil, ed., &quot;Rees&#x27;s Naval Architecture 1819–20&quot;, 1 vol, Publisher: David and Charles, 1970
*Cossons, Neil, ed., &quot;Rees&#x27;s Clocks, Watches and Chronometers&quot;, 1 vol, Publisher: David and Charles, 1970
*Cossons, Neil, ed., &quot;Rees&#x27;s Manufacturing Industry&quot;, 5 vol, Publisher: David &amp; Charles, 1972
*Harte, N. B., &#x27;Rees&#x27;s Watches Chronometers and Naval Architecture : A Note&#x27;, &quot;Maritime History&quot; III 1973, 92–5
*Harte, N. B., &quot;On Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; as a source for the history of the textile industries in the early nineteen century,&quot; &quot;Textile History&quot;, 5, 1974, pp 119–127.
*Rowland, K. T., &quot;Eighteenth Century Inventions&quot; David &amp; Charles, 1974 [Draws extensively from the Rees plates as illustrations]
*Pestana, Harold R., &#x27;Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; (1802–1820) a sourcebook for the history of geology, &quot; Journal of the Society for the Bibliography of Natural History&quot;, (1979), 9, (3), 353–361.
*Lonsdale, Roger, &#x27;Dr Burney&#x27;s &#x27;Dictionary of Music&#x27; &#x27;,&quot;Musicology Australia&quot;, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 159–171, 1979 [An account of Burney&#x27;s Rees articles, with criticism of Scholes&#x27;s discussion of them.] 
*Kassler, Jamie Croy, &quot;The Science of Music in Britain: A Catalogue of writings, Lectures and Inventions&quot;, 2 vol, Garland, 1979 [Both Burney and Farey sr. appear often in the Index. Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopaedia&quot; and music is discussed at pp 1200–1204.]
*Jeremy, David J., &quot;Transatlantic Industrial Revolution&quot;, Blackwells, 1981. [Makes use of the textile machinery illustrations and other information]
*Stafleu, F. A., and Cowen, R. S., &quot;Taxonomic Literature&quot; 2ed (1983), vol 4, pp 631–635 [Detailed account of the bibliographic make-up of the volumes and plates. Includes the information that a William Fitt Drake contributed material about botany He does not appear in any of the sources that make up the list of contributors above.]
*Mabberley, D. J., &#x27; &quot;Anemia&quot;, or, the Prevention of Later Homonyms&#x27; &quot;Taxon&quot;, vol 32, No 1 (Feb 1983) pp 79–87. [Has at pp 80–81 an account of Sir J. E. Smith and the Supplementary portion of Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopaedia&quot;. Concerns botanical articles.]
*Grant, Kerry S., &quot;Dr Burney as Critic and Historian of Music&quot;. UMI Research Press, Ann Arbor, Michigan, 1983.[Throughout this book Grant made reference to, and some times quoted from, Burney&#x27;s articles in Rees.]
*F. A. S., [F. A. Stafleu], &quot;The Rees Cyclopaedia: The Cyclopaedia or, Universal Dictionary of Arts, Sciences and Literature&quot;, London, Longman, Hurst, Rees, 1802–1820 by A. Rees, &quot;Taxon&quot; Vol 35, No 2 (May, 1986) pp 452–453. [A review of the IDG microfilm publication of Rees. Makes the point the work had not been adequately studied from the standpoint of the history of science.] 
*Klima, Slava, Bowers, Garry, and Grant, Kerry S., &quot;Memoirs of Dr Charles Burney, 1726–1769&quot;, University of Nebraska Press. Lincoln and London, 1988.[Throughout this book the authors made reference to, and frequently quoted from, Burney&#x27;s articles in Rees.]
*Kafker, Frank A., &quot;Notable Encyclopedists of the Eighteenth Century: Successors of the Encyclopedie&quot;, Publisher: The Voltaire Foundation, 1994. [Contains some material about the American edition]
*Woolrich, A. P., &quot;John Farey, Jr., technical author and draughtsman: his contribution to Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;&quot;. &quot;Industrial Archaeology Review&quot;, 20, (1998), 49–68 AIA Abstracts 1998
*Coad, Jonathan&quot;The Portsmouth Block Mills: Bentham, Brunel and the start of the Royal Navy&#x27;s Industrial Revolution&quot;, English Heritage, 2005 [Material from Rees&#x27;s Cyclopaedia was used to inform Chapter 6 &#x27;The Beginnings of Mass Production&#x27;. See Portsmouth Block Mills ]
*Jeremy, David J. and Darnell, Polly C., &quot;Visual Mechanic Knowledge: The workshop drawings of Isaac Ebeneezer Markham (1795–1825), New England Textile Mechanic&quot;, Pub. Memoirs of the American Philosophical Society, Vol 263, 2010, pp 335–344 [An extensive account of the textiles material in the two versions of the &quot;Cyclopædia&quot;].
* Macmillan, David M, &#x27;Abraham Rees, The &quot;Cyclopædia&quot; &#x27;, 2015. [This is an important online resource discussing the quality of the digitised versions of the plates in the &quot;Cyclopaedia&quot;. It investigates the 50-odd plates illustrating the Horological articles, and is an ongoing project, so subject to revision.]
* Woolrich, A. P., &quot;Dr Burney and Rees&#x27;s Cyclopaedia&quot;, &quot;Burney Letter&quot;, vol 23 no 1 Spring, 2017, pp 1, 2, 10-11 [This discusses Charles Burney&#x27;s contribution to the &quot;Cyclopaedia&quot; on music. The &quot;Burney Letter&quot; is published by the Burney Society. ISSN 1703-9835.]
* Woolrich, A. P., &quot; Consolidated edition of the Music Biographies from Rees&#x27;s Cyclopaedia&quot;, (1802-1819), &quot;Burney Letter&quot;, vol 23 no 2 Fall, 2017, pp 6–7. [This is an edited version of the fuller introduction to the biographies.]
* Woolrich, A. P., &quot;The General music articles in Rees&#x27;s Cyclopaedia by Dr Charles Burney, John Farey, Sr. &amp; John Farey, Jr.&quot;, &quot;Burney Letter&quot;, Vol 25 No 2, Spring. 2019. pp 1, 6-7, 12.

==External links==
*93 digitised articles on all aspects of textiles from the British edition can be found on the On-Line Digital Archive of Documents on Weaving Related Topics at Arizona State University. http://www.cs.arizona.edu/patterns/weaving/articles795.html
*The text and plates of the music articles can be found on the web page of the Burney Centre, McGill University. The music articles and biographies are by Charles Burney, the music theory articles are by John Farey Sr., and the technical articles describing the construction of musical instruments are by John Farey Jr. https://www.mcgill.ca/burneycentre/resources/online-texts#Charles%20Burney%20(1726-1814)

===Digitised copies===
====British====
 + via Hathi Trust
*Vol 1 (A – Amarathides)
*Vol 2 (Amarantus – Arteriotomy)
*Vol 3 (Artery – Battersea)
*Vol 4 (Battery – Bookbinding)
*Vol 5 (Book-keeping – Calvart)
*Vol 6 (Calvary – Castra)
*Vol 7 (Castramentation – Chronology)
*Vol 8 (Chronometer – Colliseum)
*Vol 9 (Collision – Corne)
*Vol 10 (Cornea – Czyrcassy)
*Vol 11 (D – Dissimilitude)
*Vol 12 (Dissimulation – Eloane)
*Vol 13 (Elocution – Extremities)
*Vol 14 (Extrinsic – Food)
*Vol 15 (Food – Generation)

*Vol 16 (Generation – Gretna Green)
*Vol 17 (Gretry – Hibe)
*Vol 18 (Hibiscus – Increment)
*Vol 19 (Increments – Kilmes)
*Vol 20 (Kiln – Light)
*Vol 21 (Light-house – Machinery)
*Vol 22 (Machinery – Mattheson)
*Vol 23 (Matthew – Monsoon)
*Vol 24 (Monster – Newton-in-the-Willows)
*Vol 25 (Newtonian Philosophy – Ozunusze)
*Vol 26 (P – Perturbation)
*Vol 27 (Pertussis – Poetics)
*Vol 28 (Poetry – Punjoor)
*Vol 29 (Punishment – Repton)
*Vol 30 (Republic – Rzemien)

*Vol 31 (S – Scotium)
*Vol 32 (Scotland – Sindy)
*Vol 33 (Sines – Starboard)
*Vol 34 (Starch – Szydlow)
*Vol 35 (T – Toleration)
*Vol 36 (Tolerium – Vermelho)
*Vol 37 (Vermes – Waterloo)
*Vol 38 (Water – Wzetin)
*Vol 39 (X – Zytomiers with Addenda)
*Plates Vol 1 (Agriculture – Astronomy)
*Plates Vol 2 (Basso-Relievo – Horology)
*Plates Vol 3 (Hydraulics – Naval architecture) 
*Plates Vol 4 (Navigation – Writing by cipher)
*Plates Vol 5 (Natural History)
*Plates Vol 6 (Atlas)
The digitised version of the Atlas is linked from the HathiTrust because the Internet Archive lacks the volume.

====American====
. Published 1806–1820

*Vol 1) (A – Alzum)
*Vol 2) (Am – Arkwright)
*Vol 3) (Arl, Gross – Barnera)
*Vol 4) (Barnes – Blast)
*Vol 5) (Blast – Bunius)
*Vol 6) (Bunkers Hill – Captain&#x27;s clerk)
*Vol 7) (Captainry – Chan-Cban)
*Vol 8) (Chance – Classification)
*Vol 9) (Classification – Condemnation)
*Vol 10) (Condensation – Cranmer)
*Vol 11) (Crannichfeld – Degree)
*Vol 12) (Degree – Duck Island)
*Vol 13) (Duck – Epitetus)
*Vol 14) (Epucurians – Fence)
*Vol 15) (Fence – Frederick I)
*Vol 16) (Frederick III– Gibraleon)

*Vol 17) (Gibraltar – Gypsophela)
*Vol 18) (Gypsum – Hookah)
*Vol 19) (Hooke – Inse)
*Vol 20) (Insects – Kzikein)
*Vol 21) (L – Lindey) 
*Vol 22) (Line – Magic pictures)
*Vol 23) (Magician – Mboteley)
*Vol 24) (Meaco – Monsoons)
*Vol 25) (Monster – New Thames)
*Vol 26) (Newton, Sir Isaac – Ox-Feet)
*Vol 27) (Oxford – Periplysis)
*Vol 28) (Peripneunomy – Plasher)
*Vol 29) (Plashing – Prosopolpsia)
*Vol 30) (Prosopoeia – Refrangible)
*Vol 31) (Refrangibility – Ros Sur Couesnon)
*Vol 32) (Rosa – Satureia)

*Vol 33) (Saturn – Sheapey)
*Vol 34) (Shepreve – Sparaxis)
*Vol 35) (Sparending – Stuart, James)
*Vol 36) (Stuart, Gilbert – Testaceous) 
*Vol 37) (Testament – Tropatena)
*Vol 38) (Trope – Vitetz)
*Vol 39) (Vitex – Water clock)
*Vol 40) (Water-colours – Yamanchalonskoi)
*Vol 41) (Yamasla – Ztomiers with Addenda &amp; Corregenda)] 
*Plates Vol 1) (Agriculture – Astronomy)
*Plates Vol 2) (Basso-Relievo – Horology)
*Plates Vol 3) (Hydraulics – Naval architecture)
*Plates Vol 4) (Navigation – Writing by cipher)
*Plates Vol 5) (Natural History)
*Plates Vol 6) (Atlas)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2916259" start="0" end="28" title="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia" label="Rees&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;Cyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842438" start="162" end="169" title="British people" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="170" end="183" title="encyclopaedia" label="encyclopaedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q922838" start="199" end="211" title="Abraham Rees" label="Abraham Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="227" end="239" title="Presbyterian" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147582" start="303" end="329" title="Chambers&amp;#x27;s Cyclopaedia" label="Chambers&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="439" end="456" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="508" end="523" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="528" end="539" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="576" end="582" title="British Empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q37068" start="650" end="661" title="Romanticism" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="680" end="704" title="evangelical Christianity" label="evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q207672" start="736" end="755" title="William Wilberforce" label="William Wilberforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="761" end="790" title="Industrial Revolution" label="factory manufacture burgeoned"/>
<link wikidata="Q79228" start="815" end="839" title="philosophical radicalism" label="philosophical radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="982" end="990" title="Tory" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524502" start="1011" end="1025" title="Jeremiah Joyce" label="Jeremiah Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634574" start="1030" end="1047" title="Charles Sylvester" label="Charles Sylvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378607" start="1188" end="1199" title="Englishness" label="Englishness"/>
<link wikidata="Q540885" start="1218" end="1229" title="anglicizing" label="anglicising"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411860" start="1260" end="1271" title="King Louis (disambiguation)" label="Kings Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9121" start="1349" end="1362" title="atom" label="atomic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632606" start="1364" end="1385" title="Succession (geology)" label="geological succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q156312" start="1391" end="1404" title="origin of the earth" label="earth origins"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="1406" end="1421" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="1423" end="1429" title="botany" label="botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="1431" end="1441" title="entomology" label="entomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44703" start="1443" end="1454" title="ornithology" label="ornithology"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="1459" end="1466" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7708483" start="1517" end="1537" title="Textile manufacture during the Industrial Revolution" label="textiles manufacture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="1707" end="1718" title="Agriculture" label="Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q162827" start="1918" end="1923" title="atlas" label="atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q309388" start="2283" end="2305" title="Natural History Museum, London" label="Natural History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="2408" end="2423" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2768" end="2786" title="Samuel F. Bradford" label="Samuel F. Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2792" end="2814" title=":fr:Samuel F. Bradford" label=":fr:Samuel F. Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2820" end="2832" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019943" start="2870" end="2876" title="William Bradford (American Revolutionary printer)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q259209" start="3061" end="3083" title="industrial archaeology" label="industrial archaeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230412" start="3144" end="3161" title="David and Charles" label="David and Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q830450" start="3296" end="3306" title="microfiche" label="microfiche"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="3506" end="3529" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375746" start="3595" end="3618" title="Encyclopædia Perthensis" label="Encyclopædia Perthensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338192" start="3729" end="3751" title="Edinburgh Encyclopædia" label="Edinburgh Encyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q168468" start="3786" end="3800" title="David Brewster" label="David Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969930" start="3809" end="3865" title="British Encyclopedia, or Dictionary of Arts and Sciences" label="British Encyclopedia, or Dictionary of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q695200" start="3894" end="3911" title="William Nicholson (chemist)" label="William Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7131881" start="3920" end="3930" title="Pantologia" label="Pantologia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247081" start="3960" end="3975" title="John Mason Good" label="John Mason Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710265" start="3977" end="3993" title="Olinthus Gregory" label="Olinthus Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3995" end="4010" title="Newton Bosworth" label="Newton Bosworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915400" start="4019" end="4045" title="Encyclopædia Metropolitana" label="Encyclopædia Metropolitana"/>
<link wikidata="Q82409" start="4096" end="4119" title="Samuel Taylor Coleridge" label="Samuel Taylor Coleridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264027" start="4127" end="4152" title="Encyclopaedia Londinensis" label="Encyclopaedia Londinensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6264027" start="4216" end="4227" title="John Wilkes (printer)" label="John Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q565005" start="4560" end="4573" title="antireligious" label="antireligious"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925719" start="4771" end="4785" title="British Critic" label="British Critic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756000" start="4868" end="4881" title="The Panoplist" label="The Panoplist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1686158" start="4940" end="4954" title="Jedediah Morse" label="Jedediah Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441261" start="4980" end="4996" title="Quarterly Review" label="Quarterly Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q867541" start="5240" end="5277" title="Encyclopædia Britannica, 11th edition" label="Encyclopædia Britannica, 11th edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="5856" end="5870" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167563" start="5906" end="5919" title="Percy Scholes" label="Percy Scholes"/>
<link wikidata="Q22654" start="6801" end="6810" title="New York (disambiguation)" label="York, New"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312455" start="6878" end="6900" title="June Zimmerman Fullmer" label="June Zimmerman Fullmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="6929" end="6950" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q131761" start="6968" end="6980" title="Humphry Davy" label="Humphry Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q652556" start="7090" end="7107" title="invisible college" label="invisible college"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7228" end="7266" title="American Foundation for the Humanities" label="American Foundation for the Humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758652" start="7597" end="7611" title="Andrew Strahan" label="Andrew Strahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931297" start="7617" end="7636" title="King&amp;#x27;s Printer" label="King&amp;#x27;s Printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q205299" start="8118" end="8128" title="Demy (paper size)" label="demy paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2122442" start="8143" end="8149" title="quarto" label="quarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q21493834" start="8674" end="8682" title="McKerrow" label="McKerrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q17451" start="8724" end="8735" title="typeface" label="Long Primer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="8919" end="8926" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213142" start="9200" end="9209" title="shillings" label="shillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507067" start="9594" end="9607" title="Calfskin" label="bound in calf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160457" start="9916" end="9934" title="conger (syndicate)" label="conger (syndicate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q911673" start="9960" end="9999" title="Longman" label="Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, &amp;amp; Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698324" start="10001" end="10016" title="Paternoster Row" label="Paternoster Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338886" start="10018" end="10040" title="Rivington" label="F. C. and J. Rivington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549024" start="10059" end="10063" title="SPCK" label="SPCK"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="10372" end="10377" title="The Blitz" label="Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="10767" end="10775" title="Serial (literature)" label="fascicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922143" start="10894" end="10913" title="scientific priority" label="scientific priority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973202" start="10948" end="10970" title="Philosophical Magazine" label="Philosophical Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q817450" start="11147" end="11170" title="Benjamin Daydon Jackson" label="Benjamin Daydon Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294875" start="11552" end="11569" title="Journal of Botany, British and Foreign" label="Journal of Botany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228599" start="11902" end="11911" title="gathering (bookbinding)" label="gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q177449" start="12144" end="12150" title="Colon (punctuation)" label="colons"/>
<link wikidata="Q214816" start="13809" end="13821" title="Pierre Bayle" label="Pierre Bayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210365" start="13829" end="13864" title="Dictionnaire Historique et Critique" label="Dictionnaire Historique et Critique"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016330" start="13891" end="13904" title="William Oldys" label="William Oldys"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914866" start="13912" end="13933" title="Biographia Britannica" label="Biographia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712004" start="13972" end="13982" title="John Aikin" label="John Aikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q556043" start="14211" end="14223" title="Thomas Birch" label="Thomas Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531829" start="14231" end="14265" title="General Dictionary, Historical and Critical" label="General Dictionary...[of biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q123225" start="14418" end="14437" title="Albrecht von Haller" label="Albrecht von Haller"/>
<link wikidata="Q856421" start="14445" end="14465" title="Bibliotheca Botanica" label="Bibliotheca Botanica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14534" end="14556" title="Bibliotheca Chirurgica" label="Bibliotheca Chirurgica"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841501" start="14625" end="14646" title="Bibliotheca Anatomica" label="Bibliotheca Anatomica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14721" end="14752" title="Bibliotheca Medicinae Practicae" label="Bibliotheca Medicinae Practicae"/>
<link wikidata="Q932694" start="14786" end="14820" title="Jean-Benjamin François de la Borde" label="Jean-Benjamin François de la Borde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871889" start="14897" end="14909" title="Louis Moréri" label="Louis Moréri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385501" start="14917" end="15008" title="Le Grand Dictionnaire historique" label="Le grand Dictionaire historique, ou le mélange curieux de l&amp;#x27;histoire sacrée et profane"/>
<link wikidata="Q913162" start="15314" end="15340" title="Philosophical Transactions" label="Philosophical Transactions"/>
<link wikidata="Q123885" start="15354" end="15367" title="Royal Society" label="Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="15591" end="15596" title="Canal" label="Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q355803" start="15607" end="15622" title="John Farey, Sr." label="John Farey, Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6243939" start="15653" end="15666" title="John Landseer" label="John Landseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="15951" end="15960" title="Classical antiquity" label="Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888802" start="15988" end="16009" title="Benjamin Heath Malkin" label="Benjamin Heath Malkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793450" start="16015" end="16026" title="Thomas Rees (Unitarian minister)" label="Thomas Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569001" start="16186" end="16199" title="William Tooke" label="William Tooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="16217" end="16236" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="16468" end="16482" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q355803" start="16524" end="16538" title="John Farey, sr" label="John Farey, sr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6232718" start="16556" end="16570" title="John Farey, Jr" label="John Farey, Jr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="18047" end="18061" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="Nonconformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573631" start="18286" end="18308" title="Royal Military Academy, Woolwich" label="Royal Military Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q142575" start="18318" end="18346" title="Addiscombe Military Seminary" label="Addiscombe Military Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="18354" end="18372" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6487512" start="18652" end="18666" title="Lant Carpenter" label="Lant Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398771" start="18722" end="18738" title="Tiberius Cavallo" label="Tiberius Cavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q366066" start="18781" end="18793" title="John Flaxman" label="John Flaxman"/>
<link wikidata="Q440061" start="18820" end="18831" title="Luke Howard" label="Luke Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243939" start="18860" end="18873" title="John Landseer" label="John Landseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9374851" start="18904" end="18920" title="Sir William Lawrence, 1st Baronet" label="William Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q458004" start="18972" end="18990" title="James Edward Smith (botanist)" label="James Edward Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237855" start="19014" end="19026" title="David Mushet" label="David Mushet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016722" start="19061" end="19076" title="William Pearson (astronomer)" label="William Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q422726" start="19107" end="19122" title="Thomas Phillips" label="Thomas Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q301678" start="19195" end="19211" title="Aaron Arrowsmith" label="Aaron Arrowsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q41513" start="19247" end="19260" title="William Blake" label="William Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792485" start="19339" end="19352" title="Thomas Milton" label="Thomas Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023126" start="19414" end="19426" title="Wilson Lowry" label="Wilson Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613524" start="19922" end="19968" title="List of contributors to Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia" label="List of contributors to Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210343" start="20048" end="20080" title="Dictionary of National Biography" label="Dictionary of National Biography"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969566" start="20123" end="20149" title="British Biographical Index" label="British Biographical Index"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20299" end="20317" title="Samuel F. Bradford" label="Samuel F. Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="20322" end="20334" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20340" end="20362" title=":fr:Samuel F. Bradford" label=":fr:Samuel F. Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019943" start="20401" end="20407" title="William Bradford (American Revolutionary printer)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20714" end="20748" title="Murray, Draper Fairman and Company" label="Murray, Draper Fairman and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569025" start="20981" end="20994" title="William White (Bishop of Pennsylvania)" label="William White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4804609" start="21017" end="21029" title="Ashbel Green" label="Ashbel Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q15716432" start="25102" end="25117" title="Textile History" label="Textile History"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399543" start="28415" end="28437" title="Portsmouth Block Mills" label="Portsmouth Block Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q547002" start="30335" end="30349" title="Charles Burney" label="Charles Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q355803" start="30384" end="30398" title="John Farey Sr." label="John Farey Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6232718" start="30485" end="30499" title="John Farey Jr." label="John Farey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q3128305" start="32101" end="32111" title="HathiTrust" label="HathiTrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="32124" end="32140" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019726" wikidata="Q27778" url="?curid=1019726" title="Political anthropology">
<text>Political anthropology is the comparative study of politics in a broad range of historical, social, and cultural settings.

==History of political anthropology==
===Origins===
Political anthropology has its roots in the 19th century. At that time, thinkers such as Lewis H. Morgan and Sir Henry Maine tried to trace the evolution of human society from &#x27;primitive&#x27; or &#x27;savage&#x27; societies to more &#x27;advanced&#x27; ones. These early approaches were ethnocentric, speculative, and often racist. Nevertheless, they laid the basis for political anthropology by undertaking a modern study inspired by modern science, especially the approaches espoused by Charles Darwin. In a move that would be influential for future anthropology, this early work focused on kinship as the key to understanding political organization, and emphasized the role of the &#x27;gens&#x27; or lineage as an object of study. 

Among the principal architects of modern social science are French sociologist Emile Durkheim, German sociologist, jurist, and political economist Max Weber, and German political philosopher, journalist, and economist Karl Marx.

Political anthropology&#x27;s contemporary literature can be traced to the 1940 publication &quot;African Political Systems&quot;, edited by Meyer Fortes and E. E. Evans-Pritchard. They rejected the speculative historical reconstruction of earlier authors and argued that &quot;a scientific study of political institutions must be inductive and comparative and aim solely at establishing and explaining the uniformities found among them and their interdependencies with other features of social organization&quot;. Their goal was taxonomy: to classify societies into a small number of discrete categories, and then compare them in order to make generalizations about them. The contributors of this book were influenced by Radcliffe-Brown and structural functionalism. As a result, they assumed that all societies were well-defined entities which sought to maintain their equilibrium and social order. Although the authors recognized that &quot;Most of these societies have been conquered or have submitted to European rule from fear of invasion. They would not acquiesce in it if the threat of force were withdrawn; and this fact determines the part now played in their political life by European administration&quot; the authors in the volume tended in practice to examine African political systems in terms of their own internal structures, and ignored the broader historical and political context of colonialism.

Several authors reacted to this early work. In his work &quot;Political Systems of Highland Burma&quot; (1954) Edmund Leach argued that it was necessary to understand how societies changed through time rather than remaining static and in equilibrium. A special version of conflict oriented political anthropology was developed in the so-called &#x27;Manchester school&#x27;, started by Max Gluckman. Gluckman focused on social process and an analysis of structures and systems based on their relative stability. In his view, conflict maintained the stability of political systems through the establishment and re-establishment of crosscutting ties among social actors. Gluckman even suggested that a certain degree of conflict was necessary to uphold society, and that conflict was constitutive of social and political order.

By the 1960s this transition work developed into a full-fledged subdiscipline which was canonized in volumes such as &quot;Political Anthropology&quot; (1966) edited by Victor Turner and Marc Swartz. By the late 1960s, political anthropology was a flourishing subfield: in 1969 there were two hundred anthropologists listing the subdiscipline as one of their areas of interests, and a quarter of all British anthropologists listed politics as a topic that they studied.

Political anthropology developed in a very different way in the United States. There, authors such as Morton Fried, Elman Service, and Eleanor Leacock took a Marxist approach and sought to understand the origins and development of inequality in human society. Marx and Engels had drawn on the ethnographic work of Morgan, and these authors now extended that tradition. In particular, they were interested in the evolution of social systems over time.

From the 1960s a &#x27;process approach&#x27; developed, stressing the role of agents (Bailey 1969; Barth 1969). It was a meaningful development as anthropologists started to work in situations where the colonial system was dismantling. The focus on conflict and social reproduction was carried over into Marxist approaches that came to dominate French political anthropology from the 1960s. Pierre Bourdieu&#x27;s work on the Kabyle (1977) was strongly inspired by this development, and his early work was a marriage between French post-structuralism, Marxism and process approach.

Interest in anthropology grew in the 1970s. A session on anthropology was organized at the Ninth International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences in 1973, the proceedings of which were eventually published in 1979 as &quot;Political Anthropology: The State of the Art&quot;. A newsletter was created shortly thereafter, which developed over time into the journal &quot;PoLAR: Political and Legal Anthropology Review&quot;.

===Anthropology concerned with states and their institutions===
While for a whole century (1860 to 1960 roughly) political anthropology developed as a discipline concerned primarily with politics in stateless societies, a new development started from the 1960s, and is still unfolding: anthropologists started increasingly to study more &quot;complex&quot; social settings in which the presence of states, bureaucracies and markets entered both ethnographic accounts and analysis of local phenomena. This was not the result of a sudden development or any sudden &quot;discovery&quot; of contextuality. From the 1950s anthropologists who studied peasant societies in Latin America and Asia, had increasingly started to incorporate their local setting (the village) into its larger context, as in Redfield&#x27;s famous distinction between &#x27;small&#x27; and &#x27;big&#x27; traditions (Redfield 1941). The 1970s also witnessed the emergence of Europe as a category of anthropological investigation. Boissevain&#x27;s essay, &quot;towards an anthropology of Europe&quot; (Boissevain and Friedl 1975) was perhaps the first systematic attempt to launch a comparative study of cultural forms in Europe; an anthropology not only carried out in Europe, but an anthropology of Europe.

The turn toward the study of complex society made anthropology inherently more political. First, it was no longer possible to carry out fieldwork in say, Spain, Algeria or India without taking into account the way in which all aspects of local society were tied to state and market. It is true that early ethnographies in Europe had sometimes done just that: carried out fieldwork in villages of Southern Europe, as if they were isolated units or &#x27;islands&#x27;. However, from the 1970s that tendency was openly criticised, and Jeremy Boissevain (Boissevain and Friedl 1975) said it most clearly: anthropologists had &quot;tribalised Europe&quot; and if they wanted to produce relevant ethnography they could no longer afford to do so. Contrary to what is often heard from colleagues in the political and social sciences, anthropologists have for nearly half a century been very careful to link their ethnographic focus to wider social, economic and political structures. This does not mean to abandon an ethnographic focus on very local phenomena, the care for detail.

In a more direct way, the turn towards complex society also signified that political themes increasingly were taken up as the main focus of study, and at two main levels. First of all, anthropologists continued to study political organization and political phenomena that lay outside the state-regulated sphere (as in patron-client relations or tribal political organization). Second of all, anthropologists slowly started to develop a disciplinary concern with states and their institutions (and on the relationship between formal and informal political institutions). An anthropology of the state developed, and it is a most thriving field today. Geertz&#x27;s comparative work on the Balinese state is an early, famous example. There is today a rich canon of anthropological studies of the state (see for example Abeles 1990). Hastings Donnan, Thomas Wilson and others started in the early 1990s a productive subfield, an &quot;anthropology of borders&quot;, which addresses the ways in which state borders affect local populations, and how people from border areas shape and direct state discourse and state formation (see for example Alvarez, 1996; Thomassen, 1996; Vereni, 1996; Donnan and Wilson, 1994; 1999; 2003).

From the 1980s a heavy focus on ethnicity and nationalism developed. &#x27;Identity&#x27; and &#x27;identity politics&#x27; soon became defining themes of the discipline, partially replacing earlier focus on kinship and social organization. This made anthropology even more obviously political. Nationalism is to some extent simply state-produced culture, and to be studied as such. And ethnicity is to some extent simply the political organization of cultural difference (Barth 1969). Benedict Anderson&#x27;s book &quot;Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism&quot; discusses why nationalism came into being. He sees the invention of the printing press as the main spark, enabling shared national emotions, characteristics, events and history to be imagined through common readership of newspapers.

The interest in cultural/political identity construction also went beyond the nation-state dimension. By now, several ethnographies have been carried out in the international organizations (like the EU) studying the &quot;fonctionnaires&quot; as a cultural group with special codes of conduct, dressing, interaction etc. (Abélès, 1992; Wright, 1994; Bellier, 1995; Zabusky, 1995; MacDonald, 1996; Rhodes, &#x27;t Hart, and Noordegraaf, 2007). Increasingly, anthropological fieldwork is today carried out inside bureaucratic structures or in companies. And bureaucracy can in fact only be studied by living in it – it is far from the rational system we and the practitioners like to think, as Weber himself had indeed pointed out long ago (Herzfeld 1992).

The concern with political institutions has also fostered a focus on institutionally driven political agency. There is now an anthropology of policy making (Shore and Wright 1997). This focus has been most evident in Development anthropology or the anthropology of development, which over the last decades has established as one of the discipline&#x27;s largest subfields. Political actors like states, governmental institutions, NGOs, International Organizations or business corporations are here the primary subjects of analysis. In their ethnographic work anthropologists have cast a critical eye on discourses and practices produced by institutional agents of development in their encounter with &#x27;local culture&#x27; (see for example Ferguson 1994). Development anthropology is tied to global political economy and economic anthropology as it concerns the management and redistribution of both ideational and real resources (see for example Hart 1982). In this vein, Escobar (1995) famously argued that international development largely helped to reproduce the former colonial power structures.

Many other themes have over the last two decades been opened up which, taken together, are making anthropology increasingly political: post-colonialism, post-communism, gender, multiculturalism, migration, citizenship, not to forget the umbrella term of globalization. It thus makes sense to say that while anthropology was always to some extent about politics, this is even more evidently the case today.

==Notable political anthropologists==
Some notable political anthropologists include:

* Marc Abélès
* F. G. Bailey
* Georges Balandier
* Jeremy Boissevain
* John Borneman 
* Robert L. Carneiro
* Pierre Clastres
* E. E. Evans-Pritchard
* Meyer Fortes
* David Graeber
* Dolly Kikon
* Ted C. Lewellen
* Carolyn Nordstrom
* James C. Scott
*Audra Simpson
* Joan Vincent
==See also==
*Political sociology
*Legal anthropology

==Notes==
==References==
*Journal of International Political Anthropology
*Abélès, Marc (1990) Anthropologie de l&#x27;État, Paris: Armand Colin.
*Abélès, Marc (1992) La vie quotidienne au Parlement européen, Paris: Hachette.
*Abélès, Marc (2010) &quot;State&quot; in Alan Barnard and Jonathan Spencer (eds.), The Routledge Encyclopedia of Social and Cultural Anthropology, 2nd. ed., London and New York: Routledge, pp. 666–670. 
*Alvarez, Robert R. (1995) &quot;The Mexican-US Border: The Making of an Anthropology of Borderlands&quot;, Annual Review of Anthropology, 24: 447–70.
*Bailey, Frederick G. (1969) Strategems and Spoils: A Social Anthropology of Politics, New York: Schocken Books, Inc.
*Barth, Fredrik (1959) Political Leadership among the Swat Pathans, London: Athlone Press.
*Bellier, Irene (1995). &quot;Moralité, langues et pouvoirs dans les institutions européennes&quot;, Social Anthropology, 3 (3): 235–250.
*Boissevain, Jeremy and John Friedl (1975) Beyond the Community: Social Process in Europe, The Hague: University of Amsterdam.
*Bourdieu, Pierre. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Brachet, Julien and Scheele, Judith. (2019) The Value of Disorder : Autonomy, Prosperity, and Plunder in the Chadian Sahara, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Donnan, Hastings and Thomas M. Wilson (eds.) (1994) Border Approaches: Anthropological Perspectives on Frontiers, Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
*Donnan, Hasting and Thomas M. Wilson (1999) Borders: Frontiers of Identity, Nation and State, Oxford: Berg.
*Donnan, Hasting and Thomas M. Wilson (eds.) (2003) &quot;European States at Their Borderlands&quot;, Focaal: European Journal of Anthropology, Special Issue, 41 (3).
*Escobar, Arturo (1995) Encountering Development, the making and unmaking of the Third World, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
*Ferguson, James (1994) The Antipolitics Machine: &quot;Development&quot;. Depoliticization and Bureaucratic Power in Lesotho, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
*Fortes, Meyer and E. E. Evans-Pritchard (eds.) (1940) African Political Systems, Oxford: The Clarendon Press.
*Hart, Keith (1982) The Political Economy of West African Agriculture, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Herzfeld, Michael (1992). The Social Production of Indifference. Exploring the Symbolic Roots of Western Bureaucracy, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
*Horvath, A. &amp; B. Thomassen (2008) &#x27;Mimetic errors in liminal schismogenesis: on the political anthropology of the trickster&#x27;, International Political Anthropology 1, 1: 3 – 24.
*Leach, Edmund (1954) Political Systems of Highland Burma. A Study of Kachin Social Structure, London, LSE and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
*McDonald, Maryon (1996). &quot;Unity and Diversity: Some tensions in the construction of Europe&quot;, in: Social Anthropology 4-1: 47–60.
*Redfield, Robert (1941) The Folk Culture of Yucutan, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
*Rhodes, Rod, A.W Paul &#x27;t Hart and Mirko Noordegraaf (eds.) (2002) Observing Government Elites, Basingstoke: Palgrave.
*Sharma, Aradhana and Akhil Gupta (eds.) (2006) The Anthropology of the State: A Reader, Malden, MA; Oxford: Blackwell. 
*Shore, Chris and Susan Wright (eds.) (1997) Anthropology of Policy: Critical Perspectives on Governance and Power, London, Routledge.
*Spencer, Jonathan (2007) Anthropology, Politics, and the State. Democracy and Violence in South Asia, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
*Thomassen, Bjørn (1996) &quot;Border Studies in Europe: Symbolic and Political Boundaries, Anthropological Perspectives&quot;, Europaea. Journal of the Europeanists, 2 (1): 37–48.
*Vereni, Pietro (1996) &quot;Boundaries, Frontiers, Persons, Individuals: Questioning &#x27;Identity&#x27; at National Borders&quot;, Europaea, 2 (1): 77–89.
*Wright, Susan (ed.) (1994) The Anthropology of Organizations, London: Routledge.
*Zabusky, Stacia E. (1995) Launching Europe. An Ethnography of European Cooperation in Space Science, Princeton: Princeton University Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q27778" start="0" end="22" title="Political anthropology" label="Political anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q313458" start="265" end="280" title="Lewis H. Morgan" label="Lewis H. Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195523" start="285" end="300" title="Sir Henry Maine" label="Sir Henry Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035" start="671" end="685" title="Charles Darwin" label="Charles Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171318" start="775" end="782" title="kinship" label="kinship"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="960" end="974" title="social science" label="social science"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948" start="998" end="1012" title="Émile Durkheim" label="Emile Durkheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9387" start="1066" end="1075" title="Max Weber" label="Max Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="1137" end="1146" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q384274" start="1247" end="1272" title="African Political Systems" label="African Political Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q346927" start="1290" end="1302" title="Meyer Fortes" label="Meyer Fortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150379" start="1307" end="1328" title="E. E. Evans-Pritchard" label="E. E. Evans-Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="1679" end="1687" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q135576" start="1871" end="1886" title="Radcliffe-Brown" label="Radcliffe-Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q831725" start="1891" end="1915" title="structural functionalism" label="structural functionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q550729" start="2677" end="2689" title="Edmund Leach" label="Edmund Leach"/>
<link wikidata="Q921883" start="2916" end="2933" title="Manchester school (anthropology)" label="Manchester school"/>
<link wikidata="Q924714" start="2952" end="2964" title="Max Gluckman" label="Max Gluckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q357480" start="3562" end="3575" title="Victor Turner" label="Victor Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755905" start="3580" end="3591" title="Marc Swartz" label="Marc Swartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948736" start="3966" end="3978" title="Morton Fried" label="Morton Fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332722" start="3980" end="3993" title="Elman Service" label="Elman Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354318" start="3999" end="4014" title="Eleanor Leacock" label="Eleanor Leacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q156268" start="4708" end="4723" title="Pierre Bourdieu" label="Pierre Bourdieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210356" start="7920" end="7942" title="political organization" label="political organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345628" start="10733" end="10757" title="Development anthropology" label="Development anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4773911" start="10765" end="10792" title="anthropology of development" label="anthropology of development"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210200" start="11318" end="11335" title="Political Economy in anthropology" label="political economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q27841" start="11340" end="11361" title="economic anthropology" label="economic anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q265425" start="11756" end="11772" title="post-colonialism" label="post-colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423894" start="12131" end="12143" title="F. G. Bailey" label="F. G. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q657995" start="12146" end="12163" title="Georges Balandier" label="Georges Balandier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6181131" start="12166" end="12183" title="Jeremy Boissevain" label="Jeremy Boissevain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157960" start="12203" end="12221" title="Robert L. Carneiro" label="Robert L. Carneiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q463151" start="12224" end="12239" title="Pierre Clastres" label="Pierre Clastres"/>
<link wikidata="Q150379" start="12242" end="12263" title="E. E. Evans-Pritchard" label="E. E. Evans-Pritchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q346927" start="12266" end="12278" title="Meyer Fortes" label="Meyer Fortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174579" start="12281" end="12294" title="David Graeber" label="David Graeber"/>
<link wikidata="Q84056363" start="12297" end="12308" title="Dolly Kikon" label="Dolly Kikon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693047" start="12311" end="12326" title="Ted C. Lewellen" label="Ted C. Lewellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025403" start="12349" end="12363" title="James C. Scott" label="James C. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q112536616" start="12365" end="12378" title="Audra Simpson" label="Audra Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q745692" start="12408" end="12427" title="Political sociology" label="Political sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195662" start="12429" end="12447" title="Legal anthropology" label="Legal anthropology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019727" wikidata="Q1984330" url="?curid=1019727" title="BMT West End Line">
<text>The BMT West End Line is a line of the New York City Subway, serving the Brooklyn communities of Sunset Park, Borough Park, New Utrecht, Bensonhurst, Bath Beach and Coney Island. The D train operates local on the entire line at all times. Although there is a center express track and three express stations along the line, there is no regular express service.

The elevated line, originally mapped as the New Utrecht Avenue Line (though the common name prevailed after construction), replaced the surface West End Line.

== Extent and service ==
The following services use part or all of the BMT West End Line:

The line begins as a branch of the BMT Fourth Avenue Line south of the 36th Street station, and it extends through a cut described as the 38th Street cut to Ninth Avenue. Then it becomes an elevated structure over New Utrecht Avenue, before subsequently turning through private property near 79th Street into 86th Street. The line then continues over 86th Street to Stillwell Avenue and to the line&#x27;s terminal at Coney Island.

==History==
The line was originally a surface excursion railway to Coney Island, called the Brooklyn, Bath and Coney Island Railroad, which was established in 1862, but did not reach Coney Island until 1864. Under the Dual Contracts of 1913, an elevated line was built over New Utrecht Avenue, 86th Street and Stillwell Avenue.

From 39th Street to Coney Island, the old route was abandoned as a rapid transit line, and it was turned into a surface car line. Surface car operation began on the line once the new elevated service started.

The first portion of the line, between the 36th Street station on Fourth Avenue and 62nd Street station, opened on June 24, 1916, with two tracks. On the same date, the line opened three more stations to 18th Avenue, but with only one track in service. The second track between 62nd Street and 18th Avenue opened on July 8, 1916. The line was then extended to 25th Avenue on July 29, 1916. The line opened to and fully opening to Coney Island on July 21, 1917. The original surface right-of-way was retained for use by trolley cars to provide local service and protect the company&#x27;s franchise.

As part of an 18-month capital budget that took effect on January 1, 1963, the wooden platforms at the stations on the West End Line were replaced with concrete platforms.

On November 13, 1985, the New York City Transit Authority announced that an almost four-year-long renovation of the line would begin in spring 1986. As part of the project, tracks and girders would be repaired, and stations would be rehabilitated. To enable sections of the local tracks to be taken out of service for long periods of time for the work, trains would operate on the center express track and stop at local stations through the use of temporary platforms that would be constructed atop the local track.

===Service history===
The West End Line has had an express (on the BMT Fourth Avenue Line) service – labeled 3 in 1924 – since it opened in 1916, passing over the Manhattan Bridge and onto the BMT Broadway Line express tracks. In the late 1950s, midday trains were switched to the local Fourth Avenue tracks and through the Montague Street Tunnel, and late night and Sunday service became a shuttle between Coney Island and 36th Street. The express and local services were assigned the designations and in the early 1960s. With the opening of the Chrystie Street Connection in late 1967, the train from Manhattan was extended to Coney Island, absorbing the T and TT (both ran express on Fourth Avenue). The TT late night and Sunday shuttle survived until 1968, when the B became full-time. It ran local on Fourth Avenue during late night hours, but express at all other times. Late night operation was cut back to a shuttle to 36th Street in 1976.

In 2001, when reconstruction of the Manhattan Bridge north tracks resumed, the B service in Brooklyn was replaced by the new train, which ran as a shuttle not only to 36th Street during nighttime hours, but also to Atlantic Avenue–Pacific Street on weekends. In 2002, reconstruction of Coney Island–Stillwell Avenue resulted in the West End Line being the only line to serve the terminal and the W was extended full-time into Manhattan, using the local Fourth Avenue tracks and Montague Street Tunnel on weekends and late nights hours.

In 2004, the Manhattan Bridge reconstruction project was completed, and the W was replaced with an extended train, running over the bridge at all hours and express on Fourth Avenue except late nights. D service was moved to the West End Line instead of returning to the Brighton Line, where it ran on from 1967 to 2001, because West End Line residents from Chinatowns in Brooklyn wanted full-time access to Grand Street, on the Sixth Avenue Line in Manhattan&#x27;s Chinatown. This also eliminated the need to run late-night and/or weekend shuttles on either the Concourse Line or the West End Line.

The other service pattern was the &quot;West End Short Line&quot;, a rush-hour local (on Fourth Avenue) service between the BMT Nassau Street Line in Lower Manhattan and 62nd Street or Bay Parkway. It became part of the TT in the early 1960s and was discontinued in 1967. In 1987, the short line service was essentially recreated when the rush-hour extension to Brooklyn was moved from the BMT Brighton Line to the West End Line terminating at Bay Parkway. It terminated at Ninth Avenue during midday hours until 1995, when it was cut back to Chambers Street. It was extended again from 2001–2004 while the Manhattan Bridge was closed for reconstruction. In 2010, as part of a series of MTA budget cuts, rush-hour M service was discontinued.

On July 19, 2019, a project to install elevators at the 62nd Street/New Utrecht Avenue station was completed. Starting on September 18, 2021, and continuing until January 3, 2022, southbound D trains terminated at Bay 50th Street so work could be completed to protect Coney Island Yard from flooding.

==Station listing==

==In popular culture==
Over the years, the West End line has been featured in movies and television shows. 
*The famous chase scene from &quot;The French Connection&quot; (1971) was filmed under the West End Line.
*The opening scene of &quot;Saturday Night Fever&quot; (1977) features Tony Manero (John Travolta) walking down 86th Street, with the West End elevated line above.
*The opening credits of the television show &quot;Welcome Back, Kotter&quot; (1975) also featured the West End Line.

==See also==
*Transportation to Coney Island

==References==
==External links==
*Railroad History Database
*Gunther and His Railroad by Morton Morris
*BMT West End Line on NYCSubway.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1984330" start="4" end="21" title="BMT West End Line" label="BMT West End Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="39" end="59" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="73" end="81" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2270906" start="97" end="108" title="Sunset Park, Brooklyn" label="Sunset Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911280" start="110" end="122" title="Borough Park, Brooklyn" label="Borough Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536676" start="124" end="135" title="New Utrecht" label="New Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q818193" start="137" end="148" title="Bensonhurst" label="Bensonhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868889" start="150" end="160" title="Bath Beach, Brooklyn" label="Bath Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="165" end="177" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q126396" start="183" end="184" title="D (New York City Subway service)" label="D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984330" start="405" end="428" title="BMT West End Line" label="New Utrecht Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985095" start="505" end="518" title="West End Line (Brooklyn surface)" label="West End Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="1112" end="1124" title="Coney Island" label="Coney Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985095" start="1137" end="1177" title="Brooklyn, Bath and Coney Island Railroad" label="Brooklyn, Bath and Coney Island Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310161" start="1263" end="1277" title="Dual Contracts" label="Dual Contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985059" start="2941" end="2963" title="BMT Fourth Avenue Line" label="BMT Fourth Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q16531269" start="2983" end="2984" title="BMT 3" label="3"/>
<link wikidata="Q125050" start="3037" end="3053" title="Manhattan Bridge" label="Manhattan Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2877193" start="3067" end="3084" title="BMT Broadway Line" label="BMT Broadway Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q9090910" start="3198" end="3220" title="Montague Street Tunnel" label="Montague Street Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q673884" start="3298" end="3309" title="36th Street (BMT Fourth Avenue Line)" label="36th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q5115013" start="3421" end="3447" title="Chrystie Street Connection" label="Chrystie Street Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q125050" start="3859" end="3875" title="Manhattan Bridge" label="Manhattan Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981950" start="4038" end="4068" title="Atlantic Avenue–Barclays Center (New York City Subway)" label="Atlantic Avenue–Pacific Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614974" start="4109" end="4138" title="Coney Island–Stillwell Avenue (New York City Subway)" label="Coney Island–Stillwell Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984733" start="4630" end="4643" title="BMT Brighton Line" label="Brighton Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612361" start="4767" end="4779" title="Grand Street (IND Sixth Avenue Line)" label="Grand Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q928996" start="5085" end="5107" title="BMT Nassau Street Line" label="BMT Nassau Street Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="5111" end="5126" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131936715" start="5131" end="5142" title="62nd Street (BMT West End Line)" label="62nd Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616272" start="5146" end="5157" title="Bay Parkway (BMT West End Line)" label="Bay Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984733" start="5351" end="5368" title="BMT Brighton Line" label="BMT Brighton Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2616272" start="5405" end="5416" title="Bay Parkway (BMT West End Line)" label="Bay Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439660" start="5435" end="5447" title="Ninth Avenue (BMT West End Line)" label="Ninth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612593" start="5504" end="5519" title="Chambers Street (BMT Nassau Street Line)" label="Chambers Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q131936715" start="5760" end="5798" title="62nd Street/New Utrecht Avenue station" label="62nd Street/New Utrecht Avenue station"/>
<link wikidata="Q220735" start="6170" end="6191" title="The French Connection (film)" label="The French Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q47654" start="6269" end="6289" title="Saturday Night Fever" label="Saturday Night Fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="6325" end="6338" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421950" start="6455" end="6475" title="Welcome Back, Kotter" label="Welcome Back, Kotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q628201" start="6537" end="6567" title="Transportation to Coney Island" label="Transportation to Coney Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019742" wikidata="Q165081" url="?curid=1019742" title="Gazette van Detroit">
<text>The Gazette van Detroit (&quot;Gazette of Detroit&quot;) was a Flemish newspaper in Dutch and English that was published in the United States from 13 August 1914 until 2018. It was aimed at Flemish immigrants and their descendants living in the United States and Canada, but latterly also some subscribers in Europe. Its parent company was a 501(c)(3) U.S. Internal Revenue Service recognized non-profit called Belgian Publishing Inc. Its final chairman was David Baeckelandt. The newspaper was published by &quot;Belgian Publishing Inc.&quot; at 18740 13 Mile Road in Roseville, Michigan.

The &quot;Gazette van Detroit&quot; first appeared as a weekly newspaper, later it became bi-weekly, and finally monthly. It had become an online-only paper before its ultimate demise. It was the longest lasting Belgian American newspaper, outlasting the &quot;Gazette van Moline&quot; at Moline, Illinois (1907–40). The newspaper&#x27;s original mission statement, published in an article entitled &quot;The Light for the People&quot; (&quot;Het Licht voor &#x27;t Volk&quot;) set forward the newspaper&#x27;s aim:

By 2004, celebrating its ninetieth birthday, it was still a popular newspaper among North Americans of Flemish ancestry and their relatives in Belgium. In 2006, the Flemish Government donated 12,500 euro to ensure the &quot;Gazette van Detroit&quot; could continue its operations. The newspaper finally folded in 2018.

The Gazette van Detroit and its parent, The Belgian Publishing Company, ceased publishing and operation on December 31, 2018. All content and holdings have been transferred to the Genealogical Society of Flemish Americans (GSFA).

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*Online archive
*A short biographical note about Camille Cools, the founder of the newspaper
* Historic research about the &quot;Gazette&quot;
*14 March 2006 the &quot;external affairs&quot; commission of the Flemish Parliament discussed whether subsidies should be granted to the &quot;Gazette&quot;:
** Commission talks report at the website of the Flemish Parliament: PDF - HTML
* VRT news website flandersnews.be
** 2 November 2006: &quot;Gazette van Detroit&quot; seeks photos
** 12 December 2006: &quot;Gazette van Detroit&quot;
*The &quot;Gazette van Detroit&quot; at Flanders&#x27; House</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="42" end="49" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="63" end="70" title="Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="84" end="89" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="128" end="141" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894388" start="190" end="208" title="Flemish American" label="Flemish immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="245" end="258" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="263" end="269" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="309" end="315" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="342" end="351" title="#501(c)(3)" label="501(c)(3)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207486" start="569" end="588" title="Roseville, Michigan" label="Roseville, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894388" start="803" end="819" title="Belgian American" label="Belgian American"/>
<link wikidata="Q579736" start="880" end="896" title="Moline, Illinois" label="Moline, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186029" start="1273" end="1291" title="Flemish Government" label="Flemish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292" start="1925" end="1943" title="Flemish Parliament" label="Flemish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858" start="2100" end="2103" title="Vlaamse Radio- en Televisieomroep" label="VRT"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019750" wikidata="Q1072120" url="?curid=1019750" title="Missile Technology Control Regime">
<text>The Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) is a multilateral export control regime. It is an informal political understanding among 35 member states that seek to limit the proliferation of missiles and missile technology. The regime was formed in 1987 by the G-7 industrialized countries. The MTCR seeks to limit the risks of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) by controlling exports of goods and technologies that could make a contribution to delivery systems (other than manned aircraft) for such weapons. In this context, the MTCR places particular focus on rockets and unmanned aerial vehicles capable of delivering a payload of at least to a range of at least and on equipment, software, and technology for such systems.

The MTCR is not a treaty and does not impose any legally binding obligations on partners (members). Rather, it is an informal political understanding among states that seek to limit the proliferation of missiles and missile technology.

== Guidelines and the Equipment, Software and Technology Annex ==
The Regime’s documents include the MTCR Guidelines and the Equipment, Software and Technology Annex. The Guidelines define the purpose of the MTCR and provide the overall structure and rules to guide the member countries and those adhering unilaterally to the Guidelines. The Equipment, Software and Technology Annex is designed to assist in implementing export controls on MTCR Annex items. The Annex is divided into “Category I” and “Category II” items. It includes a broad range of equipment and technology, both military and dual-use, that are relevant to missile development, production, and operation. Partner countries exercise restraint in the consideration of all transfers of items contained in the Annex. All such transfers are considered on a case by case basis.

Greatest restraint is applied to what are known as Category I items. These items include complete rocket systems (including ballistic missiles, space launch vehicles and sounding rockets) and unmanned air vehicle systems (including cruise missiles systems, target and reconnaissance drones) with capabilities exceeding a 300km/500kg range/payload threshold; production facilities for such systems; and major sub-systems including rocket stages, re-entry vehicles, rocket engines, guidance systems and warhead mechanisms.

The remainder of the annex is regarded as Category II, which includes complete rocket systems (including ballistic missiles systems, space launch vehicles and sounding rockets) and unmanned air vehicles (including cruise missile systems, target drones, and reconnaissance drones) not covered in item I, capable of a maximum range equal to or greater than, 300km. Also included are a wide range of equipment, material, and technologies, most of which have uses other than for missiles capable of delivering WMD. While still agreeing to exercise restraint, partners have greater flexibility in the treatment of Category II transfer applications.

The MTCR Guidelines specifically state that the Regime is “not designed to impede national space programs or international cooperation in such programs as long as such programs could not contribute to delivery systems for weapons of mass destruction.” MTCR partners are careful with satellite-launched vehicle SLV equipment and technology transfers, however, since the technology used in an SLV is virtually identical to that used in a ballistic missile, which poses genuine potential for missile proliferation.

==History==
The Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR) was established in April 1987 by the G7 countries: Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. It was created to curb the spread of unmanned delivery systems for nuclear weapons, specifically systems which can carry a payload of for .

The MTCR applies to exports to members and non-members. An aide-mémoire attached to the agreement says that it does not supersede prior agreements, which NATO members say allows the supply of Category 1 systems between NATO members. An example is the export by the United States of Trident missiles to the United Kingdom for nuclear-weapons delivery.

At the annual meeting in Oslo from 29 June to 2 July 1992, chaired by Sten Lundbo, it was agreed to expand the MTCR&#x27;s scope to include nonproliferation of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for weapons of mass destruction. Prohibited materials are divided into two categories, which are outlined in the MTCR Equipment, Software, and Technology Annex. Thirty-five nations are members, with India joining on 27 June 2016.

According to the Arms Control Association, the MTCR has been successful in helping to slow (or stop) several ballistic missile programs: &quot;Argentina, Egypt, and Iraq abandoned their joint Condor II ballistic missile program. Brazil and South Africa also shelved or eliminated missile or space launch vehicle programs. Some former Warsaw Pact countries, such as Poland and the Czech Republic, destroyed their ballistic missiles, in part, to better their chances of joining MTCR.&quot; In October 1994, the MTCR member states established a &quot;no undercut&quot; policy: if one member denies the sale of technology to another country, all members must do likewise.

China originally viewed the MTCR as a discriminatory measure by Western governments, which sold sophisticated military aircraft while restricting sales of competing ballistic missiles. It verbally agreed that it would adhere to the MTCR in November 1991, and included the assurance in a letter from its foreign minister in February 1992. China reiterated its pledge in the October 1994 US-China joint statement. In their October 1997 joint statement, the United States and China said that they agreed &quot;to build on the 1994 Joint Statement on Missile Nonproliferation.&quot; The Missiles and Missile-related Items and Technologies Export Control List, a formal regulation, was issued in August 2002. The following year, the MTCR chair invited China to participate. China requested to join the MTCR in 2004, but membership was not offered because of concerns about the country&#x27;s export-control standards.
Israel, Romania and Slovakia have agreed to follow MTCR export rules, although they are not yet members.

The regime has its limitations; member countries have been known to clandestinely violate the rules. Some of these countries, with varying degrees of foreign assistance, have deployed medium-range ballistic missiles which can travel more than and are researching missiles with greater ranges; Israel and China have deployed strategic nuclear SLCMs, ICBMs and satellite-launch systems. Countries which are not MTCR members buy and sell on the global arms market; North Korea is currently viewed as the primary source of ballistic-missile proliferation in the world, and China has supplied ballistic missiles and technology to Pakistan. China supplied DF-3A IRBMs to Saudi Arabia in 1988 before it informally agreed to follow MTCR guidelines. Israel cannot export its Shavit space-launch system due to its non-member MTCR status, although the Clinton administration allowed an import waiver for US companies to buy the Shavit in 1994.

Over 20 countries have ballistic missile systems. The International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation (ICOC), also known as the Hague Code of Conduct, was established in 2002. The code, which calls for restraint and care in the proliferation of ballistic missile systems capable of delivering weapons of mass destruction, has 119 members. Its mission is similar to the MTCR&#x27;s, an export group.

India applied for membership in June 2015 with support from Russia, France and the United States, and became a member on 27 June 2016.

Pakistan is not a member of the MTCR. Although it has expressed a desire to join the group, it has not submitted an application. The Pakistani government has pledged to adhere to MTCR guidelines, and analysts believe that the country is doing so.

In 2020, the U.S. government announced that it would reinterpret its implementation of the MTCR to expedite sales of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to other countries. The revised U.S. policy will reinterpret how the MTCR applies to drones which travel at speeds under , such as the Predator and Reaper drones (made by General Atomics) and the Global Hawk drone (made by Northrop Grumman).

==Members==
The MTCR has 35 members.
* Argentina, 1993
* Australia, 1990
* Austria, 1991
* Belgium, 1990
* Bulgaria, 2004
* Brazil, 1995
* Canada, 1987
* Czech Republic, 1998
* Denmark, 1990
* Finland, 1991
* France, 1987
* Germany, 1987
* Greece, 1992
* Hungary, 1993
* Iceland, 1993
* India, 2016
* Ireland, 1992
* Italy, 1987
* Japan, 1987
* Luxembourg, 1990
* Netherlands, 1990
* New Zealand, 1991
* Norway, 1990
* Poland, 1997
* Portugal, 1992
* Republic of Korea, 2001
* Russian Federation, 1995
* South Africa, 1995
* Spain, 1990
* Sweden, 1991
* Switzerland, 1992
* Turkey, 1997
* Ukraine, 1998
* United Kingdom, 1987
* United States, 1987

Non-members pledging to adhere to MTCR include:

* China, 2002
* Israel
* Romania
* Slovakia
==References==
==External links==
* Missile Technology Control Regime website
* Sarah Chankin-Gould &amp; Ivan Oelrich, &quot;Double-edged Shield&quot; , &quot;Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists&quot;, May/June 2005.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1072120" start="4" end="37" title="Missile Technology Control Regime" label="Missile Technology Control Regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072120" start="39" end="43" title="Missile Technology Control Regime" label="MTCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3455469" start="50" end="84" title="multilateral export control regime" label="multilateral export control regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="261" end="289" title="Group of Seven" label="G-7 industrialized countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="345" end="372" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="591" end="614" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="763" end="769" title="treaty" label="treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752243" start="3274" end="3300" title="Satellite Launch Vehicle" label="satellite-launched vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764511" start="3598" end="3600" title="Group of Seven (G7)" label="G7"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3612" end="3618" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3620" end="3626" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="3628" end="3635" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3637" end="3642" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="3644" end="3649" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3655" end="3669" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="3679" end="3692" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="3761" end="3775" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q916598" start="3894" end="3906" title="aide-mémoire" label="aide-mémoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3989" end="3993" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4027" end="4037" title="Special nuclear material#Category I" label="Category 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864964" start="4117" end="4155" title="Trident (UK nuclear programme)" label="Trident missiles to the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="4212" end="4216" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7607441" start="4257" end="4268" title="Sten Lundbo" label="Sten Lundbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="4347" end="4371" title="unmanned aerial vehicles" label="unmanned aerial vehicles"/>
<link wikidata="Q49394" start="4383" end="4410" title="weapons of mass destruction" label="weapons of mass destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793846" start="4627" end="4651" title="Arms Control Association" label="Arms Control Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q179348" start="4719" end="4736" title="ballistic missile" label="ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q645642" start="4802" end="4811" title="Condor II" label="Condor II"/>
<link wikidata="Q369330" start="6482" end="6512" title="medium-range ballistic missile" label="medium-range ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631562" start="6640" end="6645" title="Submarine-launched cruise missile" label="SLCMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151704" start="6948" end="6953" title="DF-3A" label="DF-3A"/>
<link wikidata="Q392893" start="6954" end="6959" title="Intermediate-range ballistic missile" label="IRBMs"/>
<link wikidata="Q876010" start="7064" end="7070" title="Shavit 2" label="Shavit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824550" start="7139" end="7161" title="Presidency of Bill Clinton" label="Clinton administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566329" start="7286" end="7355" title="International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation" label="International Code of Conduct against Ballistic Missile Proliferation"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="7790" end="7798" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="8155" end="8178" title="unmanned aerial vehicle" label="unmanned aerial vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q198024" start="8322" end="8330" title="General Atomics MQ-1 Predator" label="Predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q816695" start="8335" end="8341" title="General Atomics MQ-9 Reaper" label="Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501547" start="8358" end="8373" title="General Atomics" label="General Atomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q162066" start="8383" end="8394" title="Northrop Grumman RQ-4 Global Hawk" label="Global Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q329953" start="8410" end="8426" title="Northrop Grumman" label="Northrop Grumman"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="8469" end="8478" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="8487" end="8496" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="8505" end="8512" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="8521" end="8528" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="8537" end="8545" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="8554" end="8560" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8569" end="8575" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="8584" end="8598" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="8607" end="8614" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="8623" end="8630" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="8639" end="8645" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="8654" end="8661" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="8670" end="8676" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="8685" end="8692" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="8701" end="8708" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8717" end="8722" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="8731" end="8738" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="8747" end="8752" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8761" end="8766" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="8775" end="8785" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="8794" end="8805" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="8814" end="8825" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="8834" end="8840" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="8849" end="8855" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="8864" end="8872" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="8881" end="8898" title="Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="8907" end="8925" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="8934" end="8946" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8955" end="8960" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="8969" end="8975" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="8984" end="8995" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="9004" end="9010" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="9019" end="9026" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="9035" end="9049" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="9058" end="9071" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9130" end="9135" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="9144" end="9150" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="9153" end="9160" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="9163" end="9171" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019751" wikidata="Q42019" url="?curid=1019751" title=".nz">
<text>.nz is the Internet country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for New Zealand. It is administered by InternetNZ, with oversight and dispute resolution handled by its subsidiary company, the Domain Name Commission Limited (DNCL). Registrations are processed via authorised registrars. there were 747,256 registered .nz domains.

== History ==
As with many long-standing domain registries, the registry was maintained informally for some time. The first formally recognised administrative organisation was the University of Waikato until the responsibility was delegated to InternetNZ when it was formed in 1995.

Prior to the current structure, the registry operator of .nz was Domainz. Historically, Domainz was a subsidiary of InternetNZ which also operated as a registrar and vendor of other add-on services such as DNS. This combination of a natural monopoly (the registry activities) and vertical integration (the registrar and other services) was seen by some as restricting competition so InternetNZ moved to separate the provision of registry services into a separate organisation with strong oversight. The final part of this transition process was the sale of Domainz to Melbourne IT in August 2003.

From 1 April 2008 the &quot;Office of the Domain Name Commissioner&quot; (several employees of InternetNZ, including the Domain Name Commissioner herself) became the &quot;Domain Name Commission Limited&quot;, a subsidiary company of InternetNZ.
===Registry software and protocol===
The Shared Registry System (SRS) was initially developed in 2002, and provided .nz registry services until November 2022. In January 2004 the source code to the SRS system was released to the public under a GPL license. Since 2010 the SRS also supported the standard Extensible Provisioning Protocol (EPP).

In September 2019 InternetNZ announced their intent to replace the SRS and that the new system would not include the SRS protocol. The transition to a closed-source commercial registry product provided by the Canadian Internet Registration Authority was completed on the 1st of November, 2022. This transition replaced both the public facing WHOIS service and the APIs used by registrars to interact with the registry.

===Māori domain names===
On 22 July 2010, the Domain Name Commission announced that .nz domain names with macron vowels (ā, ē, ī, ō and ū) would be available from the following week to allow Māori language words to be correctly represented in domain names.

=== Second-level domain changes ===
* .geek.nz - This second level domain was approved by the council of InternetNZ on 5 July 2003.
* .kiwi.nz - This second level domain was approved on 24 August 2012 and made available for registrations on 11 September 2012.

== Second-level domains ==
There are a number of second-level domains that identify whether the user is a company, a non-commercial organisation, government body or other classification.

In October 2013, InternetNZ decided to allow domain names to be registered at the second level in the .nz domain name space, aligning the .nz domain name space with a majority of other top level domains that already allow registrations directly at the second level. The second level domain names were launched with a sunrise period from 30 September 2014 to 30 March 2015 (to allow people with similar domains to register the shorter version). From 30 March 2015 .nz domain names were available to everyone.

The early New Zealand second-level domains ac.nz, .co.nz and .govt.nz were based on those used in the UK. At the time it was considered desirable that the names were not in use as first-level domains, so .edu.nz, .com.nz and .gov.nz were rejected. There are also sub-level domains unique to New Zealand, such as iwi.nz for Māori iwi and the broader maori.nz for other Māori organisations, and geek.nz for &quot;geeks&quot;.

The following second-level domains are in use with their official descriptions. Since only some of the domains are moderated, it is possible to register outside the area intended.

===Unmoderated===
* .nz – First level NZ domain, general use
* .ac.nz – Tertiary educational institutions and related organisations
* .co.nz – Organisations pursuing commercial aims and purposes
* .geek.nz – For people who are concentrative, technically skilled, and imaginative who are generally adept with computers
* .gen.nz – Individuals and other organisations not covered elsewhere
* .kiwi.nz – For people or organisations that associate with being &#x27;Kiwi&#x27; (the colloquial term for New Zealanders)
* .maori.nz – Māori people, groups, and organisations
* .net.nz – Organisations and service providers directly related to the NZ Internet
* .org.nz – Not-for-profit organisations
* .school.nz – Primary, secondary and pre-schools and related organisations

===Moderated===
* .cri.nz – Crown Research Institutes
* .govt.nz – National, regional and local government organisations operating with statutory powers. The government registrar, DNS.govt.nz controls registration; a government portal operates at www.govt.nz
* .health.nz – Health organisations
* .iwi.nz – Traditional Māori iwi (tribes), hapū, or groups
* .mil.nz – The military organisation of the New Zealand government, the New Zealand Defence Force
* .parliament.nz – Reserved for parliamentary agencies, offices of parliament, and parliamentary political parties and their elected members; main website operates at www.parliament.nz

===Previously used===
* archie.nz – used for an Archie search engine server operated by the University of Waikato until the mid-1990s.

==See also==
* .kiwi

==References==
==External links==
* IANA .nz whois information
*.nz registry 
* .nz Domain Name Commission
* List of .nz authorised registrars</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42019" start="0" end="3" title=".nz" label=".nz"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="20" end="49" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="62" end="73" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055415" start="97" end="107" title="InternetNZ" label="InternetNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q606140" start="504" end="525" title="University of Waikato" label="University of Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289870" start="673" end="680" title="Domainz" label="Domainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q8767" start="814" end="817" title="Domain Name System" label="DNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q648510" start="841" end="857" title="natural monopoly" label="natural monopoly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="888" end="908" title="vertical integration" label="vertical integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811804" start="1176" end="1188" title="Melbourne IT" label="Melbourne IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q197876" start="1756" end="1788" title="Extensible Provisioning Protocol" label="Extensible Provisioning Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872773" start="2006" end="2046" title="Canadian Internet Registration Authority" label="Canadian Internet Registration Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q627627" start="2323" end="2329" title="Macron (diacritic)" label="macron"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="2408" end="2422" title="Māori language" label="Māori language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055415" start="2941" end="2951" title="InternetNZ" label="InternetNZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q741063" start="3241" end="3255" title="sunrise period" label="sunrise period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="3756" end="3761" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="3762" end="3765" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q243697" start="3844" end="3848" title="geek" label="geek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552898" start="4500" end="4504" title="Kiwi (nickname)" label="Kiwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141791" start="4836" end="4860" title="Crown Research Institute" label="Crown Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676081" start="5133" end="5136" title="iwi" label="iwi"/>
<link wikidata="Q675182" start="5147" end="5151" title="hapū" label="hapū"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051650" start="5236" end="5261" title="New Zealand Defence Force" label="New Zealand Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q633739" start="5496" end="5516" title="Archie search engine" label="Archie search engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q606140" start="5540" end="5561" title="University of Waikato" label="University of Waikato"/>
<link wikidata="Q15636301" start="5599" end="5604" title=".kiwi" label=".kiwi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019760" wikidata="Q1268964" url="?curid=1019760" title="Weight transfer">
<text>Weight transfer and load transfer are two expressions used somewhat confusingly to describe two distinct effects: 

*the change in load borne by different wheels of even perfectly rigid vehicles during acceleration
*the change in center of mass (CoM) location relative to the wheels because of suspension compliance or cargo shifting or sloshing 

In the automobile industry, weight transfer customarily refers to the change in load borne by different wheels during acceleration. This would be more properly referred to as load transfer, and that is the expression used in the motorcycle industry, while weight transfer on motorcycles, to a lesser extent on automobiles, and cargo movement on either is due to a change in the CoM location relative to the wheels. This article uses this latter pair of definitions.

==Load transfer==
In wheeled vehicles, load transfer is the measurable change of load borne by different wheels during acceleration (both longitudinal and lateral). This includes braking, and deceleration (which is an acceleration at a negative rate).
No motion of the center of mass relative to the wheels is necessary, and so load transfer may be experienced by vehicles with no suspension at all. Load transfer is a crucial concept in understanding vehicle dynamics. The same is true in bikes, though only longitudinally.

==Cause==
The major forces that accelerate a vehicle occur at the tires&#x27; contact patches. Since these forces are not directed through the vehicle&#x27;s CoM, one or more moments are generated whose forces are the tires&#x27; traction forces at pavement level, the other one (equal but opposed) is the mass inertia located at the CoM and the moment arm is the distance from pavement surface to CoM. It is these moments that cause variation in the load distributed between the tires. Often this is interpreted by the casual observer as a pitching or rolling motion of the vehicles body. A perfectly rigid vehicle, without suspension that would not exhibit pitching or rolling of the body, still undergoes load transfer. However, the pitching and rolling of the body of a non-rigid vehicle adds some (small) weight transfer due to the (small) CoM horizontal displacement with respect to the wheel&#x27;s axis suspension vertical travel and also due to deformation of the tires i.e. contact patch displacement relative to wheel.

Lowering the CoM towards the ground is one method of reducing load transfer. As a result load transfer is reduced in both the longitudinal and lateral directions. Another method of reducing load transfer is by increasing the wheel spacings. Increasing the vehicle&#x27;s wheelbase (length) reduces longitudinal load transfer while increasing the vehicle&#x27;s track (width) reduces lateral load transfer. Most high performance automobiles are designed to sit as low as possible and usually have an extended wheelbase and track.

One way to calculate the effect of load transfer, keeping in mind that this article uses &quot;load transfer&quot; to mean the phenomenon commonly referred to as &quot;weight transfer&quot; in the automotive world, is with the so-called &quot;weight transfer equation&quot;:

:formula_1 or formula_2

where formula_3 is the change in load borne by the front wheels, formula_4 is the longitudinal acceleration, formula_5 is the acceleration of gravity, formula_6 is the center of mass height, formula_7 is the wheelbase, formula_8 is the total vehicle mass, and formula_9 is the total vehicle weight.

Weight transfer involves the &quot;actual&quot; (relatively small) movement of the vehicle CoM relative to the wheel axes due to displacement of the chassis as the suspension complies, or of cargo or liquids within the vehicle, which results in a redistribution of the total vehicle load between the individual tires.

==Center of mass==
Weight transfer occurs as the vehicle&#x27;s CoM shifts during automotive maneuvers. Acceleration causes the sprung mass to rotate about a geometric axis resulting in relocation of the CoM. Front-back weight transfer is proportional to the change in the longitudinal location of the CoM to the vehicle&#x27;s wheelbase, and side-to-side weight transfer (summed over front and rear) is proportional to the ratio of the change in the CoM&#x27;s lateral location to the vehicle&#x27;s track.

Liquids, such as fuel, readily flow within their containers, causing changes in the vehicle&#x27;s CoM. As fuel is consumed, not only does the position of the CoM change, but the total weight of the vehicle is also reduced.

By way of example, when a vehicle accelerates, a weight transfer toward the rear wheels can occur. An outside observer might witness this as the vehicle visibly leans to the back, or squats. Conversely, under braking, weight transfer toward the front of the car can occur. Under hard braking it might be clearly visible even from inside the vehicle as the nose dives toward the ground (most of this will be due to load transfer). Similarly, during changes in direction (lateral acceleration), weight transfer to the outside of the direction of the turn can occur.

Weight transfer is generally of far less practical importance than load transfer, for cars and SUVs at least. For instance in a 0.9g turn, a car with a track of 1650 mm and a CoM height of 550 mm will see a load transfer of 30% of the vehicle weight, that is the outer wheels will see 60% more load than before, and the inners 60% less. Total available grip will drop by around 6% as a result of this load transfer. At the same time, the CoM of the vehicle will typically move laterally and vertically, relative to the contact patch by no more than 30 mm, leading to a weight transfer of less than 2%, and a corresponding reduction in grip of 0.01%.

==Traction==
Load transfer causes the available traction at all four wheels to vary as the car brakes, accelerates, or turns. This bias to one pair of tires doing more &quot;work&quot; than the other pair results in a net loss of total available traction. The net loss can be attributed to the phenomenon known as tire load sensitivity.

An exception is during positive acceleration when the engine power is driving two or fewer wheels. In this situation where all the tires are not being utilized load transfer can be advantageous. As such, the most powerful cars are almost never front wheel drive, as the acceleration itself causes the front wheels&#x27; traction to decrease. This is why sports cars usually have either rear wheel drive or all wheel drive (and in the all wheel drive case, the power tends to be biased toward the rear wheels under normal conditions).

==Rollover==
If (lateral) load transfer reaches the tire loading on one end of a vehicle, the inside wheel on that end will lift, causing a change in handling characteristic. If it reaches half the weight of the vehicle it will start to roll over. Some large trucks will roll over before skidding, while passenger vehicles and small trucks usually roll over only when they leave the road. Fitting racing tires to a tall or narrow vehicle and then driving it hard may lead to rollover.

==See also==
* Anti-roll bar
* Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics
* Car handling

==References==
==External links==
*DOT rollover ratings by vehicle type</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1268964" start="0" end="15" title="Weight transfer" label="Weight transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268964" start="20" end="33" title="Weight transfer" label="load transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945123" start="230" end="244" title="center of mass" label="center of mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q272870" start="294" end="304" title="Suspension (vehicle)" label="suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q319224" start="319" end="324" title="cargo" label="cargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="355" end="365" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268964" start="376" end="391" title="Weight transfer" label="weight transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268964" start="523" end="536" title="Weight transfer" label="load transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q34493" start="577" end="587" title="motorcycle" label="motorcycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268964" start="604" end="619" title="Weight transfer" label="weight transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="844" end="851" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964839" start="896" end="900" title="Structural load" label="load"/>
<link wikidata="Q11376" start="934" end="946" title="acceleration" label="acceleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534839" start="994" end="1001" title="Brake" label="braking"/>
<link wikidata="Q934680" start="1267" end="1283" title="vehicle dynamics" label="vehicle dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11402" start="1361" end="1366" title="force" label="force"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="1407" end="1411" title="tire" label="tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139959" start="1419" end="1432" title="contact patch" label="contact patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13222844" start="1516" end="1523" title="Moment (physics)" label="moments"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="1868" end="1876" title="observation" label="observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128004" start="2643" end="2652" title="wheelbase" label="wheelbase"/>
<link wikidata="Q125770" start="2733" end="2738" title="Axle track" label="track"/>
<link wikidata="Q13400897" start="3329" end="3352" title="Standard gravity" label="acceleration of gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068107" start="3652" end="3659" title="chassis" label="chassis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750646" start="3950" end="3961" title="sprung mass" label="sprung mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q193181" start="4666" end="4674" title="observation" label="observer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4739" end="4745" title="Suspension (vehicle)#Anti-dive and anti-squat" label="squats"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4917" end="4922" title="Suspension (motorcycle)#Brake dive" label="dives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268964" start="5188" end="5201" title="load transfer" label="load transfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139959" start="5640" end="5653" title="contact patch" label="contact patch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852039" start="5820" end="5828" title="traction (engineering)" label="traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809172" start="6086" end="6107" title="tire load sensitivity" label="tire load sensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="6354" end="6371" title="front wheel drive" label="front wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070558" start="6496" end="6512" title="rear wheel drive" label="rear wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12211810" start="6516" end="6531" title="all wheel drive" label="all wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500099" start="7146" end="7159" title="Anti-roll bar" label="Anti-roll bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903772" start="7162" end="7193" title="Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics" label="Bicycle and motorcycle dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q870020" start="7196" end="7208" title="Car handling" label="Car handling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019765" wikidata="Q6232718" url="?curid=1019765" title="John Farey Jr.">
<text>John Farey Jr. (20 March 1791 – 17 July 1851) was an English mechanical engineer, consulting engineer and patent attorney, known for his pioneering contributions in the field of mechanical engineering.

As consulting engineer Farey worked for many well-known inventors of the later Industrial Revolution, and was a witness to a number of parliamentary enquiries, inquests and court cases, and on occasion acted as an arbitrator. He was polymathic in his interests and contributed text and drawings to a number of periodicals and encyclopaedias.

Farey is also remembered as the first English inventor of the ellipsograph, an instrument used by draughtsmen to inscribe ellipses.

==Biography==
=== Youth and education ===
Born 20 March 1791, in Lambeth, Farey was the eldest son of John Farey Sr. (1766–1826), the geologist, and Sophia Hubert (1770–1830). He was the older brother of Joseph Farey (1796–1829), who also became a known mechanical engineer and draughtsman and member of the Institution of Civil Engineers in 1822. He remained in the shadow of his older brother and died young.

From 1791 to 1802, he lived in Woburn, Bedfordshire, where his father was stationed as surveyor and land agent for Francis Russell, 5th Duke of Bedford. Back in London, he possibly received training at the school of William Nicholson, established in 1799 in London&#x27;s Soho Square. He did later on work together with Nicholson on patent assignments. From 1804 to 1806, he studied the machinery and processes in manufacturing factories in and around London.

=== Early career ===

At the age of fourteen Farey was commenced to make drawings for the illustrative plates of &quot;Rees&#x27;s Cyclopædia&quot; and the &#x27;Edinburgh&#x27; encyclopedias, &#x27;Tilloch&#x27;s Magazine,&#x27; Gregory&#x27;s &#x27;Mechanics&#x27; and &#x27;Mechanical Dictionary,&#x27; the &#x27;Pantalogia,&#x27; and many other scientific works. He edited some of these, and contributed to others.

For the &quot;Rees&#x27;s Cyclopædia,&quot; which appeared serially between 1802 and 1820, Farey wrote several articles, including the articles on Machinery, Manufactures, Mechanics, Mill, Steam Engine, Water etc.

He came into the possession of the manuscript and drawings of the engineer John Smeaton and made extensive use of them in his writing and drawing. He was involved in the production of the second volume of &quot;Smeaton&#x27;s Reports&quot; (1812), the plates engraved by Wilson Lowry.

In 1819, he went to Russia for a month, where be was engaged as a civil engineer in the construction of ironworks.

=== Later career ===
In 1821, Farey stepped down in the consulting engineering family business in favour of his younger brother, Joseph Farey (1796–1829). Farey accepted an appointment at the lace manufactory of John Heathcoat in Devonshire, which, however, he gave up in 1823,

In 1825, took the engineering direction of Messrs. Marshall&#x27;s flax-mills at Leeds; this position he was obliged to relinquish in 1826 in consequence of the failure of his brother&#x27;s health and the necessity for his return to London, where he resumed his profession of consulting engineer, and from that time was engaged in most of the novel inventions, important trials in litigated patent cases, and scientific investigations of the period.

Farey joined the Institution of Civil Engineers as a member in 1826, served several offices in the council, and always took great interest in its welfare. His residence, 67 Great Guilford Street, Russell Square, London, was burnt down in 1850, when considerable portions of his library and documents were injured or destroyed.

His health, which had been failing since the death of his wife, now received an additional shock, and he died of disease of the heart at the Common, Sevenoaks, Kent, on 17 July 1851. and was buried on the western side of Highgate Cemetery (plot no.3864). The grave, which is behind that of John Harrison in the dissenters section, no longer has a decipherable inscription.

== Work ==
=== Instruments for drawing ===

The necessity of accomplishing drawings with accuracy in a limited time led Farey to invent in 1807 an instrument for making perspective drawings, for which he received a silver medal from the Society of Arts in 1814. In an accompanying letter printed in the &quot;Transactions&quot;, Farey explained in general:

An additional four page long explanation of Farey&#x27;s &quot;Instrument for drawing Lines to an inaccessible center&quot; in Plate 2 (see image fig. 4, 5.) started explaining:

In 1813, Farey also constructed a machine for drawing ellipses, the so-called ellipsograph. The device became so popular, that the 6th edition of the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; (1824) included an article about it, which started with:


The drawing device was described in many other publications in his days, for example in Smith&#x27;s &quot;The Mechanic; Or, Compendium of Practical Inventions,&quot; 1825 (see image), and it was described in the &quot;Edinburgh Encyclopædia&quot; (1832) along with four other devices by Farey. For this invention the gold medal of the same society was awarded hun.

=== Steam-engine indicator and indicator-diagram ===
At the construction of ironworks in Russia since 1819 he first saw a steam-engine indicator; on his return to England he employed McNaught to make indicators for general use, and thenceforth he was continually requested to use the instrument in disputed cases of the power of steam-engines.

===&quot;A Treatise on the Steam Engine,&quot; 1827 ===

Farey wrote the two-volume work &quot;A Treatise on the Steam Engine,&quot; which has been described as the finest work on technology published in the Industrial Revolution.

The first volume covered the early developments of steam pumps, atmospheric engines and low pressure steam engines through the eighteenth century. In particular, the work of Savery, Newcomen, Smeaton and Watt. It was published in 1827. Rekers &amp; Koetsier (2007) commented on this work:

The second volume covered the development of high-pressure steam and the simple expansion steam engine from 1800, by Trevithick and Woolf. This volume was never published; at the time of Farey&#x27;s death it had been typeset, but not sold.

The book was never sold as the sheets were pulped. It was reprinted in facsimile since from the author&#x27;s proof, with hand-written corrections by the author, that is now in the National Reference Library of Science and Invention.

== Selected publications ==
* Farey, John. &quot;A treatise on the steam engine : historical, practical, and descriptive.&quot; 1827

;Articles, a selection:
* Farey, John. Contributions to &quot;Rees&#x27;s Cyclopædia,&quot; etc., 1808–1818
* Farey, John. &quot;Force of Steam,&quot; in: &quot;Transactions of the Institution of Civil Engineers,&quot; (1836), i. p. 85-94, p. 111-16.

;Articles about 
* Charles Mamby (ed.). &quot;John Farey,&quot; obituary in: &quot;Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers,&quot; Institution of Civil Engineers (Great Britain), 1852. p. 100-102
* Alec Skempton. &quot;Farey, Jr., John,&quot; in: &quot;A Biographical Dictionary of Civil Engineers in Great Britain and Ireland: 1500–1830.&quot; 2002. p. 223-224
* Woolrich, A. P., &quot;John Farey and the Smeaton Manuscripts&quot;, &quot;History of Technology&quot; vol 10, 1985, pp. 181–216
* Woolrich, A. P., &quot;John Farey, Jr., technical author and draughtsman: his contribution to Rees&#x27;s &quot;Cyclopadia&quot;&quot;. &quot;Industrial Archaeology Review&quot;, 20, (1998), 49-68
* Woolrich, A. P., &quot;John Farey and his &quot;Treatise on the Steam Engine&quot; of 1827&quot;, &quot;History of Technology&quot;, vol 22, 2000, pp. 63–106

In 1831, Farey gave evidence to a Parliamentary select committee on steam carriages, which is included in the committee&#x27;s report, published in 1834.

==See also==
*Aerial steam carriage
*John Hick - awarded a silver medal by the Society of Arts for his invention of an elliptograph in 1840.

==References==
;Attribution

==External links ==

* John Farey at gracesguide.co.uk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6232718" start="0" end="14" title="John Farey Jr." label="John Farey Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="61" end="80" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119680" start="82" end="101" title="Engineering consulting" label="consulting engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144892" start="106" end="121" title="patent attorney" label="patent attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269" start="282" end="303" title="Industrial Revolution" label="Industrial Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q270141" start="436" end="444" title="polymath" label="polymath"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292" start="529" end="543" title="encyclopedia" label="encyclopaedias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597560" start="608" end="620" title="Trammel of Archimedes" label="ellipsograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="668" end="675" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q148349" start="744" end="751" title="Lambeth" label="Lambeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q355803" start="781" end="795" title="John Farey Sr." label="John Farey Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="813" end="822" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994433" start="883" end="895" title="Joseph Farey" label="Joseph Farey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="987" end="1017" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881422" start="1122" end="1142" title="Woburn, Bedfordshire" label="Woburn, Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25687" start="1206" end="1242" title="Francis Russell, 5th Duke of Bedford" label="Francis Russell, 5th Duke of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q695200" start="1307" end="1324" title="William Nicholson (chemist)" label="William Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705335" start="1363" end="1374" title="Soho Square" label="Soho Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916259" start="1671" end="1693" title="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia" label="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916259" start="1986" end="2008" title="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia" label="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="2262" end="2274" title="John Smeaton" label="John Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2398" end="2420" title="Smeaton&amp;#x27;s Reports" label="Smeaton&amp;#x27;s Reports"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023126" start="2458" end="2470" title="Wilson Lowry" label="Wilson Lowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994433" start="2718" end="2730" title="Joseph Farey" label="Joseph Farey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181720" start="2801" end="2815" title="John Heathcoat" label="John Heathcoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773447" start="2919" end="2944" title="Marshall&amp;#x27;s Mill" label="Marshall&amp;#x27;s flax-mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665181" start="3337" end="3367" title="Institution of Civil Engineers" label="Institution of Civil Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q939838" start="3797" end="3806" title="Sevenoaks" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="3808" end="3812" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q533697" start="3869" end="3886" title="Highgate Cemetery" label="Highgate Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="4259" end="4274" title="Society of Arts" label="Society of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597560" start="4637" end="4649" title="Trammel of Archimedes" label="ellipsograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="4715" end="4738" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338192" start="5023" end="5045" title="Edinburgh Encyclopædia" label="Edinburgh Encyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994632" start="5354" end="5362" title="William McNaught (Glasgow)" label="McNaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224989" start="5812" end="5830" title="atmospheric engine" label="atmospheric engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q310720" start="5922" end="5928" title="Thomas Savery" label="Savery"/>
<link wikidata="Q193042" start="5930" end="5938" title="Thomas Newcomen" label="Newcomen"/>
<link wikidata="Q460922" start="5940" end="5947" title="John Smeaton" label="Smeaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q9041" start="5952" end="5956" title="James Watt" label="Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514410" start="6111" end="6140" title="simple expansion steam engine" label="simple expansion steam engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q217157" start="6155" end="6165" title="Richard Trevithick" label="Trevithick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995519" start="6170" end="6175" title="Arthur Woolf" label="Woolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q837721" start="6256" end="6263" title="typeset" label="typeset"/>
<link wikidata="Q194070" start="6351" end="6360" title="facsimile" label="facsimile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916259" start="6711" end="6733" title="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia" label="Rees&amp;#x27;s Cyclopædia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2640622" start="7119" end="7132" title="Alec Skempton" label="Alec Skempton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447672" start="7808" end="7838" title="Select committee (United Kingdom)" label="Parliamentary select committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688033" start="7943" end="7964" title="Aerial steam carriage" label="Aerial steam carriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239183" start="7966" end="7975" title="John Hick (politician)" label="John Hick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460885" start="8008" end="8023" title="Society of Arts" label="Society of Arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019774" wikidata="Q339636" url="?curid=1019774" title="Somali Salvation Democratic Front">
<text>Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF) (), initially known as the Democratic Front for Salvation of Somalia, was a political and paramilitary umbrella organization in Somalia. Founded in 1978 by several army officers, it was the first of several opposition groups dedicated to ousting the authoritarian regime of Mohamed Siad Barre. With its power base mainly in the Majeerteen clan, SSDF played a significant role in the country&#x27;s complex political landscape during the late 1970s and 2000s, and succeeded with establishing the autonomous Puntland state in northeastern Somalia.

==Early history==
On October 15, 1969, while paying a visit to the northern town of Las Anod, Somalia&#x27;s then President Abdirashid Ali Shermarke was shot dead by a policeman in his security team. His assassination was quickly followed by a military coup d&#x27;état on October 21, 1969 (the day after his funeral), in which the Somali Army and police force seized power without encountering armed opposition — essentially a bloodless takeover. The putsch was spearheaded by Major General Mohamed Siad Barre, who at the time commanded the army. For refusing to support Barre&#x27;s seizure of power, numerous political figures were imprisoned. Among these was Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, Somalia&#x27;s former military attaché to Moscow, who was imprisoned for several years by the new military regime.

In 1978, together with a group of officials mainly from his own Majeerteen (Darod) clan, Ahmed participated in a failed attempt to overthrow Barre&#x27;s dictatorial administration. Most of the people who had helped plot the coup were summarily executed, but Ahmed and several colonels managed to escape abroad. Later that year, in neighboring Ethiopia, Ahmed formed a guerrilla movement called the &quot;Somali Salvation Front&quot;, which was subsequently renamed the &quot;Somali Salvation Democratic Front&quot; (SSDF) in 1979. The SSDF was the first of several opposition groups dedicated to ousting Barre&#x27;s regime by force. The SSDF was originally a multi-clan organisation. The first SSDF chairman was Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed, from the Majeerteen clan. 

The SSDF formally incorporated in Aden, South Yemen in October 1981 through the merger of three groups, Somali Salvation Front, Somali Workers Party and the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Somalia. An 11-member Central Committee was constituted, of which the SSF leaders held 7 seats. Some former CC members of the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party were part of the leadership of the new group. A military structure was built up, supported by Ethiopia and Libya.

In the summer of 1982 SSDF forces took part in a 1982 Ethiopian-Somali Border War against Siad Barre. The campaign was called off when the United States initiated emergency military aid to Somalia. However some territory, including two district towns, had come under Ethiopian and SSDF control. The Mengistu regime declared that the territory was part of Ethiopia, something which created problems in the relations between the Ethiopian government and SSDF. In any case, the action was swiftly repulsed, and according to the U.S. Department of State, resulted in severe reprisals against the Majeerteen clan; the SSDF itself would be implicated in killings of members of Siad&#x27;s own Marehan clan, in Cel-Habred in the Galgadud region in the early 1980s.

A conflict soon emerged between the former SSF and the more leftist members. The SSF clique wanted to maintain the domination of SSDF of Majeerteen and Darood clans. They made a deal with the Ethiopian government to purge the leftists. In 1984 the Mengistu government jailed many leading SSDF members, such as then colonel Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed. In 1984, Mohamed Abshir Waldo was installed as provisional SSDF Chairman.

From 1983 onwards many leaders, belonging to the Darood clan, were bought over by Barre. Many SSDF fighters defected to the regime. By 1985 SSDF had ceased most of their military operations against the Siad Barre regime.

In 1986 an SSDF congress was held, which elected Dr. Hassan Ali Mire as chairman. He resigned in 1988, leaving a power vacuum in the organization. Musse Islan was elected leader by the SSDF Central Committee to hold the position until a Congress was convened.

In 1988 the governments of Somalia and Ethiopia made some agreements to cease hostilities. The Ethiopian government started closing SSDF camps, arresting its leaders and seizing weapons. The Ethiopian government also closed the SSDF radio station, Radio Halgan, which had been broadcasting since 1981.

In 1988 SSDF guerrillas started taking control over the western districts of Mudug and the southern areas of Nugaal and Bari regions.

==Post-1991==
After the fall of the Barre regime, the SSDF (based largely in northeastern Somalia) was divided in two factions. One was led by General Mohamed Abshir Muse (chairman), who at the time was based in Saudi Arabia, and the other was led by Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed (deputy chairman). The general secretary was Mohamed Abshir Waldo.

A congress was held in August 1994. Former Prime Minister of Somalia, Abdirizak Haji Hussein, was offered the chairmanship of the SSDF by a group of clan leaders, but declined.

Over the next several years, Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed would emerge as the pre-eminent leader in northeastern Somalia. In 1992, he marshalled forces to successfully expel an Islamist extremist group linked to Al-Itihaad al-Islamiya that had taken over Bosaso, a prominent port city and the commercial capital of the northeastern part of the country.

== Notable personnel ==
* Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed
* Mohamed Abshir Muse
* Mohamed Abshir Waldo
* Hassan Ali Mire
* Hirsi Ali Magan
* Said Mohamed Hersy
* Abdullahi Muhamed Ahmed Afgab

==Puntland==
In 1998, a homegrown constitutional conference was held in Garowe over a period of three months. Attended by SSDF representatives, traditional elders (&quot;Issims&quot;), members of the business community, intellectuals and other civil society members, the autonomous Puntland State of Somalia was subsequently officially established so as to deliver services, offer security, facilitate trade, and interact with both domestic and international partners. Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed was appointed as the nascent polity&#x27;s first President.

After serving two terms as President of Puntland, Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed was elected in 2004 as President of the Transitional Federal Government (TFG), an interim federal administrative body that he had helped establish earlier in the year.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q339636" start="0" end="40" title="Somali Salvation Democratic Front" label="Somali Salvation Democratic Front (SSDF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q339636" start="68" end="109" title="Somali Salvation Democratic Front" label="Democratic Front for Salvation of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="169" end="176" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209828" start="315" end="333" title="Mohamed Siad Barre" label="Mohamed Siad Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049786" start="369" end="379" title="Majeerteen" label="Majeerteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q485112" start="547" end="555" title="Puntland" label="Puntland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017223" start="672" end="680" title="Las Anod" label="Las Anod"/>
<link wikidata="Q308215" start="712" end="736" title="Abdirashid Ali Shermarke" label="Abdirashid Ali Shermarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="841" end="857" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q209828" start="1080" end="1098" title="Siad Barre" label="Mohamed Siad Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q215585" start="1251" end="1272" title="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed" label="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q302691" start="1296" end="1312" title="military attaché" label="military attaché"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="1316" end="1322" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049786" start="1454" end="1464" title="Majeerteen" label="Majeerteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166540" start="1466" end="1471" title="Darod" label="Darod"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="1734" end="1742" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="1759" end="1768" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q131694" start="2189" end="2193" title="Aden" label="Aden"/>
<link wikidata="Q199841" start="2195" end="2206" title="South Yemen" label="South Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255614" start="2312" end="2358" title="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Somalia" label="Democratic Front for the Liberation of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q619530" start="2477" end="2513" title="Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party" label="Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="2608" end="2616" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="2621" end="2626" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q652284" start="2678" end="2710" title="1982 Ethiopian-Somali Border War" label="1982 Ethiopian-Somali Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209828" start="2719" end="2729" title="Siad Barre" label="Siad Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2768" end="2781" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045" start="2818" end="2825" title="Somalia" label="Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192512" start="2928" end="2936" title="Mengistu" label="Mengistu"/>
<link wikidata="Q862529" start="3316" end="3323" title="Marehan" label="Marehan"/>
<link wikidata="Q876772" start="3351" end="3359" title="Galguduud" label="Galgadud"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="3580" end="3588" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192512" start="3636" end="3644" title="Mengistu" label="Mengistu"/>
<link wikidata="Q215585" start="3711" end="3732" title="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed" label="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025971" start="3743" end="3763" title="Mohamed Abshir Waldo" label="Mohamed Abshir Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q209828" start="4011" end="4021" title="Siad Barre" label="Siad Barre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732660" start="4084" end="4099" title="Hassan Ali Mire" label="Hassan Ali Mire"/>
<link wikidata="Q877034" start="4672" end="4677" title="Mudug" label="Mudug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315200" start="4704" end="4710" title="Nugaal" label="Nugaal"/>
<link wikidata="Q729170" start="4715" end="4719" title="Bari Region" label="Bari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890960" start="4881" end="4900" title="Mohamed Abshir Muse" label="Mohamed Abshir Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="4942" end="4954" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215585" start="4981" end="5002" title="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed" label="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025971" start="5048" end="5068" title="Mohamed Abshir Waldo" label="Mohamed Abshir Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q202437" start="5141" end="5163" title="Abdirizak Haji Hussein" label="Abdirizak Haji Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q310147" start="5454" end="5476" title="Al-Itihaad al-Islamiya" label="Al-Itihaad al-Islamiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q331556" start="5497" end="5503" title="Bosaso" label="Bosaso"/>
<link wikidata="Q215585" start="5622" end="5643" title="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed" label="Abdullahi Yusuf Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890960" start="5646" end="5665" title="Mohamed Abshir Muse" label="Mohamed Abshir Muse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17025971" start="5668" end="5688" title="Mohamed Abshir Waldo" label="Mohamed Abshir Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732660" start="5691" end="5706" title="Hassan Ali Mire" label="Hassan Ali Mire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519006" start="5709" end="5724" title="Hirsi Ali Magan" label="Hirsi Ali Magan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7399883" start="5727" end="5745" title="Said Mohamed Hersy" label="Said Mohamed Hersy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5748" end="5777" title="Abdullahi Muhamed Ahmed Afgab" label="Abdullahi Muhamed Ahmed Afgab"/>
<link wikidata="Q822679" start="5851" end="5857" title="Garowe" label="Garowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q485112" start="6061" end="6086" title="Puntland" label="Puntland State of Somalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q332065" start="6443" end="6474" title="Transitional Federal Government" label="Transitional Federal Government"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019778" wikidata="Q891770" url="?curid=1019778" title="Alekhin (crater)">
<text>Alekhin is a lunar impact crater that is located on the southern hemisphere on the far side of the Moon. It lies to the north of the crater Zeeman, and south-southeast of Fizeau. To the west lies Crommelin, and east-southeast is Doerfel.

The rim of Alekhin has been heavily eroded by subsequent impacts to the point where the edge is little more than a curving rise in the surface. The outer wall is completely overlain by the crater pair formed by crater Dawson across the northwest rim and Dawson D on the northern rim. The southern rim is somewhat more heavily marked by gouges and irregularities in the surface, compared to the northeast rim. On the floor are a number of tiny craterlets.

== Satellite craters ==

By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Alekhin.

== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q891770" start="0" end="7" title="Alekhin (crater)" label="Alekhin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="13" end="18" title="lunar crater" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="19" end="32" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q12507" start="65" end="75" title="Sphere" label="hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="83" end="91" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="99" end="103" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184401" start="140" end="146" title="Zeeman (crater)" label="Zeeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q597728" start="171" end="177" title="Fizeau (crater)" label="Fizeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965766" start="196" end="205" title="Crommelin (lunar crater)" label="Crommelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993939" start="229" end="236" title="Doerfel (crater)" label="Doerfel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747748" start="450" end="463" title="Dawson (crater)" label="crater Dawson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019787" wikidata="Q1127629" url="?curid=1019787" title="Thomas Preston">
<text>Thomas Preston may refer to:

==Politicians==
* Thomas Preston (MP for Derby), see Derby
* Thomas Preston (died 1604), MP for Knaresborough
* Thomas Preston of Gretton, MP for Northampton
* Thomas Preston (MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme), in 1437 MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme
* Thomas Preston, in 1452 MP for Wallingford
* Thomas Preston (of Holker, elder) (1600–1679), English MP for Lancashire
* Thomas Preston (of Holker, younger) (1647–1697), English MP for Lancaster
* Thomas Hiram Preston (1855–1925), Ontario journalist and political figure
* Thomas Hildebrand Preston, 6th Baronet (1886–1976), British diplomat

==Religion==
* Thomas Preston (monk) (1563–1640), English Benedictine monk
* Thomas Scott Preston (1824–1891), Roman Catholic Vicar General of New York

==Others==
* Thomas Preston (composer) (died c. 1563), English composer
* Thomas Preston (footballer) (1893–1971), Scottish footballer (Airdrieonians)
* Thomas Preston (writer) (1537–1598), master of Trinity Hall, Cambridge and possible author of &quot;King Cambyses&quot;
* Thomas Preston, 1st Viscount Tara (1585–1655), who fought on the side of Confederation in the Irish Confederate Wars (1642–1649)
* Thomas Preston (British Army officer), involved in the Boston Massacre in 1770
* Thomas Austin Preston, Jr. (1928–2012), poker player also known as Amarillo Slim
* Thomas Preston (scientist) (1860–1900), Irish scientist 
* Thomas J. Preston Jr. (1862–1955), professor of archeology at Princeton University
* Tommy Preston (1932–2015), Scottish footballer (Hibernian)
* Tom Preston-Werner (b 1979), American entrepreneur (GitHub)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1127629" start="0" end="14" title="Thomas Preston" label="Thomas Preston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48" end="77" title="Thomas Preston (MP for Derby)" label="Thomas Preston (MP for Derby)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261411" start="83" end="88" title="Derby (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q11802145" start="91" end="117" title="Thomas Preston (died 1604)" label="Thomas Preston (died 1604)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="142" end="167" title="Thomas Preston of Gretton" label="Thomas Preston of Gretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057582" start="176" end="187" title="Northampton (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Northampton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="190" end="234" title="Thomas Preston (MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme)" label="Thomas Preston (MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052362" start="251" end="271" title="Newcastle-under-Lyme (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Newcastle-under-Lyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7963098" start="305" end="316" title="Wallingford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Wallingford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="319" end="352" title="Thomas Preston (of Holker, elder)" label="Thomas Preston (of Holker, elder)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482977" start="381" end="391" title="Lancashire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="394" end="429" title="Thomas Preston (of Holker, younger)" label="Thomas Preston (of Holker, younger)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483099" start="458" end="467" title="Lancaster (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790708" start="470" end="490" title="Thomas Hiram Preston" label="Thomas Hiram Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23061344" start="546" end="584" title="Thomas Hildebrand Preston, 6th Baronet" label="Thomas Hildebrand Preston, 6th Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793271" start="631" end="652" title="Thomas Preston (monk)" label="Thomas Preston (monk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793841" start="693" end="713" title="Thomas Scott Preston" label="Thomas Scott Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990709" start="782" end="807" title="Thomas Preston (composer)" label="Thomas Preston (composer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q97356189" start="843" end="870" title="Thomas Preston (footballer)" label="Thomas Preston (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793283" start="922" end="945" title="Thomas Preston (writer)" label="Thomas Preston (writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466049" start="1044" end="1077" title="Thomas Preston, 1st Viscount Tara" label="Thomas Preston, 1st Viscount Tara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793281" start="1175" end="1212" title="Thomas Preston (British Army officer)" label="Thomas Preston (British Army officer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q706504" start="1323" end="1336" title="Amarillo Slim" label="Amarillo Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q7793272" start="1339" end="1365" title="Thomas Preston (scientist)" label="Thomas Preston (scientist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791135" start="1398" end="1419" title="Thomas J. Preston Jr." label="Thomas J. Preston Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7819784" start="1483" end="1496" title="Tommy Preston" label="Tommy Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q16602077" start="1544" end="1562" title="Tom Preston-Werner" label="Tom Preston-Werner"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019791" wikidata="Q6974311" url="?curid=1019791" title="National Merit Scholarship Program">
<text>The National Merit Scholarship Program is a United States academic scholarship competition for recognition and university scholarships. The program is managed by the National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NMSC), a privately funded not-for-profit organization based in Evanston, Illinois. The program began in 1955.

Each year, the NMSC conducts a competition that is open to all students who meet the entry requirements. Until 2015, the NMSC also administered the National Achievement Scholarship Program, which was specifically for African-American students.

The highest performers in the National Merit Scholarship Program are named National Merit Scholars. Finalists and Semifinalists are also recognized for their academic and extracurricular achievements. Commended Students are selected based on a nationally applied Selection Index score, which may vary annually and is typically below the level required for participants to be named Semifinalists in their respective states. The Preliminary SAT/National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (PSAT/NMSQT) is used as the qualifying test for entry into each year&#x27;s competitions.

Each year, about 1.6 million students from around 22,000 high schools enter the National Merit Scholarship competition when they take the PSAT/NMSQT. This test is used to screen program entrants, evaluating their critical reading skills, problem-solving abilities in mathematics, and writing skills. Semifinalists are chosen on a state representational basis, depending on the total number of entrants and in proportion to each state&#x27;s share of the nation&#x27;s high school graduating seniors. Semifinalists represent the top 0.5 percent of the state&#x27;s senior students.

To be considered for a National Merit Scholarship, Semifinalists must meet certain requirements to advance to Finalist standing. This includes submitting a detailed scholarship application, which encompasses essays and information about extracurricular achievements, awards, and leadership positions. They must also demonstrate a strong academic record, receive an endorsement and recommendation from a school official, and earn SAT scores that confirm their qualifying test performance. A specific number of students, which varies each year, advance to Finalist standing based on these criteria. At the end of the competition, a select group of Finalists are chosen to receive $2500 National Merit Scholarships. Scholarship winners represent less than 1% of the initial pool of student entrants.

== Program entry requirements ==
To enter the competition, a student must
*Be enrolled full-time as a high school student progressing normally toward completion of high school and planning to enroll full-time in college in the fall following the completion of high school;
*Be a citizen of the United States or be a U.S. lawful permanent resident who intends to become a U.S. citizen at the earliest opportunity allowed by law, or have applied for permanent residency with the intention of becoming a U.S. citizen at the earliest possible opportunity and have not been denied; and
*Take the Preliminary SAT/National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (PSAT/NMSQT) in the specified year of the high school program, usually the junior (11th grade) year and usually at one&#x27;s own school. Students completing high school in three years or less must be in the last or next-to-last year of high school when they take the test. Students unable to take the exam because of an extenuating circumstance, such as severe illness or natural disaster, may be permitted to substitute subsequent SAT results by making arrangements with NMSC no later than March 1 following the exam that was missed.

== Competition rounds ==

=== PSAT/NMSQT ===
The NMSC uses the PSAT/NMSQT as the initial screen of over 1.5 million program entrants. In the spring of the junior year, NMSC determines a national Selection Index qualifying score (critical reading + math + writing skills scores all multiplied by two) for &quot;Commended&quot; recognition, which is calculated each year to yield students at about the 96th percentile (top 50,000 highest scorers). Up until 2016 (when the College Board changed the format and style of the PSAT), scores in the 200s (out of 240) often qualified for recognition; however, with the New SAT and PSAT format and grading system, which is out of 228 (not 240, which is what it was on the old PSAT), qualifying scores for commendation are about 207, but qualifying levels change annually depending on how the top approximately 50,000 high scorers fared. Qualification levels also vary by state, and qualifying levels are higher in competitive states such as New Jersey and Massachusetts. For the 2009/2010 school year, a score of 217 was required in California to qualify. Notification is mailed to school principals in April regarding students who scored at or above this level. In September, principals notify their students of their status.

=== Semifinalist ===
Early the next September (beginning of the senior year, almost a year after the PSAT/NMSQT was taken), NMSC determines Selection Index qualifying scores for further recognition by state (including three other areas: DC, US Territories and Commonwealths, and students enrolled in schools outside the US) and US boarding schools (by geographic region). About 16,000 of the 50,000 are recognized as National Merit Semifinalists in this process. The Selection Index qualifying scores for Semifinalist standing vary from state to state and from year to year. Each state is allocated a percentage of Semifinalists based on the percentage of that state&#x27;s graduating seniors out of the nation&#x27;s total. The National Merit Scholarship Corporation does not release to the public the minimum qualifying score required per state. In August after the PSAT was taken, high school principals are mailed notification about their semifinalists. Principals communicate these results to their students, though some misread the NMSC materials and do not release them until the NMSC press release, which comes in mid-September. Those not making Semifinalist – about 34.000 of the 50.000, and about 3-4% of all PSAT takers – are &quot;Commended&quot;, and receive a Letter of Commendation; they do not continue in the competition for Merit Scholarship awards.

=== Finalist ===
Semifinalists must fulfill additional requirements and advance to the finalist level of the competition to be considered for a scholarship. Approximately 15,000 of the 16,000 Semifinalists advance to Finalist standing by submitting SAT scores that confirm the earlier PSAT/NMSQT performance, having an outstanding academic record, and being endorsed and recommended by a high school official. They must also submit an application that includes high school courses and grades, extracurricular and volunteer activities, and a self-descriptive essay. The information that is collected about each Semifinalist is used later in the process to choose scholarship winners. All Finalists receive a Certificate of Merit in recognition of their outstanding performance in the competition.

=== Scholarships ===
Of the 15,000 Finalists, about 8,000 receive Merit Scholarship awards. All Finalists are considered for one of the 2,500 National Merit $2,500 Scholarships. National Merit $2,500 Scholarship winners are the finalists in each state judged to have the strongest combination of accomplishments, skills, and potential for success in rigorous college studies. The number of winners named in each state is proportional to the state&#x27;s percentage of the nation&#x27;s graduating high school seniors. These Scholars were selected by a committee of college admissions officers and high school counselors, who appraised a substantial amount of information submitted by both the finalists and their high schools: the academic record, including difficulty level of subjects studied and grades earned; scores from two standardized tests; contributions and leadership in school and community activities; an essay written by the finalist; and a recommendation written by a high school official. NMSC&#x27;s own funds support the majority of these awards but corporate sponsors help underwrite these awards with grants they provide to NMSC in lieu of paying administrative fees. About 1,100 Merit Scholarship awards are provided by corporate sponsors for Finalists who meet criteria specified by the sponsor. Most of these awards are for children of the sponsor&#x27;s employees, for Finalists living in a particular geographic area, or for Finalists who have career plans the sponsor wishes to encourage. These two types of awards can be used at any regionally accredited college or university in the United States. There are also approximately 4,600 college-sponsored Merit Scholarship awards for Finalists who plan to attend a sponsor college. Finalists report to NMSC their first choice college (College-Sponsored Merit Awards). In addition, about 1,500 program participants who are below the finalist level receive Special Scholarships provided by corporate sponsors.

To receive a scholarship payment, a Merit Scholarship winner must (a) notify NMSC of plans to enroll in a college or university in the United States that holds accredited status with a regional accrediting commission on higher education, and (b) plan to enroll full-time in an undergraduate course of study leading to a traditional baccalaureate degree. NMSC scholarship stipends are not payable for attendance at United States service academies, distance learning programs, and certain institutions that are limited in their purposes or training. A number of National Merit Scholars do not receive a monetary award because their educational plans or other awards preclude receipt of a monetary scholarship; however, these students may be honored as Honorary Merit Scholars, a designation that acknowledges achievement without providing any financial assistance.

== National Achievement Scholarship Program ==

The National Achievement Scholarship Program was established in 1964, contemporaneously with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, specifically to encourage Black American youth to continue their education.

In its half century of existence, more than four million African-Americans entered the program. Approximately 228,000 received program recognition, and more than 34,000 were chosen to receive Achievement Scholarship awards.

Prior to 2016, black students who met entry requirements and requested consideration when they took the PSAT/NMSQT could enter both the National Achievement Scholarship Program and the National Merit Program. The two programs were conducted concurrently; however, a student&#x27;s standing in each program was determined independently. Black students could qualify for recognition, become candidates for awards, and be honored as Scholars in both competitions, but they could receive only one monetary award from NMSC. Students who were chosen as both National Achievement and National Merit Scholars received the monetary award that was most advantageous to them and were recognized as Honorary Scholars in the other program.

With the conclusion of the 2015 program, the National Achievement Scholarship Program transitioned to the United Negro College Fund, which will use program funds to honor and award financial assistance to high-achieving, underrepresented college graduates through the newly designed Achievement Capstone Program.

Because Achievement Scholarship funds are being redirected to awards for college graduates, Black American high school students no longer have the opportunity to compete for Achievement Scholarship awards. However, they may still enter the National Merit Scholarship competition, and they may be eligible to receive awards from the United Negro College Fund after college graduation.

== National Merit and National Achievement Scholars ==
The following is a list of notable National Merit Scholarship Program honorees, many of whom are listed on the &quot;Scholars You May Know&quot; page on the National Merit Scholarship Corporation website.

* Elvin Bishop (1960)
* Joseph Stiglitz (1960)
* Randy Hendricks (1963)
* Amory Lovins (1964)
* Robert Reich (1964)
* Thomas Cech (1966)
* Alexa Canady (1967)
* Mitch Daniels (1967)
* Michael Walsh (1967)
* Roger Tsien (1968)
* Jerry Greenfield (1969)
* Paul Krugman (1970)
* Ben Bernanke (1971)
* Evelynn M. Hammonds (1971)
* Jeffrey Sachs (1972)
* Bill Gates (1973)
* Jim Cramer (1973)
* John Roberts (1973)
* Mae Jemison (1973)
* Steve Ballmer (1973)
* Elena Kagan (1977)
* Lisa P. Jackson (1979)
* B. Alvin Drew (1980)
* Lisa Randall (1980)
* Jeff Bezos (1982)
* Andrew Gelman (1982)
* Susan Rice (1982)
* Spencer Wells (1984)
* Peter Thiel (1985)
* Chubb Rock (1985)
* Jeri Ryan (1986)
* Lauren Lake (1986)
* Linda Rottenberg (1986)
* Elliott Smith (1987)
* Ted Cruz (1988)
* M. Night Shyamalan (1988)
* Howard Steven Friedman (1989)
* Michael McCullers (1989)
* Josh Singer (1990)
* Asia Carrera (1991)
* Melissa Harris-Perry (1991)
* Brooke Magnanti (1992)
* Stephenie Meyer (1992)
* Felicia Day (1995)
* Slater Rhea (2005)

==College enrollment==
A number of universities reserve or guarantee additional merit-based funding for students who are National Merit Scholars, Finalists or Semifinalists. The National Merit Scholarship Corporation releases annual reports displaying the number of award winners enrolled at specific universities, which some believe encourage competition to attract students in this select group. Secondary schools may also publish information related to their students, in order to augment perception on teaching quality.

The following lists universities that enrolled more than 100 National Merit Scholars for 2019 entering class according to the 2018-19 Annual Report of the National Merit Scholarship Corporation.

== Criticism ==
Under the umbrella of their professional organization, the National Association for College Admission Counseling (NACAC), college and university admissions officers have strongly criticized the National Merit Scholarship Corporation&#x27;s use of only one measure—the PSAT/NMSQT—to pre-screen students for National Merit recognition.

The NACAC&#x27;s position was emphasized in a July 2009 announcement, which stated the following:
&quot;Implementing the recommendations of its blue-ribbon Testing Commission, the National Association for College Admissions Counseling (NACAC) has called on the National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NMSC) and the College Board to stop using PSAT scores as the initial screen for the country’s most prestigious academic awards.&quot;

In public letters to the test&#x27;s co-sponsors, NACAC charged that eliminating 99 percent of test-takers from the National Merit Scholarship competition solely on the basis of a multiple-choice, standardized exam was &quot;at odds with best practices in the use of admissions test scores&quot;. To be eligible for scholarships, high school juniors must score among the top 1 percent of test-takers in their home state. The PSAT serves as the National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test (NMSQT), and measures critical reading ability, mathematics problem solving ability and writing ability, rather than existing knowledge. These criticisms were challenged by both the College Board and the National Merit Scholarship Corporation.

FairTest (National Center for Fair and Open Testing) has also voiced concerns about the level of transparency in the National Merit Scholarship Corporation&#x27;s selection process. In February 2010, it issued an announcement stating the following:
&quot;The National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NMSC), which runs the country’s most prestigious tuition aid competition, is trying to block internet posting of state-by-state test score requirements for its awards.&quot; FairTest points out the many problems associated with standardized tests as measurement tools for real-world achievement. Additional criticism exists in that the National Merit Scholarship Corporation (NMSC) does not publish information regarding scholarship winners by year by state.

== See also ==
* Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation (Canadian equivalent)
* Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes (German National Academic Foundation; German equivalent)

== References ==
==Further reading==
* Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Liang Zhang, and Jared Levin. &quot;Crafting a class: The trade off between merit scholarships and enrolling lower-income students.&quot; (NBER, 2005). online

* Garrigues, George L. &quot;National Merit Scholarships: A Major Dash of Jim Crow.&quot; &quot;Journal of Blacks in Higher Education&quot; 3 (1994): 60-64. online

* Marini, Jessica P., Krista D. Mattern, and Emily J. Shaw. &quot;Examination of college performance by National Merit Scholarship Program recognition level.&quot; &quot;RN&quot; 10 (2011). online

* Nankervis, Bryan. &quot;Gender Inequity in the National Merit Scholarship Program.&quot; &quot;Journal of College Admission&quot; 219 (2013): 20-25. online

== External links ==
* National Merit Scholarship Corporation </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6974311" start="4" end="38" title="National Merit Scholarship Program" label="National Merit Scholarship Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="44" end="57" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q188823" start="67" end="78" title="scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q116834119" start="232" end="246" title="not-for-profit" label="not-for-profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q462799" start="269" end="287" title="Evanston, Illinois" label="Evanston, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120579" start="989" end="1047" title="PSAT/NMSQT" label="Preliminary SAT/National Merit Scholarship Qualifying Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7120579" start="3170" end="3180" title="PSAT/NMSQT" label="PSAT/NMSQT"/>
<link wikidata="Q334113" start="3602" end="3605" title="SAT" label="SAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892196" start="9537" end="9568" title="United States service academies" label="United States service academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="10147" end="10171" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q735469" start="11309" end="11334" title="United Negro College Fund" label="United Negro College Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334244" start="12165" end="12177" title="Elvin Bishop" label="Elvin Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q18430" start="12187" end="12202" title="Joseph Stiglitz" label="Joseph Stiglitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292232" start="12212" end="12227" title="Randy Hendricks" label="Randy Hendricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q474194" start="12237" end="12249" title="Amory Lovins" label="Amory Lovins"/>
<link wikidata="Q718828" start="12259" end="12271" title="Robert Reich" label="Robert Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q135180" start="12281" end="12292" title="Thomas Cech" label="Thomas Cech"/>
<link wikidata="Q4718068" start="12302" end="12314" title="Alexa Canady" label="Alexa Canady"/>
<link wikidata="Q351330" start="12324" end="12337" title="Mitch Daniels" label="Mitch Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1929714" start="12347" end="12360" title="Michael Walsh (author)" label="Michael Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q200470" start="12370" end="12381" title="Roger Tsien" label="Roger Tsien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687830" start="12391" end="12407" title="Jerry Greenfield" label="Jerry Greenfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q131112" start="12417" end="12429" title="Paul Krugman" label="Paul Krugman"/>
<link wikidata="Q201795" start="12439" end="12451" title="Ben Bernanke" label="Ben Bernanke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416490" start="12461" end="12480" title="Evelynn M. Hammonds" label="Evelynn M. Hammonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q319189" start="12490" end="12503" title="Jeffrey Sachs" label="Jeffrey Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284" start="12513" end="12523" title="Bill Gates" label="Bill Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6446228" start="12533" end="12543" title="Jim Cramer" label="Jim Cramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11153" start="12553" end="12565" title="John Roberts" label="John Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q34091" start="12575" end="12586" title="Mae Jemison" label="Mae Jemison"/>
<link wikidata="Q181162" start="12596" end="12609" title="Steve Ballmer" label="Steve Ballmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11105" start="12619" end="12630" title="Elena Kagan" label="Elena Kagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q445734" start="12640" end="12655" title="Lisa P. Jackson" label="Lisa P. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q643556" start="12665" end="12678" title="B. Alvin Drew" label="B. Alvin Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q450404" start="12688" end="12700" title="Lisa Randall" label="Lisa Randall"/>
<link wikidata="Q312556" start="12710" end="12720" title="Jeff Bezos" label="Jeff Bezos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4757073" start="12730" end="12743" title="Andrew Gelman" label="Andrew Gelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q50612" start="12753" end="12763" title="Susan Rice" label="Susan Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595861" start="12773" end="12786" title="Spencer Wells" label="Spencer Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q705525" start="12796" end="12807" title="Peter Thiel" label="Peter Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3676011" start="12817" end="12827" title="Chubb Rock" label="Chubb Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q236809" start="12837" end="12846" title="Jeri Ryan" label="Jeri Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500282" start="12856" end="12867" title="Lauren Lake" label="Lauren Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551937" start="12877" end="12893" title="Linda Rottenberg" label="Linda Rottenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q210428" start="12903" end="12916" title="Elliott Smith" label="Elliott Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036942" start="12926" end="12934" title="Ted Cruz" label="Ted Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q51489" start="12944" end="12962" title="M. Night Shyamalan" label="M. Night Shyamalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919700" start="12972" end="12994" title="Howard Friedman" label="Howard Steven Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308374" start="13004" end="13021" title="Michael McCullers" label="Michael McCullers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6289383" start="13031" end="13042" title="Josh Singer" label="Josh Singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q540597" start="13052" end="13064" title="Asia Carrera" label="Asia Carrera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305117" start="13074" end="13094" title="Melissa Harris-Perry" label="Melissa Harris-Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q462146" start="13104" end="13119" title="Brooke Magnanti" label="Brooke Magnanti"/>
<link wikidata="Q160219" start="13129" end="13144" title="Stephenie Meyer" label="Stephenie Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234314" start="13154" end="13165" title="Felicia Day" label="Felicia Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q48472346" start="13175" end="13186" title="Slater Rhea" label="Slater Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970567" start="13991" end="14044" title="National Association for College Admission Counseling" label="National Association for College Admission Counseling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186755" start="15212" end="15228" title="critical reading" label="critical reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="15238" end="15249" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37260" start="15278" end="15285" title="writing" label="writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109023" start="15372" end="15385" title="College Board" label="College Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429753" start="15908" end="15916" title="FairTest" label="FairTest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029404" start="16211" end="16251" title="Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation" label="Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q283181" start="16276" end="16312" title="Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes" label="Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019802" wikidata="Q1302421" url="?curid=1019802" title="Alexander (crater)">
<text>Alexander is a lunar impact crater-like feature in the rugged surface to the north of Mare Serenitatis. It lies to the south-southwest of the prominent crater Eudoxus, and to the east-northeast of Calippus. It was named after Alexander the Great. 

The Alexander formation has been so heavily worn and distorted with the passage of time that it now resembles little more than a lowland region enclosed by rugged ranges. The rim segments lie along the northwest, west, and south sections of the crater, while the eastern side stands open to the surrounding surface. The surviving walls are nearly rectangular in form, with the most prominent mounts in the northwest.

The crater floor is more smooth and has a darker albedo in the western half, and gradually grows lighter and more impacted toward the east. There are no craters of significance within the perimeter of this formation, although there are tiny craterlets aplenty in the rougher eastern section.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Alexander.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1302421" start="0" end="9" title="Alexander (crater)" label="Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="15" end="20" title="lunar crater" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="21" end="34" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q169625" start="86" end="102" title="Mare Serenitatis" label="Mare Serenitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128013" start="159" end="166" title="Eudoxus (lunar crater)" label="Eudoxus"/>
<link wikidata="Q920342" start="197" end="205" title="Calippus (crater)" label="Calippus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="226" end="245" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="716" end="722" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019803" wikidata="Q626389" url="?curid=1019803" title="Sûreté">
<text> (, but often translated to &#x27;safety&#x27; or &#x27;security&#x27;) is, in some French-speaking countries or regions, the organizational title of a civil police force.

==Algeria==
The Directorate General for National Security is known in French as the Sûreté Nationale.

== Belgium ==
The VSSE is known by its French name, Sûreté de l&#x27;État.

==Canada==
The provincial police force of Québec is called the Sûreté du Québec.

==France==
The French National Police was formerly called Sûreté générale and then Sûreté nationale.

===History===
The Sûreté nationale, or Sûreté, began as the criminal investigative bureau of the (Paris Police Prefecture) and did not function as the national command and control organization until much later, by which time it no longer had any detectives on its staff.

Both the Paris Police Prefecture&#x27;s Brigade Criminelle and the Direction centrale de la Police judiciaire trace their history directly to the Sûreté.

The French Sûreté is considered a pioneer of all crime-fighting organizations in the world, although London&#x27;s Bow Street Runners, founded 1749, served a similar purpose at times. Founded in 1812 by Eugène François Vidocq, who headed it until 1827, it was the inspiration for Scotland Yard, the FBI, and other departments of criminal investigation throughout the world. Vidocq was convinced that crime could not be controlled by then-current police methods, so he organized a special branch of the criminal division modelled on Napoleon&#x27;s political police. The force was to work undercover and its early members consisted largely of reformed criminals. By 1820 – eight years after its formation – it had blossomed into a 30-man team of experts that had reduced the crime rate in Paris by 40%.

On 23 April 1941, the French police was nationalized under the Vichy regime, and each branch was placed under the prefect. The term &quot;Police nationale&quot; (&quot;National Police&quot;) was then first used – with the sole exception of the Paris Police Prefecture. This organisational name was used during the Fourth and Fifth French Republic.

On 9 July 1964, the previously independent police in Paris were placed under the Sûreté nationale and 10 July 1966 saw the final reorganization into the National Police in its present form.

===Notable original members===
* Eugène François Vidocq – founder and first chief

==Morocco==
The national police force of Morocco is the Sûreté Nationale.

==Switzerland==
&quot;Sûreté&quot; is the name of the detective branch of the cantonal police of the French-speaking cantons of Switzerland.

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q626389" start="0" end="0" title="Sûreté" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q3030788" start="84" end="120" title="Geographical distribution of French speakers" label="French-speaking countries or regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q12218510" start="189" end="230" title="Algerian police" label="Directorate General for National Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q2858778" start="367" end="390" title="Law enforcement in Canada" label="provincial police force"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="394" end="400" title="Québec" label="Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915034" start="415" end="431" title="Sûreté du Québec" label="Sûreté du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q121484" start="449" end="471" title="National Police (France)" label="French National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="782" end="791" title="detective" label="detective"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="848" end="866" title="Direction régionale de la police judiciaire de la préfecture de police de Paris#Organization" label="Brigade Criminelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029457" start="875" end="917" title="Central Directorate of the Judicial Police" label="Direction centrale de la Police judiciaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341687" start="1078" end="1096" title="Bow Street Runners" label="Bow Street Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q122818" start="1166" end="1188" title="Eugène François Vidocq" label="Eugène François Vidocq"/>
<link wikidata="Q184619" start="1243" end="1256" title="Scotland Yard" label="Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="1262" end="1265" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1495" end="1503" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="1511" end="1527" title="political police" label="political police"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="1829" end="1841" title="Vichy regime" label="Vichy regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q163265" start="2010" end="2033" title="Paris Police Prefecture" label="Paris Police Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q121484" start="2268" end="2283" title="National Police (France)" label="National Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q122818" start="2339" end="2361" title="Eugène François Vidocq" label="Eugène François Vidocq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391634" start="2445" end="2461" title="Sûreté Nationale (Morocco)" label="Sûreté Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q842782" start="2518" end="2527" title="detective" label="detective"/>
<link wikidata="Q665913" start="2542" end="2557" title="cantonal police" label="cantonal police"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2565" end="2571" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q23058" start="2581" end="2603" title="cantons of Switzerland" label="cantons of Switzerland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019804" wikidata="Q975998" url="?curid=1019804" title="Eugenia">
<text>Eugenia is a genus of flowering plants in the myrtle family Myrtaceae. It has a worldwide, although highly uneven, distribution in tropical and subtropical regions. The bulk of the approximately 1,100 species occur in the New World tropics, especially in the eastern Brazil&#x27;s northern Andes, the Caribbean, and the Atlantic Forest (coastal forests). Other centers of diversity include New Caledonia and Madagascar. Many species in the Old World have received a new classification into the genus &quot;Syzygium&quot;.

All species are woody evergreen trees and shrubs. Several are grown as ornamental plants for their attractive glossy foliage, and a few produce edible fruit that are eaten fresh or used in jams and jellies.

==Taxonomy==
The genus was named in honor of Prince Eugene of Savoy.

Many species new to science have been and are in the process of being described from these regions. For example, 37 new species of &quot;Eugenia&quot; have been described from Mesoamerica in the past few years. At least 20 new species are currently being described from New Caledonia, and approximately the same number of species new to science may occur in Madagascar. Despite the enormous ecological importance of the myrtle family in Australia (e.g. &quot;Eucalyptus&quot;, &quot;Corymbia&quot;, &quot;Angophora&quot;, &quot;Melaleuca&quot;, &quot;Callistemon&quot;, &quot;Rhodamnia&quot;, &quot;Gossia&quot;), only one species of &quot;Eugenia&quot;, &quot;E. reinwardtiana&quot;, occurs on that continent. The genus also is represented in Africa south of the Sahara, but it is relatively species-poor on that continent. In the past some botanists included the morphologically similar Old World genus &quot;Syzygium&quot; in &quot;Eugenia&quot;, but research by Rudolf Schmid in the early 1970s convinced most botanists that the genera are easily separable. Research by van Wyk and colleagues in South Africa suggests the genus may comprise at least two major lineages, recognizable by anatomical and other features.

Molecular phylogenetic studies have changed the historical circumscription of the genus. Many species formerly placed in &quot;Eugenia&quot; have been moved to &quot;Syzygium&quot;. Two others have been reassigned to &quot;Pimenta.&quot; The Caribbean genera &quot;Hottea&quot;, &quot;Calyptrogenia&quot; and &quot;Pseudanamomis&quot; were shown to be embedded in &quot;Eugenia&quot;. The monotypic Indian genus &quot;Meteoromyrtus&quot; was also found to be part of &quot;Eugenia&quot;.

=== Species ===

Selected species include:
==Ecology==
&quot;Eugenia&quot; species are sometimes used as food plants by the larvae of hepialid moths of the genera &quot;Aenetus&quot; (including &quot;A. splendens&quot;) and &quot;Endoclita&quot; (including &quot;E. damor&quot; and &quot;E. malabaricus&quot;). &quot;Aenetus&quot; species burrow horizontally into the trunk then vertically down. Other Lepidoptera larvae which feed on &quot;Eugenia&quot; include &quot;Eupseudosoma aberrans&quot; and the snowy eupseudosoma.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="13" end="18" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="22" end="37" title="flowering plant" label="flowering plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q156563" start="60" end="69" title="Myrtaceae" label="Myrtaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="201" end="208" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="222" end="231" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="267" end="273" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="290" end="295" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="301" end="310" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q477047" start="320" end="335" title="Atlantic Forest" label="Atlantic Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q33788" start="390" end="403" title="New Caledonia" label="New Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="408" end="418" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="440" end="449" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="470" end="484" title="Biological classification" label="classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q133290" start="506" end="514" title="Syzygium" label="Syzygium"/>
<link wikidata="Q190489" start="545" end="554" title="evergreen" label="evergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="555" end="559" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="565" end="570" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q152428" start="776" end="798" title="Prince Eugene of Savoy" label="Prince Eugene of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="977" end="988" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="1159" end="1169" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1238" end="1247" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q45669" start="1260" end="1270" title="Eucalyptus" label="Eucalyptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439250" start="1284" end="1292" title="Corymbia" label="Corymbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904772" start="1306" end="1315" title="Angophora" label="Angophora"/>
<link wikidata="Q606617" start="1329" end="1338" title="Melaleuca" label="Melaleuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q496460" start="1352" end="1363" title="Callistemon" label="Callistemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2230648" start="1377" end="1386" title="Rhodamnia" label="Rhodamnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5587485" start="1400" end="1406" title="Gossia" label="Gossia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310689" start="1462" end="1478" title="Eugenia reinwardtiana" label="E. reinwardtiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583" start="1565" end="1571" title="Sahara" label="Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="1643" end="1651" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q174807" start="1690" end="1699" title="Old World" label="Old World"/>
<link wikidata="Q133290" start="1712" end="1720" title="Syzygium" label="Syzygium"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1901" end="1913" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2023" end="2045" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="Molecular phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121761" start="2082" end="2097" title="Circumscription (taxonomy)" label="circumscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q133290" start="2189" end="2197" title="Syzygium" label="Syzygium"/>
<link wikidata="Q133541" start="2246" end="2253" title="Pimenta (genus)" label="Pimenta"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="2265" end="2274" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="2636" end="2641" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q580250" start="2646" end="2654" title="Hepialidae" label="hepialid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725788" start="2655" end="2659" title="moth" label="moth"/>
<link wikidata="Q507740" start="2681" end="2688" title="Aenetus" label="Aenetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687806" start="2712" end="2724" title="Aenetus splendens" label="A. splendens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937918" start="2742" end="2751" title="Endoclita" label="Endoclita"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376252" start="2775" end="2783" title="Endoclita damor" label="E. damor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376266" start="2800" end="2814" title="Endoclita malabaricus" label="E. malabaricus"/>
<link wikidata="Q507740" start="2829" end="2836" title="Aenetus" label="Aenetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q28319" start="2914" end="2925" title="Lepidoptera" label="Lepidoptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q13531756" start="2981" end="3002" title="Eupseudosoma aberrans" label="Eupseudosoma aberrans"/>
<link wikidata="Q15636391" start="3017" end="3035" title="snowy eupseudosoma" label="snowy eupseudosoma"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019805" wikidata="Q6070132" url="?curid=1019805" title="Iris Associates">
<text>Iris Associates was an American software development company founded in 1984. It developed the software for Lotus Notes (subsequently IBM Notes). Iris worked under contract with Lotus Development Corporation until 1994, when it was bought by Lotus.

==Founding==
Iris Associates was founded in Westford, Massachusetts on December 7, 1984, by Ray Ozzie. Tim Halvorsen, Steve Beckhardt, and Len Kawell, who joined Iris shortly afterwards in January 1985, met Ray Ozzie years before when all of them were working on the University of Illinois PLATO system. They are widely regarded as the core team behind the creation of Lotus Notes. Len Kawell was the author of PDP-11 Notes and a predecessor of VAX Notes, which shared similar functionality to Lotus Notes but predated the graphical interface of the PC.

==Relationship with Lotus Development Corporation==
The company&#x27;s primary funding came from a contractual relationship with Lotus Development Corporation (later known as Lotus Software), best known at the time for its Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet software. Lotus funded development of Iris&#x27;s product (then code-named simply &quot;Notes&quot;) in exchange for a future option to purchase exclusive intellectual property, marketing, and sales rights. After this option was exercised years later by Lotus, Iris was additionally compensated through royalties on gross product sales. Lotus Notes was brought to market on Iris&#x27;s 5th anniversary, December 7, 1989.

The author/publisher contractual relationship between Iris Associates and Lotus Development continued until 1994, when Iris was purchased by Lotus for approximately US$84 million.

==Success of Lotus Notes==
Only a year later, in the face of the rapid decline of its desktop business, Lotus itself was purchased by IBM for approximately US$3.5 billion and Notes became branded as IBM Notes. Approximately US$3 billion of this price is generally attributed to the purchase of the Notes business. 

At the time of the IBM purchase, Lotus reported that Notes had approximately 2.2 million users. In 2004, nearing the 20th anniversary of the founding of Iris Associates, IBM reported that Notes has over 110 million users.

==References==
==External links==
* Official history of Lotus Notes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6070132" start="0" end="15" title="Iris Associates" label="Iris Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="32" end="52" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q60198" start="108" end="119" title="Lotus Notes" label="Lotus Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q909169" start="178" end="195" title="Lotus Development" label="Lotus Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q542640" start="294" end="317" title="Westford, Massachusetts" label="Westford, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q92637" start="342" end="351" title="Ray Ozzie" label="Ray Ozzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6521843" start="389" end="399" title="Len Kawell" label="Len Kawell"/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="517" end="539" title="University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755406" start="540" end="552" title="PLATO system" label="PLATO system"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="695" end="704" title="VAX Notes" label="VAX Notes"/>
<link wikidata="Q93288" start="904" end="912" title="contract" label="contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q909169" start="934" end="951" title="Lotus Development" label="Lotus Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q653999" start="1028" end="1039" title="Lotus 1-2-3" label="Lotus 1-2-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1207" end="1228" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q39809" start="1230" end="1239" title="marketing" label="marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q194189" start="1245" end="1250" title="sales" label="sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="1355" end="1364" title="royalties" label="royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1789" end="1792" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q60198" start="1854" end="1863" title="IBM Notes" label="IBM Notes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019809" wikidata="Q1190346" url="?curid=1019809" title="Fort Tryon Park">
<text>Fort Tryon Park is a public park located in the Washington Heights and Inwood neighborhoods of the borough of Manhattan in New York City. The park is situated on a ridge in Upper Manhattan, close to the Hudson River to the west. It extends mostly from 192nd Street in the south to Riverside Drive in the north, and from Broadway in the east to the Henry Hudson Parkway in the west. The main entrance to the park is at Margaret Corbin Circle, at the intersection of Fort Washington Avenue and Cabrini Boulevard.

The area was known by the local Lenape tribe as &quot;Chquaesgeck&quot; and by Dutch settlers as &quot;Lange Bergh&quot; (Long Hill). During the American Revolutionary War, the Battle of Fort Washington was fought at the site of the park on November 16, 1776. The area remained sparsely populated during the 19th century, but by the turn of the 20th century, it was the location of large country estates.

Beginning in January 1917, philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr., bought up the &quot;Tryon Hall&quot; estate of Chicago industrialist C. K. G. Billings and several others to create Fort Tryon Park. He engaged the Olmsted Brothers firm to design the park and hired James W. Dawson to create the planting plan. Rockefeller gave the land to the city in 1931, after two prior attempts to do so were unsuccessful, and the park was completed in 1935. Rockefeller also bought sculptor George Gray Barnard&#x27;s collection of medieval art and gave it to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which from 1935 to 1939 built the Cloisters in Fort Tryon Park to house the collection.

The park is built on a high formation of Manhattan schist with igneous intrusions and glacial striations from the last ice age. The park&#x27;s design included extensive plantings of various flora in the park&#x27;s many gardens, including the Heather Garden, which was restored in the 1980s. Besides the gardens and the Cloisters, the park has extensive walking paths and meadows, with views of the Hudson and Harlem Rivers. Fort Tryon Park was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 19, 1978 and was designated a New York City scenic landmark in 1983.

== Geography and geology ==
Fort Tryon Park covers . It is bounded on the west by the Henry Hudson Parkway, on the north by Riverside Drive, on the east by Broadway and Bennett Avenue, and on the south by the alignment of 192nd Street. A small section at the park&#x27;s southwestern corner is located between Cabrini Boulevard to the east and Henry Hudson Parkway to the west, and is bounded to the south by 190th Street. The park is adjacent to Inwood Hill Park to the north and Fort Washington Park and Riverside Park to the south; all are part of the Manhattan Waterfront Greenway. The park offers views of the Hudson River, the George Washington Bridge, and the New Jersey Palisades, to the west; Washington Heights to the south; Inwood and the Bronx to the north; and the Harlem River to the east. The north–south Henry Hudson Parkway and Amtrak&#x27;s Empire Connection run alongside the western edge of the park.

The park is built on a formation of Manhattan schist and contains examples of igneous intrusions and of glacial striations from the last ice age. The lower lying regions to the east and north of the park are built on Inwood marble. Outcroppings of gneiss and schist can be seen interlaid with the marble, as seen in the outcroppings at the park&#x27;s edges. Fort Tryon Park also contains a large glacial pothole.

The northern boundary of the park is formed by the seismologically active Dyckman Street Fault. The fault creates a valley separating Fort Tryon Park from Inwood Hill Park to the north. In precolonial times, a Native American road ran within this valley from the present-day intersection of Broadway and Dyckman Street to a settlement on the Hudson River. The valley formerly contained an inlet named Little Sand Bay, which flowed into the Hudson River to the west. As recently as 1989, activity of this fault caused a magnitude 2 earthquake.

Another valley separated Fort Washington from a hill to the east, which hosted Fort George. This valley contained a stream, which was known as the Hessian Spring. The stream emptied into Half Creek (later Sherman Creek), which in turn led to the Harlem River to the east.

== History ==
=== Site ===
The northern portion of Manhattan was first known to be inhabited by the Wecquaesgeek tribe of Lenape Native Americans, who referred to the area around Fort Tryon Park as &quot;Chquaesgeck&quot;. When Dutch settlers inhabited the lower Hudson Valley in the early 17th century, they attempted to force the Native Americans out, and some of the Wecquaesgeeks continued to occupy the area. The tribe had moved out by 1669, but continued to hold onto their land claims until 1715. The Dutch referred to the park site as &quot;Lange Bergh&quot; (Long Hill), a name first given by Dutch settler Joost van Oblienus in 1691. At the time, Long Hill was a heavily wooded area that was part of the town of Harlem. As late as the 17th century, wild animals could be hunted on the northern portion of the hill, within the park&#x27;s present site. In 1711, Harlem&#x27;s political leaders decreed that a road be built through the area. When Harlem was subdivided the following year, the hill was split into multiple smaller lots.

During the American Revolutionary War, the trees were cleared to make way for fortifications. At the time, Long Hill had been known as &quot;Mount Washington&quot;, while an outcropping in the center of the site was called &quot;Forest Hill&quot;. The latter was part of a series of fortifications that lined the steep cliff within the park site, which was known by the Americans as &quot;Fort Washington&quot;. The actual site of Fort Washington is less than a mile south at Bennett Park. The park was an ancillary site of the Battle of Fort Washington, fought on November 16, 1776, between 2,900 American soldiers and 8,000 invading Hessian troops hired by Great Britain. Despite the American Continental Army&#x27;s strategic position at the top of Long Hill, they were defeated after holding out for two hours. American soldier Margaret Corbin became the first woman to fight in the war and was injured during the battle; the southern entrance to the park bears her name. After the British victory, the outpost on Forest Hill was named after William Tryon, the last British Governor of the Province of New York (1771–1777). The British made improvements to Fort Tryon, using it as Upper Manhattan&#x27;s primary defensive post, before peacefully withdrawing from Manhattan in 1783. The Tryon name persisted even after the British withdrawal, even as many other colonial place names were being expunged of their British influence.

As New York City expanded and prospered following the end of the Revolutionary War, the land comprising the park remained undeveloped, except for a few country estates. The first of these was created by Dr. Samuel Watkins, founder of Watkins Glen, who took ownership of multiple plots in 1818. Ownership of the Watkins estate passed to Lucius Chittenden, a merchant originally from New Orleans, in 1844. The Chittenden family owned the land until 1871. Part of the estate was sold in 1855 to August C. Richards, who built a Gothic-style stone castle called &quot;Woodcliff&quot;, designed by Alexander Jackson Davis. Woodcliff was subsequently used as a summer home by General Daniel Butterfield, Boss Tweed, Alexander Turney Stewart, and William Libbey, whereupon it became known as &quot;Libby Castle&quot;. Another portion of the Chittenden site was developed by William C. Muschenheim, later an operator of the Hotel Astor, who built an estate called &quot;Fort Tryon Terrace&quot;. In contrast with the elaborate estates at the top of Fort Tryon, the plateau to the east was known as &quot;Poverty Hollow&quot; by 1851.

Between 1901 and 1905, C. K. G. Billings combined Chittenden&#x27;s, Muschenheim&#x27;s, and Libbey&#x27;s properties into a single estate. On the site, he built &quot;Tryon Hall&quot;, a Châteauesque-style mansion with a swimming pool, horse stables, a formal garden, pergolas, and a winding driveway leading from Riverside Drive. The mansion also contained boat docks on the Hudson River and a garage to house his collection of 13 automobiles. Billings lived at Tryon Hall until 1915. Immediately to the north were Abbey Inn, a summer residence built on land that Willam Henry Hays had purchased in 1842, and another estate that Walter S. Sheafer, the state geologist of Pennsylvania, had bought in 1891.

=== Acquisition and planning ===
The philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr. had held an interest in Fort Tryon since childhood, when he and his father had taken walks in Fort Tryon. In January 1917, Rockefeller anonymously purchased the that collectively comprised the Hays and Sheafer tracts, Shortly afterward, a &quot;New York Times&quot; article publicized the sale, and Rockefeller acquired the Billings estate for $35,000 an acre.

In June 1917, Rockefeller announced that Fort Tryon Park would be given to the city on the conditions that it be joined to the existing Fort Washington and Riverside Parks, and that the city maintain the park. Rockefeller also donated land on the opposite bank of the Hudson to the Palisades Interstate Park in 1933; that land would be taken over by the Palisades Interstate Park Commission, which had operated the Palisades Interstate Park in New Jersey since 1900. According to the Palisades Interstate Park Commission&#x27;s website, there is an often-repeated claim that the land in New Jersey was bought to preserve views from Fort Tryon Park; however, the Palisades land was purchased years before Fort Tryon Park was opened to the public. In any case, Rockefeller planned to run a ferry service across the Hudson River between Fort Tryon and the Palisades on the river&#x27;s western bank. Mayor John Purroy Mitchel was positioned to accept Rockefeller&#x27;s offer. However, his successor John Francis Hylan ultimately did not accept the land, saying that the site had not been &quot;improved&quot;. Moreover, the city had failed to propose a law that would have deeded the parkland to the Palisades Interstate Park Commission. In 1925, Hylan told one of Rockefeller&#x27;s advisors that the city would consider another proposal to take the land and use it as a park. Following this, Rockefeller again offered the land to the city in 1926, though without success.

In preparation for converting the land into a city park, Rockefeller hired the Olmsted Brothers firm, particularly Frederick Law Olmsted Jr., son of the designer of Central Park. Olmsted&#x27;s design capitalized on the topography to reveal sweeping vistas of the Hudson River and the Palisades. Olmsted Jr. was guided by the four principles of park design that his father had established in creating Central Park: the beautiful, as seen in small open lawns; the picturesque, as shown in wooded slopes; the sublime, represented in the vistas of the Hudson River; and the gardenesque, exemplified by the park&#x27;s Heather and Alpine Gardens. Olmsted Jr. had a preliminary report in 1927 and conducted a more exhaustive study in 1928–1930. In addition, James W. Dawson was hired to create a park-planting plan.

Rockefeller also bought sculptor George Gray Barnard&#x27;s collection of medieval art in 1925. He added several artworks to the collection, which became a branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art (Met) in 1926. Rockefeller retained Barnard as an advisor for the collection, and they collectively decided to add a museum for the collection at Fort Tryon Park, which they chose for its elevation, views, and accessible but isolated location. The Billings mansion, which was originally supposed to house the collection, was destroyed in a March 1926 fire that burned down everything except the walls. In June 1930, Rockefeller offered of the park to the city for a third time, though he reserved for the future museum. Rockefeller also offered to improve the grounds for $2 million, though the city would be responsible for improving utilities in the park. In his letter offering the park to the city, Rockefeller proposed to name the park after Fort Tryon, but in September 1930, historian Reginald Pelham Bolton said that Rockefeller actually preferred to have the park be named &quot;Forest Hill Park&quot;. In early 1931, the city moved to accept Rockefeller&#x27;s offer.

=== Construction ===

Construction of the park began in August 1931, before the city had accepted the deed to the land on December 28, 1931. The work provided many jobs during the Great Depression. The work included numerous smaller projects such as destruction of the old Billings estate; grading of the terrain; constructing structures such as arches and balconies; planting trees, shrubs, and lawns; and cutting into the ridge of the west side of the park to create an extension of Riverside Drive. Some of Manhattan schist were used in the project, while an average of 350 workers were employed during each day of work. Construction progressed quickly and by February 1932, it was reported that Fort Tryon Park was 42% complete. Rockefeller bought an additional two plots from the Met totaling about in June 1932. The following year, he offered to landscape the additional plots at his own expense, and the city accepted that land.

The project included the construction of the New York City Subway&#x27;s IND Eighth Avenue Line, served by the modern-day , which contains two stations serving the park (see ). The line, which crosses directly under the park between the two stations, opened in late 1932. By March 1934, it was reported that the park was nearly complete, but that an additional $500,000 was needed for improvements. The Public Works Administration subsequently gave mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia and New York City parks commissioner Robert Moses $800,000 in funds to complete the park. The playground at the northeast corner of the park, at Broadway and Dyckman Street, was opened on September 6, 1934. The park was dedicated on October 12, 1935 by Rockefeller &amp; Moses. In total, Rockefeller had spent $3.6 million toward the park&#x27;s construction. Upon Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s opening, Upper Manhattan had nearly of parkland split among several non-contiguous sites, including Fort Tryon, Fort Washington, Inwood Hill, and Highbridge Parks.

In April 1935, construction started on the Cloisters, the Met&#x27;s medieval art museum within the park. The museum, designed by Charles Collens, incorporated several medieval buildings that were purchased in Europe, brought to the United States, and reassembled, often stone by stone. The first portions of the Cloisters were opened to the public in May 1938, and the museum was completed the following year.



=== Mid-20th century and decline ===
In the years following Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s opening, several improvements were made to the park. In 1936, the Met gave the city a small portion of the land intended for the Cloisters, thereby increasing Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s area slightly. In 1939, Rockefeller announced that he had given the city an additional of vacant land adjacent to Fort Tryon Park, which the city would convert into another playground. The new playground was dedicated in 1941.

During the years before World War I, the future park&#x27;s name was shared by the neighborhood to its south. The area between Broadway and the Hudson River, as far south as West 179th Street, was known as Fort Tryon. By the 1940s the neighborhood was known as Frankfurt-on-the-Hudson, a name that by the 1990s had given way to Hudson Heights. In the 1970s, a retired furniture salesman named Robert Hoffman led an initiative to rename Fort Tryon Park, following an interaction where Hoffman heard a group of tourists laugh upon hearing about the park&#x27;s etymology. His efforts led Hope Irvine, a co-chairperson of Manhattan Community Board 12&#x27;s Bicentennial Committee, to suggest Margaret Corbin&#x27;s name for the park. The Cloisters objected to the entire park&#x27;s renaming but reached a compromise to rename the park&#x27;s southern entrance plaza and the main road. This led to the New York City Council voting to rename these features after Margaret Corbin in 1977.

As the City of New York suffered severe budget constraints in the 1970s, especially in the aftermath of the 1975 New York City fiscal crisis, funds for parks were decimated. Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s gardens, woodlands, and playgrounds fell into disuse and disrepair. The park&#x27;s concession building was closed in 1976 following a major fire. Decline continued until the 1980s when funds became available and restoration efforts began. Numerous crimes were recorded in the park in the 1980s. These included the discoveries of several corpses, including that of a missing 9-year-old girl in 1986, and that of a 19-year-old woman who was strangled in 1989. However, there were perceptions that crime in Fort Tryon Park was overlooked due to its relatively remote position. In April 1989, the beating and rape of a woman in Central Park received national media attention, but a similar attack on another woman in Fort Tryon Park the same month was sparsely covered even by local media.

=== Late-20th and early-21st century improvements ===

In 1983, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission made Fort Tryon Park an official scenic landmark. The next year, a plan for the park&#x27;s complete renovation was unveiled. The Greenacre Foundation, an organization created by John Rockefeller Jr.&#x27;s only daughter Abby Rockefeller Mauzé, donated $10 million toward the restoration in advance of the park&#x27;s 50th anniversary in 1985. Among the first features to receive improvements was the Heather Garden, which was restored over three years by a partnership between the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation (NYC Parks), the Greenacre Foundation, and volunteers. The concession building was restored beginning in 1995 by the New York Restoration Project (NYRP), a nonprofit organization operated by Bette Midler, which started operating a cafe there in 2001. The Anne Loftus Playground at the park&#x27;s northeast corner was also restored between 1995 and 1997, and the Javits Playground at the southern border was restored around the same time. The nonprofit Fort Tryon Park Trust was founded in 1998 to help maintain the park. In 2001, the trust raised $200,000 toward the further restoration of the Heather Garden. The Sir William Dog Run opened the same year.

The park was still the site of crimes, despite being much safer than in previous years. After an incident where a jogger was raped in the early morning in 1997, NYC Parks considered proposals to close the park&#x27;s roads at night. Met officials opposed the move because it would block access to the Cloisters, but NYC Parks eventually agreed to place wooden barriers to allow Met staff access at night. &quot;The New York Times&quot; stated that the park had gained the perception among local residents and park officials &quot;as something of a nighttime haven for vandals, drug users and even car thieves&quot;, and had seen eight abandoned cars in 1997 alone. Following additional crimes in the 2000s, cameras were installed in the park in 2011.

NYC Parks and the Fort Tryon Park Trust started restoring the park&#x27;s eastern side in 2006. The restoration of the overgrown Alpine Garden was completed in 2009 in advance of the park&#x27;s 75th anniversary the following year. On June 15, 2010, the park celebrated its 75th anniversary with a fundraiser and fireworks display. After the concession building was closed in 2014 for roof renovations, the operation of the restaurant was taken over in 2015 by Queens-based cafe Coffeed. A renovation of the Jacob K. Javits Playground started in July 2018 and was completed in March 2020. The Anne Loftus Playground was temporarily closed in August 2021, and it reopened in October 2022 after a $4.2 million renovation.

== Design ==

Olmsted Brothers created a plan that adapted the area&#x27;s steep topography into a landscaped park. According to their original 1927 design, Fort Tryon Park was to be a &quot;landscape park occupying a site of extraordinary landscape interest&quot;, devoted mostly to &quot;passive recreation&quot; except for a playground at its northern edge. Fort Tryon Park&#x27;s landscape also served as the backdrop for the Cloisters, intended as the &quot;culminating point of interest in the architectural design of the park.&quot; The natural topography was largely preserved, with the park being designed around the terrain. Olmsted Jr. believed that the park should use a variety of landscapes:

Each unit in this intricate series of places should offer a picture of as great perfection as can be contrived, using the same great distant views over the Hudson and over the City gain and again but framing them differently, presenting them with constantly differing types of foreground, some intricate and intimate, some grandiose and simple, some richly architectural or gardenesque, some picturesquely naturalistic; and, by way of contrast, some presenting wholly self-contained scenes.

In a continuation of his father&#x27;s design philosophy, Olmsted Jr. included passive recreation features such as numerous tiers of paths; a combination of natural and manmade slopes; and the addition of plantings and rock forms to supplement existing features of the park site. The few small flat areas were converted to lawns with trees on their perimeters. Stone retaining walls were placed along slopes to prevent visitors on the paths from falling off the cliffs. The park also included curved drives and pathways for vehicles and pedestrians, as well as segregated vehicle and pedestrian uses. Other design features in Fort Tryon Park included the use of arches; segregation of passive and active recreational activities; the diversity and precise arrangement of plantings; the variety of different landscape designs; and the blend of naturalistic and architectural features. Similar design principles were also included in Morningside Park and in the Ramble at Central Park, both designed by Olmsted&#x27;s father upon steep terrain.

In contrast to previous parks created by Olmsted Jr. and his father, Fort Tryon Park emphasized architecture and was more accommodating to vehicles. The park&#x27;s retaining walls were more prominent than in previous parks, and the Cloisters was the most prominent feature of the park. Further, Fort Tryon Park contained parking lots and vehicle overlooks, in contrast to other parks that discouraged vehicle use. Other deviations from past designs included the emphasis of Heather Garden, a gardenesque feature, as well as the formally-designed children&#x27;s playground at the northeast corner. The design includes numerous architectural features including Corbin Circle and Linden Terrace.

=== Circulation ===
Fort Tryon Park contains numerous roads that can accommodate light traffic volumes. The primary road, named Margaret Corbin Drive, carries traffic from the park&#x27;s southern entrance at Corbin Circle to a roadway that loops around the Cloisters. Formally designated in 1977, the name commemorates the Continental Army soldier in the American Revolutionary War who was wounded in the Battle of Fort Washington. A secondary roadway named Fort Tryon Place carries traffic to and from the northbound lanes of Henry Hudson Parkway, at the bottom of the cliff to the west. Corbin Drive passes above Fort Tryon Place via a pair of masonry arches: one large arch at a rock cut that carries both directions of Corbin Drive above both directions of Fort Tryon Place, and a smaller arch that carries northbound Corbin Drive over the westbound Fort Tryon Place. The drive contains numerous small parking lots.

The north–south Fort Washington Avenue ends at Corbin Circle, though it once extended north through the park. Another street, Abbey Hill Road, once connected Margaret Corbin Drive with Broadway, though it no longer exists on maps. The north–south Overlook Terrace, on the south side of the park, was authorized to be extended to Corbin Circle, though that section was not built.

An -long network of pedestrian pathways is also located within the park. Along the edges of some paths, there are rows of stone that have been cut and placed to produce naturalistic effects. Tunnels carry the paths under the drives at two locations: at Fort Tryon Place and near the concession building. Another bridge carries a path over Fort Tryon Place. Ramps and stairways connect the park to Broadway and Riverside Drive, respectively located at the bottom of the cliff to the east and north. A formal promenade, containing seating areas and elm trees, runs north from Corbin Circle to Linden Terrace.

=== Plantings ===

The park site was originally planted with numerous trees, both native and imported. Olmsted Brothers transported 180 fully grown &quot;mature trees&quot; and planted more than 1,600 floral species to make the park appear like a botanical garden. The various sections of Fort Tryon Park were planted with herbaceous plants, shrubs, and trees representing different seasons. There were also numerous small lawns including the Children&#x27;s Play Lawn and the Picnic Grounds, as well as formal planted areas such as Corbin Circle, the promenade, the terrace, and the playground. The Heather and Alpine Gardens were distinctly designed with a large variety of plantings. Though it is illegal to forage for plants inside Fort Tryon Park, or at any other public park within the city, relatively few summons are written for such violations within the park.

The Heather Garden, located in a ridge west of Corbin Drive and the promenade, is described by NYC Parks as &quot;the largest public garden with unrestricted access in New York City&quot;, with an area of . It was planned by the Olmsted Brothers as a gardenesque site with American elm trees and low-growing heather, also known as &quot;Calluna vulgaris&quot;. The short height of the heather was intended to allow views of the Hudson River, and stone seating allowed visitors to observe the landscape. The heather took several years to grow to its full height. The Heather Garden became overgrown with invasive species after a remodeling in 1955 failed to take Olmsted&#x27;s design into consideration. The garden was restored in the late 1980s following Olmsted&#x27;s original plans. Minor additions and improvements continued to take place afterward. The garden contains perennials, shrubs, and trees, as well as plantings representing each season.

The Alpine Garden, the other formal space planned by the Olmsted Brothers, is located on the ridge along the park&#x27;s eastern side, to the east of the Cloisters. It contains a stone stair and a grotto. Originally planted with alpine plants, the garden later became overgrown before being restored in 2009. The garden incorporates numerous rocks, which according to NYC Parks&#x27; website &quot; the outcroppings of metamorphic Manhattan schist&quot;. The rocks used in the garden include quartz, feldspar, mica, and garnet; some of the stone comes from excavations during the park&#x27;s and subway&#x27;s construction.

In addition, the Cabrini Woods Nature Sanctuary runs alongside Cabrini Boulevard at the southwestern corner of the park. The woods connect to Inwood Hill Park and Fort Washington Park, the last two natural woodlands in Manhattan. Both the woods and the boulevard are named after Frances Xavier Cabrini, the first American canonized as a Roman Catholic saint. The woods serve as a habitat for wildlife, including 80 bird species as well as possums, raccoons, and skunks.

=== Playgrounds ===

Fort Tryon Park contains two playgrounds. The park&#x27;s northeast corner contains the Anne Loftus Playground, a triangle-shaped play area that primarily serves the Inwood neighborhood to the north. It is named after Anne Susan Cahill Loftus, a local resident who was the district manager of Manhattan Community Board 12 between 1980 and 1989. Opened in 1934, the playground was the only section of Fort Tryon Park that was originally intended for &quot;active recreation&quot; and the only playground designed by the Olmsted Brothers. The Olmsted Brothers built the playground on the site because of its flatness and proximity to the streets nearby. The southwest side of the Anne Loftus Playground contains a one-story stone fieldhouse with a rooftop observation deck that is set into the cliff, and the northeast side contains an entrance to the Dyckman Street station. A large wading pool is located in the middle of the playground, and plane trees encircle the play area. The playground was restored in 1995–1997 under a $1.44 million project that also added handicapped-accessible facilities, additional play structures, and performance space. The Anne Loftus Playground was renovated again between 2021 and 2022.

The other playground in Fort Tryon Park is the Jacob K. Javits Playground, which primarily serves Hudson Heights and is named after U.S. senator Jacob Javits. The play area contains a play structure and basketball courts, as well as elm trees throughout the playground. When the park was created, Empire Mortgage initially leased the playground to the city before giving away the land as a gift in 1944. The playground was transferred to NYC Parks in 1981 and renamed after Javits in 1984. It was renovated in 1995. After a second period of decline, the playground was renovated again from 2018 to 2020.

=== Other features ===
Margaret Corbin Circle is located at the intersection of Cabrini Boulevard and Fort Washington Avenue, on the park&#x27;s southern border. Formerly known simply as the South Plaza, it was renamed in 1977 after Corbin. The plaza consists of a roundabout for traffic, and is surrounded by a low stone perimeter wall, with stone posts flanking the entrances to the building. A planted circle is located in the center of the roundabout. The old Fort Tryon Cottage (see ) and the station building to the New York City Subway&#x27;s 190th Street station are located on the edges of the plaza. A bronze plaque commemorating Corbin is located on the perimeter wall.

Sir William&#x27;s Dog Run is located to the east of Corbin Drive, south of the overpass over Fort Tryon Drive. The dog run is open 24 hours a day and its regulations allow owners to take their dogs off-leash. Opened in 2001, it is described as the largest dog run in Manhattan. Several trees within Sir William&#x27;s Dog Run are surrounded by short barriers to prevent damage to their roots.

== Structures ==
Buildings in Fort Tryon Park include the Cloisters, the gatehouse, a cafeteria and administration building, the field house, and the subway fan house and shed. Except for the Cloisters, these buildings are mostly single-story masonry structures made with ashlar. Numerous other structures also exist, including a gazebo and the Billings Arcade.

=== The Cloisters ===
The Cloisters is a branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art that houses the museum&#x27;s extensive collection of medieval European art and artifacts, including the &quot;Unicorn Tapestries&quot;. The museum&#x27;s buildings are a combination of medieval structures bought in Europe and reconstructed on-site stone-by-stone, and new buildings in the medieval style designed by Charles Collens. The Cloisters consists of four main cloister structures: Cuxa, Saint Guilhem, Bonnefont, and Trie. The Cloisters also contains three gardens, one each within the Cuxa, Bonnefont, and Trie cloisters. The museum is surrounded by the circular park drive, and its site is bounded by many plantings including an apple orchard to the south and denser vegetation to the north and west. A driveway and a bus stop with Belgian blocks is located at the northeastern portion of the site.

The museum was created after John D. Rockefeller Jr. purchased the medieval art collection of George Grey Barnard, and gave it to the Met along with his own collection. Rockefeller, retaining Bernard as an advisor, decided that Fort Tryon Park was the most suitable place for the collection. The Met then had the Cloisters built in Rockefeller&#x27;s newly created Fort Tryon Park with endowment money from Rockefeller. The Cloisters opened to the public in 1938. A northern extension to the Cloisters, The Fuentidueña Apse, was completed in 1961.

=== Linden Terrace ===

The David Rockefeller Linden Terrace is located at the Promenade&#x27;s northern end, on the site of Fort Tryon and Tryon Hall. The terrace is located above sea level, the highest location in Fort Tryon Park. It is also the highest landscape feature on Manhattan Island, as measured by the distance between ground level and sea level. However, Linden Terrace is not the island&#x27;s highest natural point, which is located within Bennett Park a few blocks south, above sea level. Linden Terrace is supported with stone retaining walls of up to tall. It comprises a main observation deck and the smaller Northeast Terrace, which are linked by an arch across a passageway below. In the early 21st century the terrace was renamed after John D. Rockefeller Jr&#x27;s last surviving child David, who had donated $1 million toward the park.

The main portion contains a terraced seating area with elms. There is plaque installed in 1935 that recognizes John Rockefeller Jr&#x27;s donation of the parkland, as well as another plaque installed in 2010 honoring David&#x27;s donation. The Northeast Terrace, also known as Flagpole Terrace, includes a flagstaff with a granite-and-bronze pedestal. The original flagstaff installed by Olmsted was toppled during Hurricane Sandy in 2012 and was replaced with a replica.

The retaining wall north of Linden Terrace contains a stele called the Fort Tryon Memorial. The stele predates the park, having been installed in 1904 or 1909 to a design by Charles Rollinson Lamb. The monument was donated by C. K. G. Billings and the American Scenic and Historic Preservation Society. It contains an inscription commemorating Corbin&#x27;s and the Maryland and Virginia regiments&#x27; defense during the battle on Forest Hill in 1776.

=== Billings estate ===
There are numerous remnants of the C. K. G. Billings estate. The Fort Tryon Cottage, located on a slope just northwest of Corbin Circle, was originally a gatehouse for the estate. The structure is made of frame and stucco and contains three floors with a dining room and kitchen, as well as a patio. The cottage is NYC Parks&#x27; northern Manhattan headquarters and is closed to the public except for one weekend per year.

Another extant remnant of the estate is the partially paved-over red-brick pathways near Corbin Circle. It was originally a serpentine driveway with multiple switchbacks that continued down to Riverside Drive, now the northbound lanes of the Henry Hudson Parkway. The brick was intended to help horses ascend the driveway&#x27;s 6% slope. By 1936, when the park was built, the driveway had been converted into a pedestrian path. Though the gates to the driveway were removed, the granite posts were left standing. An overgrown section of the driveway used to connect with the northbound Henry Hudson Parkway, but in 1994, the New York State Department of Transportation added a Jersey barrier to block off access to the driveway.

The driveway continued down through the massively arched structure known as the Billings Arcade. The arcade features five arches built of granite from Maine. Atop the arcade is a small open area known as the Billings Lawn. The arcade cost $250,000 to construct, .

=== Concession building ===
The park&#x27;s concession building is located north of Margaret Corbin Circle, on the western side of Corbin Drive. The two-story stone structure is located in a slope. It contains a hip roof made of slate and open pavilions on all sides except the southern facade. The building&#x27;s main entrance is through an arcade with three arches on the eastern facade. Originally, the building contained a cafe with refreshments, as well as restrooms and the headquarters for park staff.

The building, having fallen into disrepair, was closed after a fire in 1976. It was restored beginning in 1995 by Bette Midler&#x27;s nonprofit organization NYRP. The organization was awarded the operation of the concession in 2000, and opened the New Leaf Café – later called the New Leaf Restaurant and Bar – the next year. NYC Parks closed the building for necessary roof repairs in December 2014, and NYRP announced that it would not reopen, due to the length of time the repairs would take and the increased rent that the organization would have to pay. The operation of the restaurant was taken over in late April 2015 by Coffeed, a Queens-based cafe which donates a portion of its revenue to local charities. The restaurant closed again in January 2020 after Coffeed&#x27;s contract expired.

=== Other structures ===
The Shelter Overlook, an octagonal gazebo, is located east of Corbin Drive at the northeast corner of Sir William&#x27;s Dog Run. It originally contained a tile roof, later replaced with a slate roof after a fire. The roof is supported by stone piers. The gazebo is frequented by those using the dog run.

A two-story brick ventilation building for the subway is also located within the park at Broadway and Dongan Place. There are also two comfort stations in the park. The first is a structure at Broadway and Sherman Avenue that looks like a cottage, while the second is located inside a slope north of the Cloisters.

== Wildlife ==
Cabrini Woods hosts 80 bird species as well as possums, raccoons, and skunks. The surrounding area also hosts a wide variety of birds, including common species such as blue jays and cardinals; wild turkeys; and birds of prey including red-tailed hawks and owls. Animals within the area include Eastern and meadow voles, red-bellied salamanders, southern flying squirrels, opossums, white-footed deer mice, and cottontail rabbits, as well as eastern gray squirrels and raccoons.

== Management ==
The Fort Tryon Park Trust is a nonprofit organization that helps maintain and improve Fort Tryon Park. It was founded in 1998 as the Heather Garden Committee Endowment. Their mission statement is to &quot;promote the restoration, preservation, and enhancement of this historic and scenic landmark for the benefit and use of the surrounding community and all New Yorkers and visitors.&quot; The trust secured numerous grants to maintain various parts of the park.

== Transportation ==

The New York City Subway&#x27;s IND Eighth Avenue Line () runs directly underneath Fort Tryon Park. It contains two stations serving the park: the Dyckman Street station at Broadway, Riverside Drive, and Dyckman Street on the far northeast corner of the park, and the 190th Street station at Corbin Circle in the park&#x27;s far southeast end.

Several bus routes serve Fort Tryon Park. The northern terminals of the buses are at Corbin Circle, though the M4 bus is extended into the park to serve the Cloisters when the museum is open. Additionally, the buses serve Broadway on the park&#x27;s eastern border.

== Use and significance ==

=== Historic significance ===
There have been numerous archeological findings in Fort Tryon Park since 1918. That year, Alanson Skinner, an archeologist with the National Museum of the American Indian, discovered &quot;traces of Indian shell heaps, fireplaces, and pits, indicating an ancient camping ground&quot;. The historian Reginald Pelham Bolton wrote in 1924 that the intersection of 194th Street and Broadway may have been used as a seasonal camp, as evidenced by the presence of debris from the pre-colonial era underneath the overhangs in Fort Tryon Park between 194th and 198th Streets. It is unclear whether the subway excavations of the 1930s disturbed any shells or other materials, but despite the construction during that era, many materials are still buried in the ground. In the 1970s, Michael Cohn of the Brooklyn Children&#x27;s Museum found oyster and clam shells as well as pottery shards and &quot;projectile points&quot;. Other excavations have found artifacts from the 17th and 18th centuries, including war artifacts up to below ground level.

Together, the park and the Cloisters were listed as an historic district on the National Register of Historic Places in 1978. The Cloisters had been designated a New York City landmark in 1974, while Fort Tryon Park was designated a scenic landmark in 1983.

=== Public use and perception ===
In 2012, an examination of tweets and emoticons determined that Fort Tryon Park was &quot;the happiest spot in Manhattan&quot;. Because of its secluded location, the park is frequently used for wedding photographs and ceremonies, though the park remains open to the public while these events take place. On the other hand, Fort Tryon Park has historically been used as a location for sexual intercourse due to this seclusion, and in some years, New York City Police Department officers would issue summons once a week. However, since the 2000s and 2010s, summons for public intercourse have decreased greatly.

The Fort Tryon Park Trust helps fund programs for all ages like yoga and tai chi classes, live outdoor concerts, and bird walks. The Trust also supports local artists&#x27; displays within the park, facilitated by the New York City Parks Temporary Public Art Program.

Fort Tryon Park also hosts several annual events. The Medieval Festival, an annual event that has taken place at the park since 1983, typically takes place at the end of September and draws an average of 60,000 people. Additionally, Open House New York hosts the Annual Open House New York Weekend each October, collaborating with the Fort Tryon Park Trust to give tours of the Billings cottage and the Heather Garden. Other annual events include the &quot;Shearing of the Heather&quot; in April, the &quot;Urban Wildlife Festival&quot;, the remembrance of the Battle of Fort Washington in November, the Scandia Symphony concert in June, the Harvest Festival in October, and &quot;A Toast to Fort Tryon&quot; each summer.

=== In media ===
Several films contain footage shot in Fort Tryon Park or the Cloisters. In 1948, director Maya Deren used the Cloisters&#x27; ramparts as a backdrop for her experimental film &quot;Meditation on Violence&quot;. The same year, the film &quot;Portrait of Jennie&quot; used the Cloisters as the location for a convent school. Additionally, two scenes in the 1968 film &quot;Coogan&#x27;s Bluff&quot; were filmed in Fort Tryon Park: a shoot-out at the Cloisters and a motorcycle chase in the Heather Garden. Scenes from the 2011 film &quot;The Adjustment Bureau&quot; were also filmed in Fort Tryon Park.

== See also ==

* List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan above 110th Street
* List of New York City scenic landmarks
* List of parks in New York City
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan above 110th Street

== References ==
Notes
Bibliography
* 
* 
* 

== External links ==

* Fort Tryon Park on the NYC Department of Parks and Recreation website
* The Fort Tryon Park Trust</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="0" end="15" title="Fort Tryon Park" label="Fort Tryon Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370292" start="48" end="66" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189533" start="71" end="77" title="Inwood, Manhattan" label="Inwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="99" end="106" title="borough (New York City)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="110" end="119" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="123" end="136" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11252" start="173" end="188" title="Upper Manhattan" label="Upper Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="203" end="215" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589766" start="281" end="296" title="Riverside Drive (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="320" end="328" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487838" start="348" end="368" title="Henry Hudson Parkway" label="Henry Hudson Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396241" start="418" end="433" title="Margaret Corbin" label="Margaret Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472255" start="465" end="487" title="Fort Washington Avenue" label="Fort Washington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015842" start="492" end="509" title="Cabrini Boulevard" label="Cabrini Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="544" end="550" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="657" end="683" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q706755" start="689" end="714" title="Battle of Fort Washington" label="Battle of Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="960" end="983" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5006141" start="1005" end="1015" title="Tryon Hall" label="Tryon Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006141" start="1054" end="1071" title="C. K. G. Billings" label="C. K. G. Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="1133" end="1149" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q339164" start="1398" end="1417" title="George Gray Barnard" label="George Gray Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624153" start="1439" end="1451" title="medieval art" label="medieval art"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="1471" end="1497" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138030" start="1529" end="1542" title="the Cloisters" label="the Cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063488" start="1629" end="1645" title="Manhattan schist" label="Manhattan schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="1659" end="1668" title="intrusion" label="intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q625751" start="1674" end="1691" title="glacial striation" label="glacial striation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="1702" end="1714" title="Last Glacial Period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="1999" end="2005" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="2047" end="2083" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q126454260" start="2126" end="2155" title="New York City scenic landmark" label="New York City scenic landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487838" start="2252" end="2272" title="Henry Hudson Parkway" label="Henry Hudson Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589766" start="2290" end="2305" title="Riverside Drive (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="2322" end="2330" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015842" start="2476" end="2493" title="Cabrini Boulevard" label="Cabrini Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636278" start="2613" end="2629" title="Inwood Hill Park" label="Inwood Hill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148520" start="2647" end="2667" title="Fort Washington Park (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339602" start="2672" end="2686" title="Riverside Park (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749328" start="2721" end="2750" title="Manhattan Waterfront Greenway" label="Manhattan Waterfront Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="2781" end="2793" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q125821" start="2799" end="2823" title="George Washington Bridge" label="George Washington Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338968" start="2833" end="2853" title="New Jersey Palisades" label="New Jersey Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370292" start="2868" end="2886" title="Washington Heights, Manhattan" label="Washington Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q18426" start="2912" end="2921" title="the Bronx" label="the Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="2944" end="2956" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487838" start="2986" end="3006" title="Henry Hudson Parkway" label="Henry Hudson Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="3011" end="3017" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6405822" start="3025" end="3042" title="Empire Connection" label="Empire Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063488" start="3124" end="3140" title="Manhattan schist" label="Manhattan schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="3174" end="3183" title="intrusion" label="intrusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q625751" start="3192" end="3209" title="glacial striation" label="glacial striation"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="3220" end="3232" title="Last Glacial Period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="3312" end="3318" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q166409" start="3336" end="3342" title="gneiss" label="gneiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q15315" start="3347" end="3353" title="schist" label="schist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358604" start="3485" end="3500" title="glacial pothole" label="glacial pothole"/>
<link wikidata="Q109168329" start="3577" end="3597" title="Dyckman Street Fault" label="Dyckman Street Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636278" start="3658" end="3674" title="Inwood Hill Park" label="Inwood Hill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="3943" end="3955" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q500062" start="4022" end="4033" title="Seismic magnitude scales" label="magnitude 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438535" start="4126" end="4137" title="Fort George, Manhattan" label="Fort George"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="4252" end="4265" title="Sherman Creek (New York)" label="Sherman Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q597451" start="4293" end="4305" title="Harlem River" label="Harlem River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12645114" start="4420" end="4432" title="Wecquaesgeek" label="Wecquaesgeek"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="4442" end="4448" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q200569" start="4548" end="4553" title="Dutch people" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140235" start="4583" end="4596" title="Hudson Valley" label="Hudson Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q189074" start="5042" end="5048" title="Harlem" label="Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="5376" end="5402" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729185" start="5841" end="5853" title="Bennett Park (New York)" label="Bennett Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q706755" start="5893" end="5918" title="Battle of Fort Washington" label="Battle of Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q700853" start="6000" end="6014" title="Hessian (soldiers)" label="Hessian troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="6024" end="6037" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="6060" end="6076" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396241" start="6197" end="6212" title="Margaret Corbin" label="Margaret Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580817" start="6411" end="6424" title="William Tryon" label="William Tryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1840478" start="6435" end="6479" title="List of Colonial Governors of New York" label="British Governor of the Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738851" start="7034" end="7046" title="Watkins Glen, New York" label="Watkins Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="7324" end="7330" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q433770" start="7392" end="7415" title="Alexander Jackson Davis" label="Alexander Jackson Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2615867" start="7477" end="7495" title="Daniel Butterfield" label="Daniel Butterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353450" start="7497" end="7507" title="Boss Tweed" label="Boss Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720268" start="7509" end="7533" title="Alexander Turney Stewart" label="Alexander Turney Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808852" start="7539" end="7553" title="William Libbey" label="William Libbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903297" start="7715" end="7726" title="Hotel Astor (New York City)" label="Hotel Astor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006141" start="7949" end="7966" title="C. K. G. Billings" label="C. K. G. Billings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118885" start="8114" end="8126" title="Châteauesque" label="Châteauesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q264458" start="8195" end="8202" title="pergola" label="pergola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589766" start="8241" end="8256" title="Riverside Drive (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q363984" start="8686" end="8709" title="John D. Rockefeller Jr." label="John D. Rockefeller Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q160278" start="8774" end="8784" title="John D. Rockefeller" label="his father"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148520" start="9208" end="9223" title="Fort Washington Park (Manhattan)" label="Fort Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339602" start="9228" end="9243" title="Riverside Park (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Parks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127602" start="9354" end="9379" title="Palisades Interstate Park" label="Palisades Interstate Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7127602" start="9426" end="9462" title="Palisades Interstate Park Commission" label="Palisades Interstate Park Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338968" start="9921" end="9934" title="The Palisades (Hudson River)" label="the Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182321" start="9975" end="9994" title="John Purroy Mitchel" label="John Purroy Mitchel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233903" start="10069" end="10087" title="John Francis Hylan" label="John Francis Hylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="10624" end="10640" title="Olmsted Brothers" label="Olmsted Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q538025" start="10660" end="10685" title="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr." label="Frederick Law Olmsted Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q364187" start="10694" end="10706" title="Frederick Law Olmsted" label="the designer"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="10710" end="10722" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q339164" start="11390" end="11409" title="George Gray Barnard" label="George Gray Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624153" start="11431" end="11443" title="medieval art" label="medieval art"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="11527" end="11553" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q50057270" start="12346" end="12368" title="Reginald Pelham Bolton" label="Reginald Pelham Bolton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="12713" end="12729" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="13515" end="13535" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373436" start="13543" end="13565" title="IND Eighth Avenue Line" label="IND Eighth Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177134" start="13873" end="13900" title="Public Works Administration" label="Public Works Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q312502" start="13925" end="13947" title="Fiorello H. La Guardia" label="Fiorello H. La Guardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111386" start="13985" end="13997" title="Robert Moses" label="Robert Moses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636278" start="14465" end="14476" title="Inwood Hill Park" label="Inwood Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757846" start="14482" end="14492" title="Highbridge Park" label="Highbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138030" start="14540" end="14553" title="the Cloisters" label="the Cloisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731486" start="14631" end="14646" title="Charles Collens" label="Charles Collens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633837" start="15736" end="15750" title="Hudson Heights (Manhattan)" label="Hudson Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="16308" end="16329" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865642" start="16502" end="16534" title="1975 New York City fiscal crisis" label="1975 New York City fiscal crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061609" start="17185" end="17212" title="Central Park jogger case" label="beating and rape of a woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="17216" end="17228" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q967276" start="17447" end="17494" title="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission" label="New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q126454260" start="17528" end="17543" title="New York City scenic landmarks" label="scenic landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q4664490" start="17716" end="17738" title="Abby Rockefeller Mauzé" label="Abby Rockefeller Mauzé"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="17977" end="18025" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013931" start="18143" end="18171" title="New York Restoration Project" label="New York Restoration Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="18182" end="18204" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q190631" start="18217" end="18229" title="Bette Midler" label="Bette Midler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190346" start="18479" end="18500" title="Fort Tryon Park Trust" label="Fort Tryon Park Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161355" start="19734" end="19744" title="fundraiser" label="fundraiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q127933" start="19749" end="19758" title="fireworks" label="fireworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="19897" end="19903" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192739" start="19915" end="19922" title="Coffeed" label="Coffeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913001" start="22287" end="22303" title="Morningside Park (Manhattan)" label="Morningside Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522417" start="22311" end="22321" title="The Ramble and Lake" label="the Ramble"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="22325" end="22337" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396241" start="23223" end="23238" title="Margaret Corbin" label="Margaret Corbin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23304" end="23317" title="#Corbin Circle" label="Corbin Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q54122" start="23419" end="23435" title="Continental Army" label="Continental Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487838" start="23623" end="23643" title="Henry Hudson Parkway" label="Henry Hudson Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891954" start="23778" end="23786" title="rock cut" label="rock cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472255" start="24033" end="24055" title="Fort Washington Avenue" label="Fort Washington Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="24794" end="24802" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589766" start="24807" end="24822" title="Riverside Drive (Manhattan)" label="Riverside Drive"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24988" end="25002" title="#Linden Terrace" label="Linden Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q167346" start="25252" end="25268" title="botanical garden" label="botanical garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="25328" end="25344" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="25347" end="25352" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="25359" end="25363" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q469382" start="26149" end="26167" title="Ulmus americana" label="American elm trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983007" start="26213" end="26229" title="Calluna" label="Calluna vulgaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="26479" end="26495" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582662" start="27059" end="27071" title="alpine plant" label="alpine plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q43010" start="27322" end="27328" title="quartz" label="quartz"/>
<link wikidata="Q170258" start="27330" end="27338" title="feldspar" label="feldspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q114675" start="27340" end="27344" title="mica" label="mica"/>
<link wikidata="Q105368" start="27350" end="27356" title="garnet" label="garnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015842" start="27518" end="27535" title="Cabrini Boulevard" label="Cabrini Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q238983" start="27734" end="27756" title="Frances Xavier Cabrini" label="Frances Xavier Cabrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="27777" end="27786" title="canonized" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="27792" end="27806" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43115" start="27807" end="27812" title="saint" label="saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q262494" start="28240" end="28268" title="Manhattan Community Board 12" label="Manhattan Community Board 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219277" start="28797" end="28819" title="Dyckman Street station (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="Dyckman Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875906" start="29314" end="29326" title="Jacob Javits" label="Jacob Javits"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015842" start="29854" end="29871" title="Cabrini Boulevard" label="Cabrini Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525" start="30039" end="30049" title="roundabout" label="roundabout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339195" start="30272" end="30288" title="station building" label="station building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="30296" end="30316" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959768" start="30324" end="30344" title="190th Street station" label="190th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q38516" start="30572" end="30579" title="Dog park" label="dog run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="31123" end="31129" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="31269" end="31295" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="31350" end="31365" title="medieval Europe" label="medieval Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626769" start="31407" end="31425" title="Unicorn Tapestries" label="Unicorn Tapestries"/>
<link wikidata="Q757022" start="32040" end="32053" title="Belgian block" label="Belgian block"/>
<link wikidata="Q24207145" start="32611" end="32631" title="The Fuentidueña Apse" label="The Fuentidueña Apse"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="33466" end="33471" title="David Rockefeller" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q14660" start="33824" end="33828" title="flag" label="flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="33860" end="33868" title="pedestal" label="pedestal"/>
<link wikidata="Q264" start="33933" end="33948" title="Hurricane Sandy" label="Hurricane Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178743" start="34045" end="34050" title="stele" label="stele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082159" start="34165" end="34187" title="Charles Rollinson Lamb" label="Charles Rollinson Lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511708" start="34243" end="34292" title="American Scenic and Historic Preservation Society" label="American Scenic and Historic Preservation Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q527769" start="35521" end="35564" title="New York State Department of Transportation" label="New York State Department of Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300314" start="35573" end="35587" title="Jersey barrier" label="Jersey barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q162034" start="36103" end="36111" title="hip roof" label="hip roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192739" start="37030" end="37037" title="Coffeed" label="Coffeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q199758" start="38032" end="38040" title="blue jay" label="blue jay"/>
<link wikidata="Q726389" start="38046" end="38055" title="Northern cardinal" label="cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q26844" start="38057" end="38068" title="wild turkey" label="wild turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="38075" end="38088" title="bird of prey" label="birds of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q457471" start="38099" end="38114" title="red-tailed hawk" label="red-tailed hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="38120" end="38123" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765085" start="38170" end="38181" title="meadow vole" label="meadow vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q53663" start="38196" end="38206" title="salamander" label="salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q913350" start="38209" end="38233" title="southern flying squirrel" label="southern flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q21834" start="38236" end="38243" title="opossum" label="opossum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232962" start="38259" end="38268" title="deer mice" label="deer mice"/>
<link wikidata="Q748448" start="38274" end="38291" title="cottontail rabbit" label="cottontail rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q468500" start="38305" end="38326" title="eastern gray squirrel" label="eastern gray squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="38332" end="38339" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="38391" end="38413" title="nonprofit organization" label="nonprofit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q942830" start="38535" end="38552" title="mission statement" label="mission statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="38850" end="38870" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2373436" start="38878" end="38900" title="IND Eighth Avenue Line" label="IND Eighth Avenue Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219277" start="38993" end="39015" title="Dyckman Street station (IND Eighth Avenue Line)" label="Dyckman Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959768" start="39114" end="39134" title="190th Street station" label="190th Street station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708286" start="39606" end="39621" title="Alanson Skinner" label="Alanson Skinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075141" start="39648" end="39686" title="National Museum of the American Indian" label="National Museum of the American Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4974780" start="40310" end="40341" title="Brooklyn Children&amp;#x27;s Museum" label="Brooklyn Children&amp;#x27;s Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243209" start="40611" end="40628" title="historic district" label="historic district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="40636" end="40672" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591917" start="40718" end="40740" title="New York City landmark" label="New York City landmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="40876" end="40882" title="Twitter" label="tweets"/>
<link wikidata="Q31963" start="40887" end="40895" title="emoticon" label="emoticon"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="41294" end="41325" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q9350" start="41524" end="41528" title="yoga" label="yoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q167987" start="41533" end="41540" title="tai chi" label="tai chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q450382" start="42559" end="42569" title="Maya Deren" label="Maya Deren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687008" start="42710" end="42728" title="Portrait of Jennie" label="Portrait of Jennie"/>
<link wikidata="Q45388" start="42840" end="42859" title="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff (film)" label="Coogan&amp;#x27;s Bluff"/>
<link wikidata="Q492089" start="43005" end="43026" title="The Adjustment Bureau" label="The Adjustment Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591907" start="43089" end="43163" title="List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan above 110th Street" label="List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan above 110th Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q126454260" start="43166" end="43204" title="List of New York City scenic landmarks" label="List of New York City scenic landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849831" start="43207" end="43237" title="List of parks in New York City" label="List of parks in New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063043" start="43240" end="43317" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan above 110th Street" label="National Register of Historic Places listings in Manhattan above 110th Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019810" wikidata="Q787113" url="?curid=1019810" title="Esplanade">
<text>An esplanade or promenade is a long, open, level area, usually next to a river or large body of water, where people may walk. The historical definition of &quot;esplanade&quot; was a large, open, level area outside fortress or city walls to provide clear fields of fire for the fortress&#x27;s guns. In modern usage, the space allows the area to be paved as a pedestrian walk; esplanades are often on sea fronts and allow walking whatever the state of the tide, without having to walk on the beach.

==History==
In the 19th century, the razing of city fortifications and the relocation of port facilities made it possible in many cities to create promenade paths on the former fortresses and ramparts. The parts of the former fortifications, such as hills, viewpoints, ditches, waterways and lakes have now been included in these promenades, making them popular excursion destinations as well as the location of cultural institutions. The rapid development of artificial street lighting in the 19th century also enabled safe use in the evening. One example of this is Vienna&#x27;s Ringstrasse.

Esplanades became popular in Victorian times, when it was fashionable to visit seaside resorts. A promenade, often abbreviated to &#x27;(the) prom&#x27;, was an area where people – couples and families especially – would go to walk for a while in order to &#x27;be seen&#x27; and be considered part of &#x27;society&#x27;. Beach promenades such as the Promenade de la Croisette in Cannes, the famous Promenade des Anglais on the Mediterranean coast in Nice or the Lungomare of Barcola in Trieste still play a central role in city life and in the real estate market.

In the United States, &quot;esplanade&quot; has another meaning, being also a median (strip of raised land) or berm dividing a roadway or boulevard. Sometimes they are just strips of grass, or some may have gardens and trees. Some roadway esplanades may be used as parks with a walking/jogging trail and benches.

&quot;Esplanade&quot; and &quot;promenade&quot; are sometimes used interchangeably. The derivation of &quot;promenade&quot; indicates a place specifically intended for walking, though many modern promenades and esplanades also allow bicycles and other nonmotorized transport. Some esplanades also include large boulevards or avenues where cars are permitted.

A similar term with the same meaning in the eastern coastal region of Spain is &quot;alameda&quot; Alameda de Hercules, Seville, o &quot;rambla&quot;, such as La Rambla in Barcelona, but more widely used terms in the rest of the Hispanic world are &#x27; (&quot;esplanade&quot;), &#x27; (&quot;promenade&quot;) or &quot;&quot; (&quot;esplanade&quot;).

== Examples ==
=== Asia ===
==== India ====
* Esplanade, also known as the Central Business District in Kolkata
* Kamarajar Salai, Chennai in Chennai
* Marine Drive, Kochi in Kochi
* Marine Drive in Mumbai
* Bandstand Promenade in Mumbai
* Promenade Beach in Pondicherry

==== Malaysia ====
* Esplanade, Kuantan, Pahang
* Esplanade, George Town, Penang
* Gurney Drive, George Town, Penang
* Karpal Singh Drive, George Town, Penang

==== Philippines ====
* Baywalk, Manila
* Dipolog Boulevard, Dipolog
* Iloilo River Esplanade, Iloilo City
*Paseo del Mar, Zamboanga City

==== United Arab Emirates ====
* Al Seef
* Corniche (Abu Dhabi)
* Deira Corniche
* Fujairah Corniche

==== Others ====
* Tsim Sha Tsui East, Victoria Harbour in Hong Kong
* West Kowloon Waterfront Promenade, West Kowloon Cultural District in Hong Kong
* Tel Aviv Promenade, Tel Aviv, Israel
* Corniche Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
* The Esplanade, Singapore
* Galle Face Green, Colombo, Sri Lanka
* Doha Corniche, Doha, Qatar
* The Bund, Shanghai, China
* Jehangir Kothari Parade, Pakistan
* Jeddah Corniche, Saudi Arabia

=== Americas ===
==== United States ====
* The Charles River Esplanade, Boston, Massachusetts
* The Eastern Promenade, Portland, Maine
* The Esplanade, Redondo Beach, California
* Third Street Promenade, Santa Monica, Los Angeles County, California
* Eastbank Esplanade, Portland, Oregon
* The East River Greenway, New York, New York

==== Others ====
* Bulevar Marítimo Patricio Peralta Ramos, Mar del Plata, Argentina
* Calçadão de Copacabana and Calçadão de Ipanema, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
* Malecón, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico
* Malecón, Havana, Cuba
* Paseo del Morro, Old San Juan, Puerto Rico
* Paseo de la Princesa, Old San Juan, Puerto Rico
* Rambla de Montevideo, Uruguay
* Terrasse Dufferin, Quebec City, Canada

=== Europe ===
* Barcola, Trieste, Italy
* Esplanaden, Copenhagen, Denmark
* La Promenade des Anglais, in Nice, France
* Esplanade de La Defense, France
* Paseo Marítimo de Pontevedra, in Pontevedra, Spain
* Usedom Beach Promenade, Western Pomerania, Germany (Europe&#x27;s longest beach promenade)
* Świnoujście, by the Baltic Sea, Poland
* Trzebież, by the Szczecin Lagoon, Poland
* The Esplanade, in Weymouth, England
* Esplanadi, in Helsinki, Finland
* Valletta Waterfront, in Floriana, Malta
* Spianada, in Corfu town, Greece

=== Others ===
* St Clair Esplanade in Dunedin, New Zealand
* The Golden Mile, Durban, South Africa
* Sea Point, Cape Town, South Africa

===Inland===

* Esplanade of the European Parliament, in Brussels, Belgium
* Ministries Esplanade, in Brasília, Brazil
* The Esplanade (Toronto), in Toronto, Canada
* Thames Embankment, in London, England
* Brühl&#x27;s Terrace, Dresden, Germany
* The Danube Promenade in Budapest, Hungary
* Esplanade, in Calcutta, India
* Iloilo River Esplanade in Iloilo City, Philippines
* Błonia, Kraków, Poland
* L&#x27;Enfant Plaza in Washington, D.C., United States
* Charles River Reservation, in Boston, Massachusetts, United States
* The Eastbank Esplanade, in Portland, Oregon, United States

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Boardwalk
* Foreshoreway
* Malecón
* Oceanway
* Processional walkway
* Similar areas inland: Boulevard, mall

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q787113" start="3" end="12" title="Esplanade" label="esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q787113" start="16" end="25" title="Esplanade" label="promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q15324" start="88" end="101" title="body of water" label="body of water"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="215" end="223" title="fortification" label="fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q369730" start="360" end="375" title="pedestrian zone" label="pedestrian walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23384" start="456" end="460" title="tide" label="tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q40080" start="492" end="497" title="beach" label="beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q46232" start="1082" end="1093" title="Ringstrasse" label="Ringstrasse"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="1125" end="1140" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="1175" end="1189" title="seaside resort" label="seaside resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2910239" start="1404" end="1411" title="high society (group)" label="society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455184" start="1448" end="1473" title="Promenade de la Croisette" label="Promenade de la Croisette"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="1477" end="1483" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849491" start="1496" end="1517" title="Promenade des Anglais" label="Promenade des Anglais"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="1548" end="1552" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q807970" start="1573" end="1580" title="Barcola" label="Barcola"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="1584" end="1591" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673934" start="1741" end="1747" title="Central reservation" label="median"/>
<link wikidata="Q81957" start="1774" end="1778" title="berm" label="berm"/>
<link wikidata="Q54114" start="2288" end="2297" title="boulevard" label="boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7543083" start="2302" end="2309" title="Avenue (landscape)" label="avenues"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2436" end="2464" title="Alameda de Hercules, Seville" label="Alameda de Hercules, Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q850593" start="2496" end="2505" title="La Rambla, Barcelona" label="La Rambla"/>
<link wikidata="Q514022" start="2566" end="2580" title="Hispanic world" label="Hispanic world"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057280" start="2736" end="2745" title="Esplanade, Kolkata" label="Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="2794" end="2801" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q673659" start="2804" end="2828" title="Marina Beach" label="Kamarajar Salai, Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="2832" end="2839" title="Chennai" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122325" start="2842" end="2861" title="Marine Drive, Kochi" label="Marine Drive, Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800" start="2865" end="2870" title="Kochi" label="Kochi"/>
<link wikidata="Q985828" start="2873" end="2885" title="Marine Drive, Mumbai" label="Marine Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2889" end="2895" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4854721" start="2898" end="2917" title="Bandstand Promenade" label="Bandstand Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="2921" end="2927" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16898816" start="2930" end="2945" title="Promenade Beach" label="Promenade Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q639421" start="2949" end="2960" title="Pondicherry" label="Pondicherry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2983" end="3001" title="Esplanade, Kuantan" label="Esplanade, Kuantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q191346" start="3003" end="3009" title="Pahang" label="Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q28219658" start="3012" end="3021" title="Esplanade, Penang" label="Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q61092" start="3023" end="3034" title="George Town, Penang" label="George Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="3036" end="3042" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5620210" start="3045" end="3057" title="Gurney Drive" label="Gurney Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q61092" start="3059" end="3070" title="George Town, Penang" label="George Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="3072" end="3078" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18171039" start="3081" end="3099" title="Karpal Singh Drive" label="Karpal Singh Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q61092" start="3101" end="3112" title="George Town, Penang" label="George Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="3114" end="3120" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875029" start="3146" end="3153" title="Baywalk" label="Baywalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="3155" end="3161" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280045" start="3164" end="3181" title="Dipolog Boulevard" label="Dipolog Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q432169" start="3183" end="3190" title="Dipolog" label="Dipolog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000953" start="3193" end="3215" title="Iloilo River Esplanade" label="Iloilo River Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q459787" start="3217" end="3228" title="Iloilo City" label="Iloilo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438657" start="3230" end="3243" title="Fort Pilar" label="Paseo del Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629" start="3245" end="3259" title="Zamboanga City" label="Zamboanga City"/>
<link wikidata="Q114355732" start="3294" end="3301" title="Al Seef" label="Al Seef"/>
<link wikidata="Q16951727" start="3304" end="3324" title="Corniche (Abu Dhabi)" label="Corniche (Abu Dhabi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428575" start="3327" end="3341" title="Deira Corniche" label="Deira Corniche"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276033" start="3344" end="3361" title="Fujairah Corniche" label="Fujairah Corniche"/>
<link wikidata="Q15022" start="3382" end="3400" title="Tsim Sha Tsui East" label="Tsim Sha Tsui East"/>
<link wikidata="Q155643" start="3402" end="3418" title="Victoria Harbour" label="Victoria Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985665" start="3434" end="3467" title="West Kowloon Waterfront Promenade" label="West Kowloon Waterfront Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985661" start="3469" end="3499" title="West Kowloon Cultural District" label="West Kowloon Cultural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695551" start="3515" end="3533" title="Tel Aviv Promenade" label="Tel Aviv Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q33935" start="3535" end="3543" title="Tel Aviv" label="Tel Aviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q728168" start="3554" end="3569" title="Corniche Beirut" label="Corniche Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="3571" end="3577" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399011" start="3589" end="3602" title="Esplanade, Singapore" label="The Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492279" start="3616" end="3632" title="Galle Face Green" label="Galle Face Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q35381" start="3634" end="3641" title="Colombo" label="Colombo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234812" start="3655" end="3668" title="Doha Corniche" label="Doha Corniche"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861" start="3670" end="3674" title="Doha" label="Doha"/>
<link wikidata="Q125474" start="3684" end="3692" title="The Bund" label="The Bund"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="3694" end="3702" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6176458" start="3712" end="3735" title="Jehangir Kothari Parade" label="Jehangir Kothari Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3807760" start="3748" end="3763" title="Jeddah Corniche" label="Jeddah Corniche"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082074" start="3826" end="3849" title="Charles River Esplanade" label="Charles River Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="3851" end="3872" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330385" start="3879" end="3896" title="Eastern Promenade" label="Eastern Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q49201" start="3898" end="3913" title="Portland, Maine" label="Portland, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q840678" start="3916" end="3956" title="The Esplanade, Redondo Beach, California" label="The Esplanade, Redondo Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990464" start="3959" end="3981" title="Third Street Promenade" label="Third Street Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="3983" end="3995" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="3997" end="4027" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329795" start="4030" end="4048" title="Eastbank Esplanade" label="Eastbank Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="4050" end="4066" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036759" start="4073" end="4092" title="East River Greenway" label="East River Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4094" end="4102" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="4104" end="4112" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q52607" start="4174" end="4187" title="Mar del Plata" label="Mar del Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="4189" end="4198" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="4249" end="4263" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="4265" end="4271" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q17077969" start="4274" end="4298" title="Malecón, Puerto Vallarta" label="Malecón, Puerto Vallarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="4300" end="4306" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q12597" start="4309" end="4324" title="Malecón, Havana" label="Malecón, Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="4326" end="4330" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q66660324" start="4333" end="4348" title="Paseo del Morro" label="Paseo del Morro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136674" start="4350" end="4362" title="Old San Juan" label="Old San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="4364" end="4375" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q49540041" start="4378" end="4398" title="Paseo de la Princesa" label="Paseo de la Princesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136674" start="4400" end="4412" title="Old San Juan" label="Old San Juan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="4414" end="4425" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q989939" start="4428" end="4448" title="Rambla of Montevideo" label="Rambla de Montevideo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518581" start="4460" end="4477" title="Terrasse Dufferin" label="Terrasse Dufferin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="4479" end="4490" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="4492" end="4498" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q807970" start="4517" end="4524" title="Barcola" label="Barcola"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="4526" end="4533" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399045" start="4543" end="4565" title="Esplanaden, Copenhagen" label="Esplanaden, Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849491" start="4577" end="4601" title="Promenade des Anglais" label="La Promenade des Anglais"/>
<link wikidata="Q33959" start="4606" end="4610" title="Nice" label="Nice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4621" end="4644" title="Esplanade de La Defense" label="Esplanade de La Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q107634317" start="4655" end="4683" title="Paseo Marítimo de Pontevedra" label="Paseo Marítimo de Pontevedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q12411" start="4688" end="4698" title="Pontevedra" label="Pontevedra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3255" start="4708" end="4714" title="Usedom" label="Usedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196" start="4732" end="4749" title="Mecklenburg-Vorpommern" label="Western Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q41599" start="4801" end="4812" title="Świnoujście" label="Świnoujście"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="4821" end="4831" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016582" start="4842" end="4850" title="Trzebież" label="Trzebież"/>
<link wikidata="Q161385" start="4859" end="4874" title="Szczecin Lagoon" label="Szczecin Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990355" start="4885" end="4898" title="Weymouth Beach" label="The Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="4903" end="4911" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368319" start="4923" end="4932" title="Esplanadi" label="Esplanadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="4937" end="4945" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7911962" start="4957" end="4976" title="Valletta Waterfront" label="Valletta Waterfront"/>
<link wikidata="Q832807" start="4981" end="4989" title="Floriana" label="Floriana"/>
<link wikidata="Q16900398" start="4999" end="5007" title="Spianada" label="Spianada"/>
<link wikidata="Q205832" start="5012" end="5022" title="Corfu (city)" label="Corfu town"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592808" start="5049" end="5067" title="Saint Clair, New Zealand" label="St Clair Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="5071" end="5078" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579653" start="5098" end="5117" title="Golden Mile, Durban" label="Golden Mile, Durban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383557" start="5134" end="5154" title="Sea Point, Cape Town" label="Sea Point, Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5399040" start="5186" end="5222" title="Esplanade of the European Parliament" label="Esplanade of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5227" end="5235" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q565101" start="5247" end="5267" title="Ministries Esplanade" label="Ministries Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2844" start="5272" end="5280" title="Brasília" label="Brasília"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351859" start="5291" end="5314" title="The Esplanade (Toronto)" label="The Esplanade (Toronto)"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="5319" end="5326" title="Toronto" label="Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251243" start="5337" end="5354" title="Thames Embankment" label="Thames Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5359" end="5365" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q25711" start="5377" end="5397" title="Brühl&amp;#x27;s Terrace" label="Brühl&amp;#x27;s Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="5399" end="5406" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5221261" start="5422" end="5438" title="Danube Promenade" label="Danube Promenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="5442" end="5450" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q12057280" start="5462" end="5471" title="Esplanade, Calcutta" label="Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="5476" end="5484" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6000953" start="5494" end="5516" title="Iloilo River Esplanade" label="Iloilo River Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q459787" start="5520" end="5531" title="Iloilo City" label="Iloilo City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358590" start="5547" end="5553" title="Błonia" label="Błonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="5555" end="5561" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q6455669" start="5572" end="5591" title="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza" label="L&amp;#x27;Enfant Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="5595" end="5611" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1065919" start="5629" end="5654" title="Charles River Reservation" label="Charles River Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5659" end="5665" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="5667" end="5680" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329795" start="5702" end="5720" title="Eastbank Esplanade" label="Eastbank Esplanade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="5725" end="5741" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q93338609" start="5785" end="5794" title="Boardwalk (entertainment district)" label="Boardwalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q249565" start="5797" end="5809" title="Foreshoreway" label="Foreshoreway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082251" start="5812" end="5819" title="Malecón" label="Malecón"/>
<link wikidata="Q249565" start="5822" end="5830" title="Oceanway" label="Oceanway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7247339" start="5833" end="5853" title="Processional walkway" label="Processional walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q54114" start="5878" end="5887" title="Boulevard" label="Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5889" end="5893" title="Mall (disambiguation)#Places" label="mall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019815" wikidata="Q6651298" url="?curid=1019815" title="Little Pee Dee River">
<text>The Little Pee Dee River is a tributary of the Pee Dee River (which originates in the Appalachian Mountains where it is known as the Yadkin River). The Little Pee Dee technically arises near Laurinburg, North Carolina as Gum Swamp, which flows southward, receiving several small tributaries, across the South Carolina border into Red Bluff Lake, near McColl, South Carolina. The lake is at an elevation of above sea level, and from the outlet of the lake, the flow is called the Little Pee Dee River. The Little Pee Dee River is named after the Pee Dee Indian Tribe. Today, the tribe still occupies some of the land, although the tribe only consists of just over 200 enrolled members.

The Little Pee Dee is a sluggish meandering blackwater river that ranges between wide and deep in its upper reaches. It is navigable only by canoe or other small craft. Some parts of the Little Pee Dee River are nearly blocked by low-hanging tree branches. It is bordered by a swamp area that features bald cypress, sweetgum, oak, tupelo and other hardwoods. It flows southeastward, roughly paralleling the state border until it receives the somewhat larger Lumber River (a National Wild and Scenic River) near Nichols, South Carolina, from which the much larger river flows more nearly southward until it joins with the Pee Dee near Yauhannah, South Carolina.

Part of the lower section has been designated a Scenic River by the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources. It features deep channels, slow moving water, and white sandy bars and beaches. Cooters, sunning on logs, are a common sight. Other wildlife is abundant, including alligators, beavers, deer, and wood ducks. Less common species like bald eagles, pileated woodpeckers, and prothonotary warblers, can be spotted with a little luck. The river also offers excellent fishing. A Boating Guide to the Little Pee Dee is available from the South Carolina Department of Natural Resources. It covers the history of the river, its flora and fauna as well as a listing of access points and boating information. Paddle SC has list of 10 suggested trips on the Little Pee Dee listing difficulty and current runnability.

The Little Pee Dee runs its entire length through coastal lands of low relief that are pockmarked with Carolina bays. Down river from Dillon, South Carolina is Little Pee Dee State Park. Adjacent to this is the Little Pee Dee Heritage Preserve which is a Carolina bay that has been preserved as natural as possible.

==References==
== External links ==
* Little Pee Dee State Park and Little Pee Dee Bay Heritage Preserve
* Boating Guide to the Little Pee Dee
* Ten Trips on the Little Pee Dee</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6651298" start="4" end="24" title="Little Pee Dee River" label="Little Pee Dee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061230" start="47" end="60" title="Pee Dee River" label="Pee Dee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="86" end="107" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520726" start="133" end="145" title="Yadkin River" label="Yadkin River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904873" start="191" end="217" title="Laurinburg, North Carolina" label="Laurinburg, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="303" end="317" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000808" start="351" end="373" title="McColl, South Carolina" label="McColl, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q180537" start="719" end="726" title="meander" label="meander"/>
<link wikidata="Q100649" start="730" end="740" title="blackwater (river)" label="blackwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q171529" start="827" end="832" title="canoe" label="canoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="963" end="968" title="swamp" label="swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q148950" start="988" end="1000" title="Taxodium distichum" label="bald cypress"/>
<link wikidata="Q469652" start="1002" end="1010" title="American Sweetgum" label="sweetgum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="1012" end="1015" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q964952" start="1017" end="1023" title="Tupelo (tree)" label="tupelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267277" start="1144" end="1156" title="Lumber River" label="Lumber River"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="1160" end="1190" title="National Wild and Scenic River" label="National Wild and Scenic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071041" start="1197" end="1220" title="Nichols, South Carolina" label="Nichols, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1320" end="1345" title="Yauhannah, South Carolina" label="Yauhannah, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1396" end="1408" title="Scenic River" label="Scenic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281025" start="1544" end="1551" title="Pseudemys" label="Cooters"/>
<link wikidata="Q530397" start="1628" end="1637" title="alligator" label="alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="1640" end="1647" title="American Beaver" label="beavers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="1649" end="1653" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q322159" start="1659" end="1668" title="wood duck" label="wood duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="1696" end="1706" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q930712" start="1709" end="1728" title="pileated woodpecker" label="pileated woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q206535" start="1735" end="1755" title="prothonotary warbler" label="prothonotary warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566572" start="1894" end="1940" title="South Carolina Department of Natural Resources" label="South Carolina Department of Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044777" start="2272" end="2284" title="Carolina bay" label="Carolina bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276236" start="2303" end="2325" title="Dillon, South Carolina" label="Dillon, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q15051848" start="2329" end="2354" title="Little Pee Dee State Park" label="Little Pee Dee State Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019816" wikidata="Q17443552" url="?curid=1019816" title="Stigler">
<text>Stigler is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

* Franz Stigler (1915–2008), Luftwaffe pilot who escorted an American bomber back to safety in 1943
* George Stigler (1911–1991), Nobel Prize–winning U.S. economist, associated with the &quot;Stigler Commission&quot; and &quot;Stigler diet&quot;; father of Stephen Stigler
* James W. Stigler, American psychologist, researcher, entrepreneur and author
* Michael Stigler (born 1992), American track and field athlete
* Stephen Stigler (born 1941), professor at the University of Chicago, known for &quot;Stigler&#x27;s law of eponymy&quot;; son of George Stigler
* William G. Stigler (1891–1952), American politician in Oklahoma

==Other uses==
* Stigler, Oklahoma, a city Haskell County
** Stigler Regional Airport, owned by the city of Stigler
* Stigler Commission, convened in 1961 to study the measurement of inflation in the United States
* Stigler diet, an optimization problem regarding recommended dietary allowances (RDAs)
* Stigler&#x27;s law of eponymy, which states that no scientific discovery is named after its original discoverer
** List of examples of Stigler&#x27;s law

==See also==
* Stiegler, a surname
* Stig (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17443552" start="0" end="7" title="Stigler" label="Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q55417889" start="66" end="79" title="Franz Stigler" label="Franz Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q243534" start="166" end="180" title="George Stigler" label="George Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q68817422" start="339" end="355" title="James W. Stigler" label="James W. Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q32979539" start="418" end="433" title="Michael Stigler" label="Michael Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610606" start="482" end="497" title="Stephen Stigler" label="Stephen Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578917" start="628" end="646" title="William G. Stigler" label="William G. Stigler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674962" start="710" end="727" title="Stigler, Oklahoma" label="Stigler, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616469" start="754" end="778" title="Stigler Regional Airport" label="Stigler Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616468" start="811" end="829" title="Stigler Commission" label="Stigler Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7616470" start="909" end="921" title="Stigler diet" label="Stigler diet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376201" start="997" end="1026" title="Stigler&amp;#x27;s law of eponymy" label="Stigler&amp;#x27;s law of eponymy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619096" start="1112" end="1150" title="List of examples of Stigler&amp;#x27;s law" label="List of examples of Stigler&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q21507966" start="1167" end="1175" title="Stiegler" label="Stiegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047398" start="1189" end="1210" title="Stig (disambiguation)" label="Stig (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019817" wikidata="Q978544" url="?curid=1019817" title="Reiner Gamma">
<text>Reiner Gamma (γ) is a geographical feature of the Moon known as a lunar swirl. It is one of the most visible lunar swirls from Earth, visible from most telescopes. It was originally thought to be a lunar highland, but scientists eventually realized that it cast no shadow on the moon.
==Origin==
The origin of Reiner Gammalike other lunar swirlsis not completely understood. It is associated with a localized magnetic field, but not with any particular irregularities in the surface. Similar features have been discovered in Mare Ingenii and Mare Marginis by orbiting spacecraft. The feature on Mare Ingenii is located at the lunar opposite point from the center of Mare Imbrium. Likewise the feature on Mare Marginis is opposite the midpoint of Mare Orientale. Thus one hypothesis is that the feature resulted from seismic energies generated by the impacts that created these maria. However, no such lunar mare formation is on the opposite side of the Moon from Reiner Gamma.

==Location and Features==
Reiner Gamma is located on the Oceanus Procellarum, west of the crater Reiner. Its center is located at selenographic coordinates . It has an overall length of about 70 kilometres. The feature has a higher albedo than the relatively dark mare surface, with a diffuse appearance and a distinctive swirling, concentric oval shape. Related albedo features continue across the surface to the east and southwest, forming loop-like patterns over the mare.

The central feature of Reiner Gamma resembles the dipolar formation created by iron filings on a surface with a bar magnet on the underside. Low-orbiting spacecraft have observed a relatively strong magnetic field associated with each of these albedo markings. Some have speculated that this magnetic field and the patterns were created by cometary impacts. However the true cause remains uncertain.

Reiner Gamma&#x27;s magnetic field strength is approximately , measured from an altitude of . This is one of the strongest localized magnetic anomalies on the Moon. The surface field strength of this feature is sufficient to form a mini-magnetosphere that spans at the surface, forming a thick region of enhanced plasma where the solar wind flows around the field. As the particles in the solar wind are known to darken the lunar surface, the magnetic field at this site may account for the survival of this albedo feature.

In early lunar maps by Francesco Maria Grimaldi, this feature was incorrectly identified as a crater. His colleague Giovanni Riccioli then named it &quot;Galilaeus&quot;, after Galileo Galilei. The name was later transferred northwest to the current crater Galilaei.

==References==

===Other references===
* Ewen A. Whitaker, &quot;Mapping and Naming the Moon: A History of Lunar Cartography and Nomenclature&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1999, .

==External links==
* Overexposed 35mm Nikon camera image of Reiner Gamma from Apollo 17: AS17-158-23895
* Lunar Orbiter 4 image showing Reiner Gamma in upper left: IV-157-H1</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q978544" start="0" end="12" title="Reiner Gamma" label="Reiner Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="50" end="54" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703801" start="66" end="77" title="lunar swirls" label="lunar swirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648514" start="204" end="212" title="Geology of the Moon" label="highland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037706" start="409" end="423" title="Magnetic field of the Moon" label="magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q333835" start="525" end="537" title="Mare Ingenii" label="Mare Ingenii"/>
<link wikidata="Q168375" start="542" end="555" title="Mare Marginis" label="Mare Marginis"/>
<link wikidata="Q487895" start="666" end="678" title="Mare Imbrium" label="Mare Imbrium"/>
<link wikidata="Q488143" start="746" end="760" title="Mare Orientale" label="Mare Orientale"/>
<link wikidata="Q488299" start="1035" end="1054" title="Oceanus Procellarum" label="Oceanus Procellarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q286167" start="1075" end="1081" title="Reiner (crater)" label="Reiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q180874" start="1242" end="1246" title="Lunar mare" label="mare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703801" start="1300" end="1308" title="Lunar Swirls" label="swirling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11421" start="1567" end="1577" title="Magnet" label="bar magnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40218" start="1609" end="1619" title="spacecraft" label="spacecraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="1795" end="1800" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q117987" start="1989" end="2007" title="Magnetic anomaly" label="magnetic anomalies"/>
<link wikidata="Q79833" start="2186" end="2196" title="solar wind" label="solar wind"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="2390" end="2395" title="Moon" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4006" start="2396" end="2399" title="map" label="map"/>
<link wikidata="Q315411" start="2404" end="2428" title="Francesco Maria Grimaldi" label="Francesco Maria Grimaldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="2475" end="2481" title="Impact crater" label="crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q196472" start="2497" end="2514" title="Giovanni Riccioli" label="Giovanni Riccioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q307" start="2558" end="2573" title="Galileo Galilei" label="Galileo Galilei"/>
<link wikidata="Q978504" start="2638" end="2646" title="Galilaei (lunar crater)" label="Galilaei"/>
<link wikidata="Q967132" start="2826" end="2830" title="1999 in literature" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q180971" start="2913" end="2922" title="Apollo 17" label="Apollo 17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066381" start="2941" end="2956" title="Lunar Orbiter 4" label="Lunar Orbiter 4"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019822" wikidata="Q3570984" url="?curid=1019822" title="Ximelagatran">
<text>Ximelagatran (Exanta or Exarta, H 376/95) is an anticoagulant that has been investigated extensively as a replacement for warfarin that would overcome the problematic dietary, drug interaction, and monitoring issues associated with warfarin therapy. In 2006, its manufacturer AstraZeneca announced that it would withdraw pending applications for marketing approval after reports of hepatotoxicity (liver damage) during trials, and discontinue its distribution in countries where the drug had been approved (Germany, Portugal, Sweden, Finland, Norway, Iceland, Austria, Denmark, France, Switzerland, Argentina and Brazil).

==Method of action==
Ximelagatran, a direct thrombin inhibitor, was the first member of this class that can be taken orally. It acts solely by inhibiting the actions of thrombin. It is taken orally twice daily, and rapidly absorbed by the small intestine. Ximelagatran is a prodrug, being converted &quot;in vivo&quot; to the active agent melagatran. This conversion takes place in the liver and many other tissues through hydrolysis and dehydroxylation (replacing the ethyl and hydroxyl groups with hydrogen).


==Uses==
Ximelagatran was expected to replace warfarin and sometimes aspirin and heparin in many therapeutic settings, including deep venous thrombosis, prevention of secondary venous thromboembolism and complications of atrial fibrillation such as stroke. The efficacy of ximelagatran for these indications had been well documented, except for non valvular atrial fibrillation.

An advantage, according to early reports by its manufacturer, was that it could be taken orally without any monitoring of its anticoagulant properties. This would have set it apart from warfarin and heparin, which require monitoring of the international normalized ratio (INR) and the partial thromboplastin time (PTT), respectively. A disadvantage recognised early was the absence of an antidote in case acute bleeding develops, while warfarin can be antagonised by prothrombin complex concentrate and/or vitamin K and heparin by protamine sulfate.

==Side effects==
Ximelagatran was generally well tolerated in the trial populations, but a small proportion (5–6%) developed elevated liver enzyme levels, which prompted the FDA to reject an initial application for approval in 2004. The further development was discontinued in 2006 following reports of hepatotoxicity. Subsequent analysis of Phase 2 clinical study data using extreme value modelling showed that the elevated liver enzyme levels observed in Phase 3 clinical studies could have been predicted; if this had been known at the time, it might have affected decisions on future development of the compound.

A chemically different but pharmacologically similar substance, AZD-0837, was developed by AstraZeneca for similar indications. It is a prodrug of a potent, competitive, reversible inhibitor of free and fibrin-bound thrombin called ARH0637. The development of AZD-0837 has been discontinued. Due to a limitation identified in long-term stability of the extended-release AZD-0837 drug product, a follow-up study from ASSURE on stroke prevention in patients with non-valvular atrial fibrillation, was prematurely closed in 2010 after 2 years. There was also a numerically higher mortality against warfarin. In a Phase 2 trial for AF the mean serum creatinine concentration increased by about 10% from baseline in patients treated with AZD-0837, which returned to baseline after cessation of therapy.

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3570984" start="0" end="12" title="Ximelagatran" label="Ximelagatran"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570984" start="14" end="20" title="Ximelagatran" label="Exanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570984" start="24" end="30" title="Ximelagatran" label="Exarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q215118" start="48" end="61" title="anticoagulant" label="anticoagulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="122" end="130" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q474191" start="167" end="174" title="Diet (nutrition)" label="dietary"/>
<link wikidata="Q718753" start="176" end="192" title="drug interaction" label="drug interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261151" start="198" end="208" title="therapeutic drug monitoring" label="monitoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q731938" start="276" end="287" title="AstraZeneca" label="AstraZeneca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349821" start="382" end="396" title="hepatotoxicity" label="hepatotoxicity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280395" start="660" end="685" title="direct thrombin inhibitor" label="direct thrombin inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q409166" start="792" end="800" title="thrombin" label="thrombin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11090" start="862" end="877" title="small intestine" label="small intestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q603741" start="897" end="904" title="prodrug" label="prodrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="928" end="935" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="1046" end="1056" title="hydrolysis" label="hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q898497" start="1061" end="1076" title="dehydroxylation" label="dehydroxylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371525" start="1092" end="1097" title="ethyl group" label="ethyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q104116" start="1102" end="1110" title="hydroxyl" label="hydroxyl"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="1123" end="1131" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="1182" end="1190" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18216" start="1205" end="1212" title="aspirin" label="aspirin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="1217" end="1224" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762339" start="1265" end="1287" title="deep venous thrombosis" label="deep venous thrombosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q891391" start="1320" end="1335" title="thromboembolism" label="thromboembolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="1357" end="1376" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368879" start="1702" end="1710" title="warfarin" label="warfarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="1715" end="1722" title="heparin" label="heparin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144385" start="1756" end="1786" title="international normalized ratio" label="international normalized ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755136" start="1801" end="1828" title="partial thromboplastin time" label="partial thromboplastin time"/>
<link wikidata="Q194168" start="1904" end="1912" title="antidote" label="antidote"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044524" start="1983" end="2014" title="prothrombin complex concentrate" label="prothrombin complex concentrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q182338" start="2022" end="2031" title="vitamin K" label="vitamin K"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075855" start="2047" end="2064" title="protamine sulfate" label="protamine sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359801" start="2201" end="2213" title="liver enzyme" label="liver enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="2241" end="2244" title="U.S. Food and Drug Administration" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q729429" start="2443" end="2466" title="extreme value theory" label="extreme value modelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359801" start="2492" end="2504" title="liver enzyme" label="liver enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2749" end="2757" title="AZD-0837" label="AZD-0837"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2917" end="2924" title="ARH0637" label="ARH0637"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019827" wikidata="Q1063239" url="?curid=1019827" title="Polity">
<text>A polity is a group of people with a collective identity, who are organized by some form of political institutionalized social relations, and have a capacity to mobilize resources.

A polity can be any group of people organized for governance, such as the board of a corporation, the government of a country, or the government of a country subdivision. A polity may have various forms, such as a republic administered by an elected representative, the realm of a hereditary monarch, and others.

When referring to a specific polity, the term &quot;country&quot; may refer to a sovereign state, states with limited recognition, constituent country, or a dependent territory.

== Overview ==

In geopolitics, a polity can manifest in different forms such as a state, an empire, an international organization, a political organization or another identifiable, resource-manipulating organizational structure. A polity like a state does not need to be a sovereign unit. The preeminent polities today are Westphalian states and nation-states, commonly referred to as countries.

A polity may encapsulate a multitude of organizations; many of these may form or are involved to the apparatus of contemporary states such as their subordinate civil and local government authorities. Polities do not need to be in control of any geographic areas, as not all political entities and governments have controlled the resources of one fixed geographic area. The historical Steppe Empires originating from the Eurasian Steppe are the most prominent example of non-sedentary polities. These polities differ from states because of their lack of a fixed, defined territory. Empires also differ from states in that their territories are not statically defined or permanently fixed and consequently that their body politic was also dynamic and fluid. It is useful then to think of a polity as a political community.

A polity can also be defined either as a faction within a larger (usually state) entity or at different times as the entity itself. For example, Kurds in Iraqi Kurdistan are parts of their own separate and distinct polity. However, they are also members of the sovereign state of Iraq which is itself a polity, albeit one which is much less specific and as a result much less cohesive. Therefore, it is possible for an individual to belong to more than one polity at a time.

Thomas Hobbes was a highly significant figure in the conceptualisation of polities, in particular of states. Hobbes considered notions of the state and the body politic in &quot;Leviathan&quot;, his most notable work.

Polities do not necessarily need to be governments. A corporation, for instance, is capable of marshalling resources, has a governance structure, legal rights and exclusive jurisdiction over internal decision making. An ethnic community within a country or coast to coast entity may be a polity if they have sufficient organization and cohesive interests that can be furthered by such organization.

== See also ==

* &quot;Kokutai&quot;
*Nation
* Politeia
* Political system

== References ==
== External links ==

* &quot;Dictionary of the History of Ideas&quot; – analogy of the body politic (elaboration of correspondences between society or the state and the individual human body)
*Polity at the Encyclopædia Britannica</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1063239" start="2" end="8" title="Polity" label="polity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146163" start="37" end="56" title="collective identity" label="collective identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070165" start="102" end="119" title="Institutionalisation" label="institutionalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q853725" start="120" end="135" title="social relation" label="social relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270" start="396" end="404" title="republic" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="424" end="446" title="elected representative" label="elected representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250464" start="452" end="457" title="realm" label="realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="474" end="481" title="monarch" label="monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256" start="548" end="555" title="country" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="577" end="592" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q199683" start="594" end="625" title="List of states with limited recognition" label="states with limited recognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q161243" start="653" end="672" title="dependent territory" label="dependent territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q159385" start="694" end="705" title="geopolitics" label="geopolitics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275" start="758" end="763" title="State (polity)" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q48349" start="768" end="774" title="empire" label="empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="779" end="805" title="international organization" label="international organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210356" start="809" end="831" title="political organization" label="political organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="949" end="958" title="Sovereignty" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q442402" start="999" end="1017" title="Westphalian sovereignty" label="Westphalian states"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="1022" end="1034" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124640" start="1233" end="1238" title="Civil authorities" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="1243" end="1259" title="local government" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1370" end="1380" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495771" start="1457" end="1471" title="Nomadic empire" label="Steppe Empires"/>
<link wikidata="Q77120" start="1493" end="1508" title="Eurasian Steppe" label="Eurasian Steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141745" start="1547" end="1556" title="Sedentism" label="sedentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q66711956" start="2049" end="2064" title="Iraqi Kurdistan" label="Iraqi Kurdistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="2175" end="2179" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q37621" start="2371" end="2384" title="Thomas Hobbes" label="Thomas Hobbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q151885" start="2424" end="2431" title="concept" label="concept"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936955" start="2527" end="2539" title="body politic" label="body politic"/>
<link wikidata="Q193034" start="2549" end="2558" title="Leviathan (Hobbes book)" label="Leviathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204868" start="3014" end="3021" title="Kokutai" label="Kokutai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266" start="3029" end="3035" title="Nation" label="Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q547921" start="3038" end="3046" title="Politeia" label="Politeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28108" start="3049" end="3065" title="Political system" label="Political system"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="3292" end="3315" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019830" wikidata="Q1507641" url="?curid=1019830" title="Shackleton (crater)">
<text>Shackleton is an impact crater that lies at the lunar south pole. The peaks along the crater&#x27;s rim are exposed to almost continual sunlight, while the interior is perpetually in shadow. The low-temperature interior of this crater functions as a cold trap that may capture and freeze volatiles shed during comet impacts on the Moon. Measurements by the &quot;Lunar Prospector&quot; spacecraft showed higher than normal amounts of hydrogen within the crater, which may indicate the presence of water ice. The crater is named after Antarctic explorer Ernest Shackleton.

== Description ==

The rotational axis of the Moon passes through Shackleton, near the rim. The crater is in diameter and deep. From the Earth, it is viewed edge-on in a region of rough, cratered terrain. It is located within the South Pole–Aitken basin on a massif. The rim is slightly raised about the surrounding surface and it has an outer rampart that has been only lightly impacted. No significant craters intersect the rim, and it is sloped about 1.5° toward the direction 50–90° from the Earth. The age of the crater is about 3.6 billion years and it has been in the proximity of the south lunar pole for at least the last two billion years.

Because the orbit of the Moon is tilted only 1.5° from the ecliptic, the interior of this crater lies in perpetual darkness. Estimates of the area in permanent shadow were obtained from Earth-based radar studies. Peaks along the rim of the crater are almost continually illuminated by sunlight, spending about 80–90% of each lunar orbit exposed to the Sun. Continuously illuminated mountains have been termed peaks of eternal light and have been predicted to exist since the early nineteenth century.

The shadowed portion of the crater was imaged with the Terrain Camera of the Japanese SELENE spacecraft using the illumination of sunlight reflected off the rim. The interior of the crater consists of a symmetrical 30° slope that leads down to a diameter floor. The handful of craters along the interior span no more than a few hundred meters. The bottom is covered by an uneven mound-like feature that is thick. The central peak is about in height.

The continuous shadows in the south polar craters cause the floors of these formations to maintain a temperature that never exceeds about . For Shackleton, the average temperature was determined to be about , reaching 88 K at the crater floor. Under these conditions, the estimated rate of loss from any ice in the interior would be 10−26 to 10−27 m/s. Any water vapor that arrives here following a cometary impact on the Moon would lie permanently frozen on or below the surface. However, the surface albedo of the crater floor matches the lunar far-side, suggesting that there is no exposed surface ice.

This crater was named after Ernest Shackleton, an Anglo-Irish explorer of Antarctica from 1901 until his death in 1922. The name was officially adopted by the International Astronomical Union in 1994. Nearby craters of note include Shoemaker, Haworth, de Gerlache, Sverdrup, Slater, and Faustini. Somewhat farther away, on the eastern hemisphere of the lunar near side, are the larger craters Amundsen and Scott, named after two other early explorers of the Antarctic continent.

== Exploration ==

From the perspective of the Earth, this crater lies along the southern limb of the Moon, making observation difficult. Detailed mapping of the polar regions and farside of the Moon did not occur until the advent of orbiting spacecraft. Shackleton lies entirely within the rim of the immense South Pole-Aitken basin, which is one of the largest known impact formations in the Solar System. This basin is over 12 kilometers deep, and an exploration of its properties could provide useful information about the lunar interior.

A neutron spectrometer on board the Lunar Prospector spacecraft detected enhanced concentrations of hydrogen close to the northern and southern lunar poles, including the crater Shackleton. At the end of this mission in July 1999, the spacecraft was crashed into the nearby crater Shoemaker in the hope of detecting from Earth-based telescopes an impact-generated plume containing water vapor. The impact event did not produce any detectable water vapor, and this may be an indication that the hydrogen is not in the form of hydrated minerals, or that the impact site did not contain any ice. Alternatively, it is possible that the crash did not excavate deeply enough into the regolith to liberate significant quantities of water vapor.

From Earth-based radar and spacecraft images of the crater edge, Shackleton appears to be relatively intact; much like a young crater that has not been significantly eroded from subsequent impacts. This may mean that the inner sides are relatively steep, which may make traversing the sides relatively difficult for a robotic vehicle. In addition, it is possible that the interior floor might not have collected a significant quantity of since its formation. However other craters in the vicinity are considerably older, and may contain significant deposits of hydrogen, possibly in the form of water ice. (See Shoemaker (lunar crater), for example.)

Radar studies preceding and following the Lunar Prospector mission demonstrate that the inner walls of Shackleton are similar in reflective characteristics to those of some sunlit craters. In particular, the surroundings appear to contain a significant number of blocks in its ejecta blanket, suggesting that its radar properties are a result of surface roughness, and not ice deposits, as was previously suggested from a radar experiment involving the Clementine mission. This interpretation, however, is not universally agreed upon within the scientific community. Radar images of the crater at a wavelength of 13 cm show no evidence for water ice deposits.

Optical imaging inside the crater was done for the first time by the Japanese lunar orbiter spacecraft &quot;Kaguya&quot; in 2007. It did not have any evidence of significant amount of water ice, down to the image resolution of 10 m per pixel.

On November 15, 2008, a 34-kg probe made a hard landing near the crater. The Moon Impact Probe (MIP) was launched from the Indian Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft and reached the surface 25 minutes later. The probe carried a radar altimeter, video imaging system, and a mass spectrometer, which detected the presence of water during the descent.

== Potential uses ==


Some sites along Shackleton&#x27;s rim receive almost constant illumination. At these locales sunlight is almost always available for conversion into electricity using solar panels, potentially making them good locations for future Moon landings. The temperature at this site is also more favorable than at more equatorial latitudes as it does not experience the daily temperature extremes of 100 °C when the Sun is overhead, to as low as −150 °C during the lunar night.

While scientific experiments performed by Clementine and Lunar Prospector could indicate the presence of water in the polar craters, the current evidence is far from definitive. There are doubts among scientists as to whether or not the hydrogen is in the form of ice, as well as to the concentration of this &quot;ore&quot; with depth below the surface. Resolution of this issue will require future missions to the Moon. The potential presence of water suggests that the crater floor could be &quot;mined&quot; for deposits of hydrogen in water form, a commodity that is expensive to deliver directly from the Earth.

This crater has also been proposed as a future site for a large infrared telescope. The low temperature of the crater floor makes it ideal for infrared observations, and solar cells placed along the rim could provide near-continuous power to the observatory. About 120 kilometers from the crater lies the 5-km tall Malapert Mountain, a peak that is perpetually visible from the Earth, and which could serve as a radio relay station when suitably equipped.

In 2006, NASA named the rim of Shackleton as a potential candidate for its lunar outpost, originally slated to be up and running by 2020 and continuously staffed by a crew by 2024. The location would promote self-sustainability for lunar residents, as perpetual sunlight on the south pole would provide energy for solar panels. Furthermore, the shadowed polar regions are believed to contain the frozen water necessary for human consumption and could also be harvested for fuel manufacture. The crater is a major landing site candidate for the Artemis program and could be explored by a crew starting in 2026 with a possible first lunar outpost in 2028.

== In popular culture ==

Shackleton plays prominently in the alternate history television drama series &quot;For All Mankind&quot;. In the program, astronauts in a fictionalized version of the Apollo 15 mission land near Shackleton in 1971 and discover water ice in the crater walls. Later, the United States and the Soviet Union establish competing, crewed bases next to the crater to take advantage of the ice for drinking, oxygen and other uses.

Shackleton was also the site of the first lunar base in &quot;Mass Effect&quot;. It was chosen as a location due to its hypothesised water ice deposits.

Shackleton was the location for the site of the Chinese National Space Agency moonbase Guang Han Gong-1 in the fictional podcast series Transmissions from Colony One.

Pusher (musician), in his album published in late September 2023 named &quot;King of the Moon&quot;, heavily references a location called &quot;Shackleton Heights&quot;, where his album&#x27;s back-story takes place.

Shackleton is the point of origin of a mysterious signal in the novel &quot;The Shackleton Signal&quot; by Joshua T. Calvert.

== See also ==

* Colonization of the Moon
* Lunar ice
* Lunar south pole

== References ==

== External links ==
* Shackleton Crater Topography Visualization from NASA LRO
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1507641" start="0" end="10" title="Shackleton (crater)" label="Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="17" end="30" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703840" start="48" end="64" title="lunar south pole" label="lunar south pole"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182635" start="168" end="189" title="permanently shadowed crater" label="perpetually in shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306723" start="288" end="297" title="Volatile (astrogeology)" label="volatiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="310" end="315" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q590245" start="363" end="379" title="Lunar Prospector" label="Lunar Prospector"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="434" end="442" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="534" end="543" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q957543" start="553" end="570" title="Ernest Shackleton" label="Ernest Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q936117" start="803" end="826" title="South Pole–Aitken basin" label="South Pole–Aitken basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061151" start="832" end="838" title="massif" label="massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q210539" start="1236" end="1253" title="orbit of the Moon" label="orbit of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="1283" end="1291" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="1576" end="1579" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q819497" start="1633" end="1655" title="peak of eternal light" label="peaks of eternal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1803" end="1808" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q205408" start="1812" end="1818" title="SELENE" label="SELENE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="2576" end="2581" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="2679" end="2685" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q957543" start="2812" end="2829" title="Ernest Shackleton" label="Ernest Shackleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849692" start="2834" end="2845" title="Anglo-Irish people" label="Anglo-Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="2858" end="2868" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="2943" end="2975" title="International Astronomical Union" label="International Astronomical Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136701" start="3016" end="3025" title="Shoemaker (lunar crater)" label="Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591719" start="3027" end="3034" title="Haworth (crater)" label="Haworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q300905" start="3036" end="3047" title="De Gerlache (crater)" label="de Gerlache"/>
<link wikidata="Q7652193" start="3049" end="3057" title="Sverdrup (crater)" label="Sverdrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q24058576" start="3059" end="3065" title="Slater (crater)" label="Slater"/>
<link wikidata="Q144871" start="3071" end="3079" title="Faustini (crater)" label="Faustini"/>
<link wikidata="Q196450" start="3177" end="3185" title="Amundsen (crater)" label="Amundsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260757" start="3190" end="3195" title="Scott (crater)" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555938" start="3242" end="3251" title="Antarctic" label="Antarctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="3311" end="3316" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q936117" start="3574" end="3597" title="South Pole-Aitken basin" label="South Pole-Aitken basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="3658" end="3670" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2348" start="3810" end="3817" title="neutron" label="neutron"/>
<link wikidata="Q188463" start="3818" end="3830" title="spectrometer" label="spectrometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q590245" start="3844" end="3860" title="Lunar Prospector" label="Lunar Prospector"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="3908" end="3916" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136701" start="4089" end="4098" title="Shoemaker (lunar crater)" label="Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q462174" start="4333" end="4340" title="hydrate" label="hydrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7946" start="4342" end="4349" title="mineral" label="mineral"/>
<link wikidata="Q106551" start="4486" end="4494" title="regolith" label="regolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="5108" end="5116" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136701" start="5158" end="5182" title="Shoemaker (lunar crater)" label="Shoemaker (lunar crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="5199" end="5204" title="Radar" label="Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="5328" end="5354" title="albedo" label="reflective characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49055" start="5652" end="5670" title="Clementine mission" label="Clementine mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q205408" start="5969" end="5975" title="SELENE" label="Kaguya"/>
<link wikidata="Q738559" start="6182" end="6199" title="Moon Impact Probe" label="Moon Impact Probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49011" start="6235" end="6248" title="Chandrayaan-1" label="Chandrayaan-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q12725" start="6617" end="6628" title="electricity" label="electricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="6635" end="6646" title="Photovoltaic module" label="solar panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q495307" start="6699" end="6711" title="Moon landing" label="Moon landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q49055" start="6981" end="6991" title="Clementine mission" label="Clementine"/>
<link wikidata="Q590245" start="6996" end="7012" title="Lunar Prospector" label="Lunar Prospector"/>
<link wikidata="Q556" start="7467" end="7475" title="hydrogen" label="hydrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="7622" end="7630" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q4213" start="7631" end="7640" title="telescope" label="telescope"/>
<link wikidata="Q58803" start="7728" end="7738" title="solar cell" label="solar cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886730" start="7873" end="7890" title="Malapert Mountain" label="Malapert Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="7936" end="7941" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="7970" end="7975" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="8024" end="8028" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873299" start="8090" end="8103" title="Lunar outpost (NASA)" label="lunar outpost"/>
<link wikidata="Q63819987" start="8559" end="8574" title="Artemis program" label="Artemis program"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="8732" end="8749" title="alternate history" label="alternate history"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958409" start="8780" end="8795" title="For All Mankind (TV series)" label="For All Mankind"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="8864" end="8873" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8966" end="8979" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8988" end="9000" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q953242" start="9183" end="9194" title="Mass Effect" label="Mass Effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9411" end="9440" title="Transmissions from Colony One" label="Transmissions from Colony One"/>
<link wikidata="Q108423850" start="9443" end="9460" title="Pusher (musician)" label="Pusher (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q367737" start="9806" end="9830" title="Colonization of the Moon" label="Colonization of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1037506" start="9833" end="9842" title="Lunar water" label="Lunar ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6703840" start="9845" end="9861" title="Lunar south pole" label="Lunar south pole"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019831" wikidata="Q4411725" url="?curid=1019831" title="Hialeah Market station">
<text>Hialeah Market is a Tri-Rail commuter rail Station in Hialeah, Florida. Station is located at Southeast 10th Court near Southeast 14th Street, opening in January 1989 as Miami Airport Station. It was the southern terminus of Tri-Rail line until a new Station was built closer to the airport in 1998. The name was changed to Hialeah Market Station at this point. The other Miami Airport Station was closed in September 12, 2011, and this Station&#x27;s name was changed to Hialeah Market/Miami Airport Station. The name was changed back to Hialeah Market Station again in 2015 after Tri-Rail began to serve Miami Airport station. Parking is available at this Station. Immediately north of the station is the historic Hialeah Seaboard Air Line Railway Station.

==Station layout==
The station has two tracks, and only one side platform. The station building, parking, and bus stops are west of the platform.

==Places of interest==
*Hialeah Seaboard Air Line Railway Station

==References==
== External links ==
*South Florida Regional Transportation Authority – Hialeah Market station</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4411725" start="0" end="14" title="Hialeah Market station" label="Hialeah Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452212" start="20" end="28" title="Tri-Rail" label="Tri-Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412403" start="29" end="42" title="commuter rail" label="commuter rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q49276" start="54" end="70" title="Hialeah, Florida" label="Hialeah, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095577" start="606" end="627" title="Miami Airport station" label="Miami Airport station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750497" start="716" end="757" title="Hialeah Seaboard Air Line Railway Station" label="Hialeah Seaboard Air Line Railway Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735706" start="820" end="833" title="side platform" label="side platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750497" start="931" end="972" title="Hialeah Seaboard Air Line Railway Station" label="Hialeah Seaboard Air Line Railway Station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019842" wikidata="Q1634461" url="?curid=1019842" title="Olbers (crater)">
<text>Olbers is a lunar impact crater that lies at the west edge of the Oceanus Procellarum, near the western limb of the Moon. It lies to the northwest of the crater Hevelius, and to the north of the indistinct Hedin. Farther to the south is the crater Riccioli. Due to its location, this crater appears very oblong because of foreshortening. It is viewed nearly edge-on, making observation of the interior difficult from the Earth.

The rim of Olbers is somewhat worn, with notches to the north, east, and south. The interior floor is relatively flat, especially toward the eastern rim, and is not marked by notable craterlets. The floor is covered by ray material and ejecta from the adjacent Glushko.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Olbers.

The following craters have been renamed by the IAU:
* Olbers A — &quot;See&quot; Glushko (crater).

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1634461" start="0" end="6" title="Olbers (crater)" label="Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="12" end="17" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="18" end="31" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q488299" start="66" end="85" title="Oceanus Procellarum" label="Oceanus Procellarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="116" end="120" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1565861" start="161" end="169" title="Hevelius (crater)" label="Hevelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458363" start="206" end="211" title="Hedin (crater)" label="Hedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661075" start="248" end="256" title="Riccioli (crater)" label="Riccioli"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="421" end="426" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478661" start="648" end="660" title="Ray system" label="ray material"/>
<link wikidata="Q427691" start="690" end="697" title="Glushko (crater)" label="Glushko"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="912" end="915" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q427691" start="946" end="962" title="Glushko (crater)" label="Glushko (crater)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019850" wikidata="Q5472970" url="?curid=1019850" title="Forty Fort">
<text>Forty Fort was a stronghold built by settlers from Connecticut, on the Susquehanna River in what is now Luzerne County, Pennsylvania. Before the American Revolutionary War, both Connecticut and Pennsylvania claimed this territory, as Connecticut had laid claim to a wide swath of land to its west based on its colonial charter. These competing claims triggered the Pennamite-Yankee Wars but were resolved after the Revolutionary War when the federal government awarded the contested territory to Pennsylvania. 

The fort was a refuge for settlers during the Battle of Wyoming on July 3, 1778. Lieutenant Colonel Zebulon Butler&#x27;s force of largely militia soldiers was defeated by a force of Loyalist soldiers from Butler&#x27;s Rangers and their indigenous allies. Forty Fort capitulated the following day. The fort was reoccupied by the Americans later that year.

==Description==

Forty Fort was located in the Wyoming Valley on the west bank of the Susquehanna River in what is now Forty Fort Borough in Luzerne County.

The fort is named for the forty families from Connecticut who arrived in the Wyoming Valley in 1769. Construction of the fort began in 1770, however, it fell into disrepair until rebuilt in 1777 during the Revolutionary War. The fort enclosed about an acre of ground. Barracks and other buildings were constructed along the double thick, twelve foot high stockade wall. These provided shelter for the occupants and a firing platform for the garrison. The enclosure was rectangular in shape with gates in the north and south walls. Small sentry towers were constructed at the four corners of the fort.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5472970" start="0" end="10" title="Forty Fort" label="Forty Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="51" end="62" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q27538" start="71" end="88" title="Susquehanna River" label="Susquehanna River"/>
<link wikidata="Q501292" start="104" end="132" title="Luzerne County, Pennsylvania" label="Luzerne County, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="145" end="171" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="194" end="206" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163373" start="365" end="386" title="Pennamite-Yankee War" label="Pennamite-Yankee Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2190013" start="558" end="575" title="Battle of Wyoming" label="Battle of Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068328" start="612" end="626" title="Zebulon Butler" label="Zebulon Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q935481" start="695" end="703" title="Loyalist (American Revolution)" label="Loyalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002546" start="718" end="739" title="Butler&amp;#x27;s Rangers" label="Butler&amp;#x27;s Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q604264" start="917" end="931" title="Wyoming Valley" label="Wyoming Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131872" start="989" end="1007" title="Forty Fort, Pennsylvania" label="Forty Fort Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q604264" start="1105" end="1119" title="Wyoming Valley" label="Wyoming Valley"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019852" wikidata="Q427691" url="?curid=1019852" title="Glushko (crater)">
<text>Glushko is a young impact crater on the Moon attached to the western rim of the crater Olbers.

Glushko possesses a relatively high albedo and is the focus of a prominent ray system that extends in all directions across the nearby surface. It has sharp, well-defined features that, combined with its higher albedo, are indicative of a relatively young impact crater. There is a small outer , and material along the inner walls has slumped to form shelves and s. There are three outward bulges in the rim to the north and northwest.

Due to its prominent rays, Glushko is mapped as part of the Copernican System.

This crater was previously designated Olbers A before being renamed by the IAU.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* SMART-1 view of the crater Glushko on the Moon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q427691" start="0" end="7" title="Glushko (crater)" label="Glushko"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="19" end="32" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="40" end="44" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634461" start="87" end="93" title="Olbers (crater)" label="Olbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="132" end="138" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478661" start="171" end="181" title="ray system" label="ray system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039116" start="593" end="610" title="Copernican period" label="Copernican System"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="688" end="691" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019863" wikidata="Q499691" url="?curid=1019863" title="Alfraganus (crater)">
<text>Alfraganus is a small lunar impact crater that lies in the rugged highland region to the southwest of the Mare Tranquillitatis. It is named after the Muslim astronomer Alfraganus. Northwest of Alfraganus is the crater Delambre, and to the south is the irregular Zöllner. The rim of Alfraganus is circular and retains a sharp edge that has not received a significant amount of wear due to subsequent impacts. The interior floor is roughly half the diameter of the crater rim.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Alfraganus.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

*Alfraganus at The Moon Wiki
* LTO-78A3 Alfraganus — L&amp;PI topographic map</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q499691" start="0" end="10" title="Alfraganus (crater)" label="Alfraganus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="22" end="27" title="lunar crater" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="28" end="41" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q320936" start="106" end="126" title="Mare Tranquillitatis" label="Mare Tranquillitatis"/>
<link wikidata="Q336550" start="168" end="178" title="Alfraganus" label="Alfraganus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183857" start="218" end="226" title="Delambre (crater)" label="Delambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q247796" start="262" end="269" title="Zöllner (crater)" label="Zöllner"/>
<link wikidata="Q216526" start="760" end="775" title="topographic map" label="topographic map"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019868" wikidata="Q7100653" url="?curid=1019868" title="Order of the Coif">
<text>The Order of the Coif () is an American honor society for law school graduates. The Order was founded in 1902 at the University of Illinois College of Law. The name is a reference to the ancient English order of trial lawyers, the serjeants-at-law, whose courtroom attire included a coif—a white lawn or silk skullcap, which came to be represented by a round piece of white lace worn on top of the advocate&#x27;s wig. A student who earns a Juris Doctor degree and graduates in the top ten percent of their class is eligible for membership if the student&#x27;s law school has a chapter of the Order. 

==History==

The University of Illinois College of Law established what would become the Order of the Coif in 1902. According to the organization&#x27;s constitution, &quot;The purpose of The Order is to encourage excellence in legal education by fostering a spirit of careful study, recognizing those who as law students attained a high grade of scholarship, and honoring those who as lawyers, judges and teachers attained high distinction for their scholarly or professional accomplishments.&quot;

In the late 19th century, several leading American law schools had established honors fraternities to recognize scholarship and distinction within the ranks of Juris Doctors in the United States. One of these, at the University of Illinois, was originally named Theta Kappa Nu. It inspired several additional chapters in Nebraska, Missouri, and Wisconsin. A local legal honor society had formed in 1907 at Northwestern University, adopting the name Order of the Coif, but three years later, in 1910, would accept a charter from Theta Kappa Nu. Even with this charter the Northwestern group retained use of the earlier name, which was one of the factors which necessitated a discussion and eventual negotiation of a &quot;merger&quot;, and not just an absorption. 

Also, in 1910 chapters at Iowa and Michigan were formed. Rapid expansion and divergent practices at these early schools led to calls for a national convention. At this meeting, in 1911, it was determined to adopt the original name of the Northwestern group, the Order of the Coif, along with a revised constitution that was fully ratified in 1912. Thus the American Order of the Coif dates to its earliest group, in Illinois, from 1902, and adopted its name from both the Northwestern group and its institutional inspiration, the English Order.

== Symbols ==
The symbolism of the Order of the Coif is far older, having evolved from the legal traditions of the Middle Ages in England. The Coif itself originated as a tight-fitting headpiece once used by both men and women. A version of this, in the form a close-fitting hood that covered all but the face, was adopted as a symbol for those barristers who had been recognized as serjeants-at-law and thus formed the narrow pool of legal practitioners who could be appointed judges of the Court of Common Pleas or, later, of the King&#x27;s Bench. With this distinctive apparel, the serjeants-at-law became known as &quot;serjeants of the coif&quot; and their group within society as the original Order of the Coif; this predecessor inspired the name and markings of the American Order, although beyond inspiration there is no legal connection between the two. White wigs were so often sewn onto the coif that their usage became conjoined.

One of the earliest known (English) serjeants of the coif was a man named Geoffrey Ridel, named so in the year 1117. The early writer, Geoffrey Chaucer made mention of Serjeants at Law in the preface to his novel, &quot;The Canterbury Tales&quot;. Through the 15th, 16th, and 17th centuries, important English jurists were so recognized: Bacon, Blackburn, Blackstone, Campbell, Cavendish, Coke, Coleridge, Fortesque, Glanville, and Littleton, these may be the best known. But in the 18th century, rumblings of dissatisfaction with this arrangement grew. The English Order&#x27;s privileged hold on the court was finally ended when a Crown Warrant was issued in 1839 which commanded Common Pleas to permit &quot;gentlemen of the bar generally&quot; to be allowed to practice before it. Objections were litigated briefly, but by the following year, the matter had been settled with the power of the Order broken. Its last meeting was held in 1877.

The wig and coif remain standard courtroom attire today in England and Commonwealth countries.

== Membership ==
The induction process varies by law school, but students are generally notified of their membership after the final class ranks at their schools are announced. A new member receives a certificate of membership, a badge of membership for wear during academic ceremonies, a Coif key, and in some cases an actual coif or a representation of one.

The basic requirement for membership is ranking in the top 10% of a member school&#x27;s graduating class. If a member law school graduates fewer than 30 students, it may induct its top three students. A school can decide not to allow an otherwise eligible student to receive the honor and may impose additional requirements for membership beyond the organization&#x27;s national requirement of being in the top 10% of the class.

Each member school may also induct a faculty member and one honorary member each year. The national organization&#x27;s executive committee may also elect a limited number of honorary members. Those chosen for honorary membership are usually U.S. Supreme Court justices and other preeminent members of the legal profession.

== Chapters ==
, 87 of 203 United States law schools accredited by the American Bar Association to award the Juris Doctor (J.D.) degree had Order of the Coif chapters. Following is a list of chapters of Order of the Coif.
== Notable members ==
==Credentials obtainable while in law school==
Within each U.S. law school, key credentials include:
* Law review/Law journal membership or editorial position (based either on grades or write-on competition or both). This is important for at least three reasons. First, because it is determined by either grades or writing ability, membership is an indicator of strong academic performance. This leads to the second reason, which is that potential employers sometimes use law review membership in their hiring criteria. Third, work on law review exposes a student to legal scholarship and editing, and often allows the student to publish a significant piece of legal scholarship on his or her own. Most law schools have a &quot;flagship&quot; journal usually called &quot;&quot;School name&quot; Law Review&quot; (for example, the &quot;Harvard Law Review&quot;—although some schools call their flagship journal &quot;&quot;School name&quot; Law Journal&quot;; see &quot;Yale Law Journal&quot;) that publishes articles on all areas of law, and one or more other specialty law journals that publish articles concerning only a particular area of the law (for example, the &quot;Harvard Journal of Law &amp; Technology&quot;).
* Moot court membership or award (based on oral and written argument). Success in moot court can distinguish one as an outstanding oral advocate and provides a degree of practical legal training that is often absent from law review membership. Moot court and related activities, such as Trial Advocacy and Dispute Resolution, may appeal especially to employers hiring for litigation positions, such as a district attorney&#x27;s office.
* Mock trial membership and awards (based on trial level advocacy skills) also can distinguish one as an outstanding trial advocate and help develop &quot;real world&quot; skills that are often valuable to employers hiring for litigation positions.
* Order of the Coif membership (based on grade point average). This is often coupled with Latin honors (summa and magna cum laude, though often not cum laude). However, a slight majority of law schools in the U.S. do not have Order of the Coif chapters.
* Phi Delta Phi honor society membership (based on class ranking of the top one-third.) This prestigious society is organized around student chapters called &quot;Inns&quot;, and the society has inducted many historic figures including five U.S. presidents, two U.S. vice presidents, 14 Supreme Court justices, and numerous members of Congress, Cabinet members, and ambassadors. .

===State and federal court clerkship===

On the basis of a student&#x27;s credentials, as well as favorable faculty recommendations, some students obtain a one or two-year clerkship with a judge after graduation. While the majority of judges traditionally choose incoming clerks while they are still in law school, or as they complete another clerkship, in the 2020s; some judges seek out clerks with some private law practice experience.

Clerkships may be with state or federal judges, and are meant to provide the recent law school graduate with experience working for a judge. Often, clerks engage in significant legal research and writing for the judge, writing memos to assist a judge in coming to a legal conclusion in some cases, and writing drafts of opinions based on the judge&#x27;s decisions. Appellate court clerkships, although generally more prestigious, do not necessarily give one a great deal of practical experience in the day-to-day life of a lawyer in private practice. The average litigator might get much more out of a clerkship at the trial court level, where they will be learning about motions practices, dealing with lawyers, and generally learning how a trial court works from the inside.

Court clerkships may also provide other valuable assets to a young lawyer; judges often become mentors to their clerks, providing the fledgling attorney with an experienced individual from whom to seek advice. Fellow clerks may also become enduring connections. Law schools encourage graduates to engage in a clerkship to broaden their professional experiences. However, there fewer clerkships than there are academically eligible graduates.

===United States Supreme Court clerkship===
Some law school graduates are able to clerk for one of the Justices on the Supreme Court (each Justice takes two to four clerks per year). Often, these clerks are graduates of elite law schools, with Harvard, Yale, the University of Chicago, the University of Michigan, Columbia, the University of Virginia, and Stanford being among the most highly represented schools. Justice Clarence Thomas is the major exception to the rule that Justices hire clerks from elite schools; he takes pride in selecting clerks from non-top-tier schools, and publicly noted that his clerks have been attacked on the Internet as &quot;third tier trash&quot;.

Most Supreme Court clerks have clerked in a lower court, often for a year with a highly selective federal circuit court judge (such as Judges Alex Kozinski, Michael Luttig, J. Harvie Wilkinson, David Tatel, Richard Posner) known as a &quot;feeder judge&quot;. It is perhaps the most highly selective and prestigious position a recently graduated lawyer can have, and Supreme Court clerks are often highly sought after by law firms, the government, and law schools. Law firms give Supreme Court clerks as much as a $400,000 bonus for signing with their firm. The vast majority of Supreme Court clerks either become academics at elite law schools, enter private practice as appellate attorneys, or take highly selective government positions.

== See also ==
* Professional fraterities and sororities
* Honor society

==References==
==Further reading==
*Michael Herz, &quot;Coif Comes to Cardozo&quot;, (Spring 1999) (includes information on the order&#x27;s history).
*Frank R. Strong, &quot;Order of the Coif: English Antecedents and American Adaptation&quot;, 63 A.B.A. J. 1725-1727 (1977).

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7100653" start="4" end="21" title="Order of the Coif" label="Order of the Coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078534" start="40" end="53" title="honor society" label="honor society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895523" start="117" end="154" title="University of Illinois College of Law" label="University of Illinois College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104090" start="231" end="247" title="serjeants-at-law" label="serjeants-at-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978441" start="283" end="287" title="coif" label="coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q13139736" start="296" end="300" title="lawn (fabric)" label="lawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14952" start="309" end="317" title="Headgear" label="skullcap"/>
<link wikidata="Q105507" start="414" end="417" title="Wig (hair)" label="wig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="441" end="453" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895523" start="620" end="657" title="University of Illinois College of Law" label="University of Illinois College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978441" start="2558" end="2562" title="Coif" label="Coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104090" start="2798" end="2814" title="serjeants-at-law" label="serjeants-at-law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683" start="3494" end="3510" title="Geoffrey Chaucer" label="Geoffrey Chaucer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191663" start="3579" end="3599" title="The Canterbury Tales" label="The Canterbury Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q15978441" start="4729" end="4733" title="coif" label="coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="5436" end="5454" title="United States Supreme Court" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="5590" end="5614" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540185" start="5628" end="5640" title="Juris Doctor" label="Juris Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q746654" start="5866" end="5888" title="Law review" label="Law review/Law journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365125" start="6600" end="6618" title="Harvard Law Review" label="Harvard Law Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q3571386" start="6734" end="6750" title="Yale Law Journal" label="Yale Law Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15707478" start="6939" end="6978" title="Harvard Journal of Law &amp;amp; Technology" label="Harvard Journal of Law &amp;amp; Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q382310" start="6989" end="6999" title="Moot court" label="Moot court"/>
<link wikidata="Q653368" start="7391" end="7408" title="district attorney" label="district attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887795" start="7426" end="7436" title="Mock trial" label="Mock trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100653" start="7675" end="7692" title="Order of the Coif" label="Order of the Coif"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="7714" end="7733" title="grade point average" label="grade point average"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085571" start="7929" end="7942" title="Phi Delta Phi" label="Phi Delta Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128036" start="7978" end="7988" title="class rank" label="class rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="10215" end="10222" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143289" start="10224" end="10228" title="Yale Law School" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036763" start="10234" end="10255" title="University of Chicago Law School" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q911830" start="10261" end="10283" title="University of Michigan Law School" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149089" start="10285" end="10293" title="Columbia Law School" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896545" start="10299" end="10321" title="University of Virginia School of Law" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012895" start="10327" end="10335" title="Stanford Law School" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11142" start="10393" end="10408" title="Clarence Thomas" label="Clarence Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717318" start="10798" end="10811" title="Alex Kozinski" label="Alex Kozinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1676364" start="10813" end="10827" title="J. Michael Luttig" label="Michael Luttig"/>
<link wikidata="Q15512910" start="10829" end="10848" title="J. Harvie Wilkinson" label="J. Harvie Wilkinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239398" start="10850" end="10861" title="David S. Tatel" label="David Tatel"/>
<link wikidata="Q533583" start="10863" end="10877" title="Richard Posner" label="Richard Posner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248071" start="11414" end="11453" title="Professional fraternities and sororities" label="Professional fraterities and sororities"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078534" start="11456" end="11469" title="Honor society" label="Honor society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650020" start="11719" end="11728" title="ABA Journal" label="A.B.A. J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019875" wikidata="Q6817807" url="?curid=1019875" title="Mephisto Odyssey">
<text>Mephisto Odyssey is an American house music group from San Francisco, California, United States, who have been credited with helping to pioneer the San Francisco house music sound. The group went on to release a number of self-released singles until doing tenures at City of Angels and Warner Bros. Records from the mid-1990s into the early 2000s. Mephisto Odyssey are also credited with being the only group to officially remix Jane&#x27;s Addiction for the maxi single &quot;So What!&quot;. The group released many singles and remixes as well as an EP and two albums during the life of the band. This included the song &quot;Crash&quot; which was co-written with Wayne Static of Static-X and &quot;Some Kinda Freak&quot; which was featured in the horror film &quot;Hostel&quot;.

==Biography==
===Inception and debut single (1993—1996)===
Mephisto Odyssey was originally formed in the fall of 1993 by musician, songwriter / producer Mikael Johnston and producer / songwriter Michael Ames. Johnston&#x27;s high school friend and fellow musician Orpheos Dejournette joined the group shortly after. The group&#x27;s first single, the self-released &quot;Dream of the Black Dahlia” (1993), earned kudos from Bay Area promoters and the international underground scene including DJ Garth of Greyhound Recordings who was the first international DJ to play the track. Ames left the group permanently after the release of their first single.

===City of Angels (1996—1998)===
Mephisto Odyssey now fronted by Johnston and Dejournette continued to release singles on their own label Mephisto Records until 1996 when they signed to the progressive West Coast label City of Angels. At City of Angels the group shared the talent roster with Überzone, Simply Jeff, Christopher Lawrence (DJ), Sandra Collins and future break beat kings, The Crystal Method. After a handful of singles and the release of their first album &quot;Catching The Skinny&quot; the then duo caught the ear of Warner Bros. Records A &amp; R rep Troy Wallace. Wallace offered the duo the chance to work on a remix project with Jane&#x27;s Addiction for the upcoming maxi single &quot;So What!&quot;, Mephisto Odyssey co-produced the remixes with long-time friend and Primal Record Shop owner, Barrie Eves, who officially joined the group soon after. The official release featured 3 remixes by Mephisto Odyssey and went on to spend 6 weeks in the &quot;Billboard&quot; maxi singles chart which paved the way for a Warner Bros. Records recording contract (December 1998). DJ Josh Camacho also joined the group soon after the band signed to Warner Bros. as a touring member. To date Mephisto Odyssey are the only artists to officially remix Jane&#x27;s Addiction. 

===The Warner Bros. Years (1998—2002)===
While at Warner Bros. Records the group expanded further into the realm of engineering, producing and remixing by working with various artists sharing the roster. Mikael Johnston co-wrote, produced and engineered the single &quot;Crash&quot; with Wayne Static of Static-X which also appeared on the Static-X album &quot;Beneath... Between... Beyond...&quot; Mephisto Odyssey also appeared with Wayne Static and Koichi Fukuda in the song&#x27;s video (directed by Len Wiseman), which aired in heavy rotation on MTVX. A Humble Brothers remix version of &quot;Crash&quot; was also featured on the soundtrack of &quot;Batman Beyond: Return of the Joker&quot;. Mephisto Odyssey did remixes for Los Amigos Invisibles &quot;Mi Linda&quot;, Static-X&#x27;s &quot;Push It&quot; and Soul Coughing&#x27;s &quot;Rolling&quot; among others. An EP called &quot;The Lift&quot; which charted in the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Dance Club Play Chart, several singles and an album called &quot;The Deep Red Connection&quot; followed. A diverse array of guest vocalists appeared on the band&#x27;s major label debut including Wayne Static, Hafdis Huld of Gus Gus, former 4ad artist Paula Frazer and Mad Lion. The group left Warner Bros. at the beginning of 2002 and disbanded.

=== Mephisto Odyssey reunite (2006—2008) ===
In 2006 founding member Mikael Johnston and DJ Josh Camacho reunited under the Mephisto Odyssey moniker to release several singles under their new Groove Quest label. Some of the singles released were &quot;Superphonic&quot; on N-mitysound Records, &quot;Sexy Love&quot; and &quot;Bump.&quot;
In 2008 Mikael Johnston put Mephisto Odyssey in moratorium to become one half of the music production team Dresden and Johnston with long-time friend Dave Dresden.

==Discography==
* Dream of the Black Dahlia (EP) 12&quot; - Orpheos Productions 1994
* Dream of the Black Dahlia Remixes 12&quot; - Mephisto Records through Hi-Bias 1994
* Dream of the Black Dahlia on Twitch Vol. 10 12&quot; - Twitch Records 1994
* Catching the Skinny EP 12&quot; - Mephisto Records through Hi-Bias 1994
* The Motive EP 12&quot; - Mephisto Records 1995
* Transhumance feat. John Kozak - San Francisco Sound Spectrum (under the name Odyssey Arcane) 12&quot; Twitch Records 1995
* The Tyburn Swing on RAW OXYGEN 5: Cool Neurotica 12&quot; - Oxygen Music Works 1996
* Freak Lip Stomp, Dream of the Black Dahlia on Mephisto - The Subterranean Sounds of San Francisco 12&quot; SSR/Crammed 1996
* Get Down (single) 12&quot; - City of Angels Records - 1996
* Midntropolis (Single) 12&quot; - City of Angels Records 1997
* Feterous Tripstride on The Sound of Young America 12&quot; - City of Angels - 1997
* Catching the Skinny Album - City of Angels 1997
* Jane&#x27;s Addiction - So What EP Mephisto Odyssey remixes 12&quot; - Warner Bros. Records 1997
* Los Amigos Invisibles - Mi Linda Mephisto Odyssey Remixes 12&quot; - Luaka Bop / WBR 1998
* Flow single (under the name Deep Red) 12&quot; - Primal Trax / Warner Bros. Records 1999
* The Lift Remixes (EP) 12&quot; Dbl Pack Primal Trax / Warner Bros. Records 2000
* The Deep Red Connection - Warner Bros. Records 2000
* Sexy Dancer (single) Hipp-E &amp; Halo remix 12&quot; - Primal Trax / Warner Bros. Records 2000
* Reach (single) feat Hafdis Huld 12&quot; - Primal Trax / Warner Bros. Records 2000
* Killah (single) feat Jamalski 12&quot; - Primal Trax / Warner Bros. Records 2001
* Some Kinda Freak (single) feat. Ultra Violet Catastrophe remix 12&quot; - Primal Trax / Warner Bros. Records 2001
* Crash Video (Featuring Static-X, directed by Len Wiseman) - Warner Bros. Records 2001
* Rites of Passage (single) 12&quot; - The Joint / Waako records 2004

==References==
==External links==
*MEPHISTO ODYSSEY</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6817807" start="0" end="16" title="Mephisto Odyssey" label="Mephisto Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="32" end="43" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="55" end="68" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="70" end="80" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q622947" start="429" end="450" title="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction" label="Jane&amp;#x27;s Addiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q439366" start="665" end="677" title="Wayne Static" label="Wayne Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q491892" start="681" end="689" title="Static-X" label="Static-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q842720" start="767" end="773" title="Hostel (2005 film)" label="Hostel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65972744" start="935" end="950" title="Mikael Johnston" label="Mikael Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="1206" end="1214" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205329" start="1275" end="1283" title="DJ Garth" label="DJ Garth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052305" start="1729" end="1737" title="Überzone" label="Überzone"/>
<link wikidata="Q33465" start="1752" end="1777" title="Christopher Lawrence (DJ)" label="Christopher Lawrence (DJ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416574" start="1779" end="1793" title="Sandra Collins" label="Sandra Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q50975" start="1823" end="1841" title="The Crystal Method" label="The Crystal Method"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="1970" end="1990" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="2405" end="2426" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="2472" end="2492" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="2772" end="2792" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q439366" start="3010" end="3022" title="Wayne Static" label="Wayne Static"/>
<link wikidata="Q491892" start="3026" end="3034" title="Static-X" label="Static-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q940534" start="3083" end="3114" title="Beneath... Between... Beyond..." label="Beneath... Between... Beyond..."/>
<link wikidata="Q2303778" start="3174" end="3187" title="Koichi Fukuda" label="Koichi Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q336099" start="3226" end="3237" title="Len Wiseman" label="Len Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6718588" start="3273" end="3277" title="MTVX" label="MTVX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740909" start="3281" end="3302" title="The Humble Brothers" label="Humble Brothers remix"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3377" end="3411" title="Batman Beyond: Return of the Joker" label="Batman Beyond: Return of the Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043925" start="3452" end="3473" title="Los Amigos Invisibles" label="Los Amigos Invisibles"/>
<link wikidata="Q491892" start="3496" end="3504" title="Static-X" label="Static-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q973818" start="3536" end="3549" title="Soul Coughing" label="Soul Coughing"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="3646" end="3667" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638308" start="3882" end="3893" title="Hafdis Huld" label="Hafdis Huld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261885" start="3897" end="3904" title="Gus Gus" label="Gus Gus"/>
<link wikidata="Q238095" start="3913" end="3916" title="4ad" label="4ad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551165" start="3924" end="3936" title="Paula Frazer" label="Paula Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725992" start="3941" end="3949" title="Mad Lion" label="Mad Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q65972744" start="4089" end="4104" title="Mikael Johnston" label="Mikael Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5307001" start="4465" end="4485" title="Dresden and Johnston" label="Dresden and Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228694" start="4508" end="4520" title="Dave Dresden" label="Dave Dresden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019876" wikidata="Q633271" url="?curid=1019876" title="Holly Grove">
<text>Holly Grove may refer to:

==Places==
===United States===
* Holly Grove, Arkansas, a town
**Holly Grove Historic District, Holly Grove, Arkansas, listed on the NRHP in Monroe County, Arkansas
*Holly Grove, Davidson County, North Carolina, an unincorporated community
*Holly Grove, Gates County, North Carolina, an unincorporated communities
*Holly Grove, West Virginia, an unincorporated community
*Holly Grove Methodist Church, Anacoco, Louisiana, listed on the NRHP in Vernon Parish, Louisiana
*Holly Grove (Clinton, Louisiana), listed on the NRHP in East Feliciana Parish, Louisiana
*Holly Grove Plantation House, Bolton, Mississippi, NRHP-listed
*Holly Grove (Centreville, Mississippi), listed on the NRHP in Wilkinson County, Mississippi
*Holly Grove Site, Sledge, Mississippi, NRHP-listed
*Holly Grove Mansion, Charleston, West Virginia, listed on the NRHP in West Virginia

==See also==
*Hollygrove (disambiguation)
*Holly Grove School (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q633271" start="0" end="11" title="Holly Grove" label="Holly Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q79280" start="60" end="81" title="Holly Grove, Arkansas" label="Holly Grove, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707006" start="92" end="121" title="Holly Grove Historic District" label="Holly Grove Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q6976891" start="146" end="191" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Monroe County, Arkansas" label="listed on the NRHP in Monroe County, Arkansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768242" start="193" end="237" title="Holly Grove, Davidson County, North Carolina" label="Holly Grove, Davidson County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q60768237" start="268" end="309" title="Holly Grove, Gates County, North Carolina" label="Holly Grove, Gates County, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714057" start="342" end="368" title="Holly Grove, West Virginia" label="Holly Grove, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881996" start="399" end="427" title="Holly Grove Methodist Church" label="Holly Grove Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q12063459" start="449" end="495" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Vernon Parish, Louisiana" label="listed on the NRHP in Vernon Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="497" end="529" title="Holly Grove (Clinton, Louisiana)" label="Holly Grove (Clinton, Louisiana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975972" start="531" end="585" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in East Feliciana Parish, Louisiana" label="listed on the NRHP in East Feliciana Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882000" start="587" end="615" title="Holly Grove Plantation House" label="Holly Grove Plantation House"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060072" start="651" end="689" title="Holly Grove (Centreville, Mississippi)" label="Holly Grove (Centreville, Mississippi)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977871" start="691" end="742" title="National Register of Historic Places listings in Wilkinson County, Mississippi" label="listed on the NRHP in Wilkinson County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882007" start="744" end="760" title="Holly Grove Site" label="Holly Grove Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q5881987" start="796" end="815" title="Holly Grove Mansion" label="Holly Grove Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6977837" start="844" end="879" title="List of RHPs in WV" label="listed on the NRHP in West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882391" start="895" end="922" title="Hollygrove (disambiguation)" label="Hollygrove (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16784828" start="924" end="959" title="Holly Grove School (disambiguation)" label="Holly Grove School (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019877" wikidata="Q1128711" url="?curid=1019877" title="Holly Ridge">
<text>Holly Ridge may refer to:

*Holly Ridge, Mississippi
*Holly Ridge, North Carolina 

==See also==
*Hollyridge Strings</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1128711" start="0" end="11" title="Holly Ridge" label="Holly Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11026874" start="28" end="52" title="Holly Ridge, Mississippi" label="Holly Ridge, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023761" start="54" end="81" title="Holly Ridge, North Carolina" label="Holly Ridge, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13366656" start="98" end="116" title="Hollyridge Strings" label="Hollyridge Strings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019879" wikidata="Q1787634" url="?curid=1019879" title="Alhazen (crater)">
<text>Alhazen is a lunar impact crater that lies near the eastern limb of the Moon&#x27;s near side. Just to the south-southeast is the crater Hansen, and to the west is the Mare Crisium. The rim of Alhazen is nearly circular, but appears highly oblong when viewed from the Earth due to foreshortening. The inner walls and the crater floor are rugged and irregular. A low ridge joins the south rim of Alhazen with the nearby Hansen. The crater is named after the Arab Muslim scientist, Ibn al-Haytham.

==Satellite craters==

By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Alhazen.

==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==

* The Lunar Crater Alhazen</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1787634" start="0" end="7" title="Alhazen (crater)" label="Alhazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="13" end="18" title="lunar crater" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="19" end="32" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="72" end="76" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q798598" start="137" end="143" title="Hansen (crater)" label="Hansen"/>
<link wikidata="Q168416" start="168" end="180" title="Mare Crisium" label="Mare Crisium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="268" end="273" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="457" end="461" title="Arab" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q11104" start="480" end="494" title="Alhazen" label="Ibn al-Haytham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019881" wikidata="Q1052479" url="?curid=1019881" title="Cedar Falls">
<text>Cedar Falls may refer to:
*Operation Cedar Falls, ground operation of the Vietnam War
*Cedar Falls, Iowa
**Cedar Falls Utilities in Cedar Falls, Iowa
**Cedar Falls Community School District in Cedar Falls, Iowa
**Cedar Falls Historical Society in Cedar Falls, Iowa
**Cedar Falls High School in Cedar Falls, Iowa
**Cedar Falls Ice House in Cedar Falls, Iowa
**Cedar Falls Independent Order of Odd Fellows Temple in Cedar Falls, Iowa
*Cedar Falls Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa
*Waterloo – Cedar Falls metropolitan area, Iowa
*Cedar Falls, North Carolina
*Cedar Rock Falls, North Carolina
*Cedar Falls, Washington
**Cedar Falls Historic District in Washington
*Cedar Falls, Wisconsin
* Cedar Falls, a waterfall in Montana
* Cedar Falls, a waterfall in the Hocking Hills State Park, Ohio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q859217" start="27" end="48" title="Operation Cedar Falls" label="Operation Cedar Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q582212" start="87" end="104" title="Cedar Falls, Iowa" label="Cedar Falls, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056677" start="107" end="128" title="Cedar Falls Utilities" label="Cedar Falls Utilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056673" start="152" end="189" title="Cedar Falls Community School District" label="Cedar Falls Community School District"/>
<link wikidata="Q14688932" start="213" end="243" title="Cedar Falls Historical Society" label="Cedar Falls Historical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056672" start="267" end="290" title="Cedar Falls High School" label="Cedar Falls High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056674" start="314" end="335" title="Cedar Falls Ice House" label="Cedar Falls Ice House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056675" start="359" end="410" title="Cedar Falls Independent Order of Odd Fellows Temple" label="Cedar Falls Independent Order of Odd Fellows Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220262" start="433" end="478" title="Cedar Falls Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa" label="Cedar Falls Township, Black Hawk County, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974317" start="480" end="520" title="Waterloo – Cedar Falls metropolitan area" label="Waterloo – Cedar Falls metropolitan area"/>
<link wikidata="Q19460900" start="528" end="555" title="Cedar Falls, North Carolina" label="Cedar Falls, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q38328" start="557" end="573" title="Cedar Rock Falls" label="Cedar Rock Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q54824896" start="591" end="614" title="Cedar Falls, Washington" label="Cedar Falls, Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q105706905" start="617" end="646" title="Seattle Municipal Light and Power Plant" label="Cedar Falls Historic District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056670" start="662" end="684" title="Cedar Falls, Wisconsin" label="Cedar Falls, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973975" start="702" end="722" title="Waterfalls of Montana" label="waterfall in Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875771" start="757" end="781" title="Hocking Hills State Park" label="Hocking Hills State Park"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019883" wikidata="Q5019695" url="?curid=1019883" title="Calgary Mustangs (USL)">
<text>The Calgary Mustangs (formerly the Calgary Storm and Team Calgary) were a soccer team in Calgary, Alberta, that played in the semi-professional USL Premier Development League in 2001 and the professional USL A-League from 2002 to 2004.

==History==

In 2001, the Calgary Storm was formed to play in the semi-professional USL Premier Development League. They finished as the regular season champions and in the playoffs advanced to the Championship final, where they finished as runner-ups after being defeated by the Westchester Flames.

In 2002, the Storm moved to the professional USL A-League. In their debut professional season, the Storm finished last in their division failing to qualify for the playoffs. During the season, the season was complicated by player walkouts, a coach&#x27;s firing, financial problems that forced several players to play without being paid, and some games being played without substitutes available.

In 2003, the team once again continued to struggle in the standings, once again finishing last in their division. During the season, team owner Michael Vandale resigned as team owner citing personal issues and mounting financial losses, handing over the operation of the team to the United Soccer Leagues, who would seek a new ownership group. The USL managed the team for the remainder of the season, with funding pooled from the other 18 A-League franchises, who approved the decision to take over operation of the team, with the team finishing the season under the name Team Calgary.

For 2004, a new ownership group consisting of Storm head coach Thomas Niendorf, John Torode, and Juergen Hanne were granted the rights to the franchise, choosing to operate the franchise as a non-profit organization. The team continued in the USL A-League, changing its name to the Calgary Mustangs for the 2004 season (a previous team in the Canadian Professional Soccer League had operated as the Calgary Mustangs in 1983). Following another last place finish, the Mustangs halted operations following the 2005 season, initially planning to return for the 2006 season, however, they ultimately never returned.

The team never acquired a significant profile in the Calgary sports marketplace and never had great fan support. The USL PDL Calgary Storm averaged 2,003 fans per game at Foothills Stadium. In their final season the team&#x27;s average attendance was just 1,258 at 35,650 capacity McMahon Stadium.

==Year-by-year==
==Honours==
* USL PDL Regular Season Champions: 2001

==Reserve Team==

After the Storm moved to the A-League from the PDL following the 2001 season, the club established a second team in the PDL known as the Calgary Storm Select, later known as the Calgary Storm Prospects in 2003. After the first team was taken over by the league mid-season in 2003, the reserve team was disbanded, with the Abbotsford Rangers who were operating a provisional league member taking over the remainder of their fixtures.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5019695" start="4" end="20" title="Calgary Mustangs (USL)" label="Calgary Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019695" start="35" end="48" title="Calgary Mustangs (USL)" label="Calgary Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5019695" start="53" end="65" title="Calgary Mustangs (USL)" label="Team Calgary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36312" start="89" end="105" title="Calgary, Alberta" label="Calgary, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q976491" start="144" end="174" title="Premier Development League" label="USL Premier Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646905" start="204" end="216" title="A-League (1995–2004)" label="USL A-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q976491" start="321" end="351" title="Premier Development League" label="USL Premier Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q738987" start="517" end="535" title="Westchester Flames" label="Westchester Flames"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646905" start="583" end="595" title="A-League (1995–2004)" label="USL A-League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520453" start="1219" end="1240" title="United Soccer Leagues" label="United Soccer Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030501" start="1867" end="1902" title="Canadian Professional Soccer League (1983)" label="Canadian Professional Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q106609443" start="1923" end="1939" title="Calgary Mustangs (CPSL)" label="Calgary Mustangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3747848" start="2308" end="2325" title="Foothills Stadium" label="Foothills Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810204" start="2418" end="2433" title="McMahon Stadium" label="McMahon Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q4599008" start="2501" end="2505" title="2001 PDL season" label="2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493703" start="2847" end="2865" title="Abbotsford Rangers" label="Abbotsford Rangers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019885" wikidata="Q163304" url="?curid=1019885" title="United States Naval Hospital Beaufort">
<text>Naval Hospital Beaufort is a United States Navy hospital located in Beaufort, South Carolina.

== History ==
Commissioned on April 29, 1949, the hospital is one of only a handful of its kind that sits within its own complex rather than within a larger base. It takes its name from Beaufort, the larger community north of Port Royal that is commonly associated with military installations in the Lowcountry region.

== Function ==
NH Beaufort serves nearby Marine Corps bases MCRD Parris Island and MCAS Beaufort, including the housing area of Laurel Bay.

== References ==
== External links ==
*beaufort.tricare.mil/—Official Web Site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q163304" start="0" end="23" title="United States Naval Hospital Beaufort" label="Naval Hospital Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="29" end="47" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q813376" start="68" end="92" title="Beaufort, South Carolina" label="Beaufort, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q813376" start="281" end="289" title="Beaufort, South Carolina" label="Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885311" start="395" end="405" title="Lowcountry" label="Lowcountry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="456" end="468" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424369" start="475" end="493" title="MCRD Parris Island" label="MCRD Parris Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031183" start="498" end="511" title="MCAS Beaufort" label="MCAS Beaufort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810605" start="543" end="553" title="Laurel Bay, South Carolina" label="Laurel Bay"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019887" wikidata="Q1454582" url="?curid=1019887" title="Long Pond">
<text>Long Pond or Longs Pond may refer to:

==Natural Feature==

* Long Pond, Tunkhannock Creek, Pennsylvania, Monroe County, Tunkhannock Township

==Anguilla==
* Long Pond, Anguilla

==Canada==
* Long Pond, St. John&#x27;s, Newfoundland and Labrador
* A community in Conception Bay South
* Long Pond (Herring Cove, Nova Scotia)
* The purported birthplace of hockey in Windsor, Nova Scotia

==United States==
=== Maine ===
*Long Pond (Belgrade Lakes)
* Long Pond (Hancock County, Maine), Hancock County, Maine
*Long Pond (Moose River)

=== Massachusetts ===

* Long Pond (West Yarmouth, Massachusetts)
* Long Pond (Lakeville, Massachusetts)
* Long Pond (Plymouth, Massachusetts)
* Long Pond (Rochester, Massachusetts)

=== New Jersey and New York ===
* Long Pond (New York), near Oswegatchie Camp, Lewis County, New York
* Long Pond (Chenango County, New York)
* Long Pond (Hamilton County, New York)
* Long Pond (Warren County, New York)
* Greenwood Lake, once known as Long Pond, New Jersey / New York
* Lake Owassa, once known as Long Pond, New Jersey
* Long Pond Ironworks State Park, Hewitt, New Jersey

=== Pennsylvania ===
* Long Pond, Pennsylvania, Pocono Mountains

===Washington===
* Longs Pond</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1454582" start="0" end="9" title="Long Pond" label="Long Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454582" start="13" end="23" title="Long Pond" label="Longs Pond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62" end="141" title="Long Pond, Tunkhannock Creek, Pennsylvania, Monroe County, Tunkhannock Township" label="Long Pond, Tunkhannock Creek, Pennsylvania, Monroe County, Tunkhannock Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673102" start="158" end="177" title="Long Pond, Anguilla" label="Long Pond, Anguilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673099" start="192" end="218" title="Long Pond, St. John&amp;#x27;s" label="Long Pond, St. John&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123842" start="263" end="283" title="Conception Bay South" label="Conception Bay South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673107" start="286" end="323" title="Long Pond (Herring Cove, Nova Scotia)" label="Long Pond (Herring Cove, Nova Scotia)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="340" end="360" title="Windsor, Nova Scotia#Ice hockey" label="birthplace of hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25025180" start="419" end="445" title="Long Pond (Belgrade Lakes)" label="Long Pond (Belgrade Lakes)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16894319" start="448" end="481" title="Long Pond (Hancock County, Maine)" label="Long Pond (Hancock County, Maine)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715290" start="506" end="529" title="Long Pond (Moose River)" label="Long Pond (Moose River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279714" start="556" end="596" title="Long Pond (West Yarmouth, Massachusetts)" label="Long Pond (West Yarmouth, Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673109" start="599" end="635" title="Long Pond (Lakeville, Massachusetts)" label="Long Pond (Lakeville, Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673110" start="638" end="673" title="Long Pond (Plymouth, Massachusetts)" label="Long Pond (Plymouth, Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673112" start="676" end="712" title="Long Pond (Rochester, Massachusetts)" label="Long Pond (Rochester, Massachusetts)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30607517" start="748" end="768" title="Long Pond (New York)" label="Long Pond (New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30609978" start="818" end="855" title="Long Pond (Chenango County, New York)" label="Long Pond (Chenango County, New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30607865" start="858" end="895" title="Long Pond (Hamilton County, New York)" label="Long Pond (Hamilton County, New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30608237" start="898" end="933" title="Long Pond (Warren County, New York)" label="Long Pond (Warren County, New York)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544839" start="936" end="950" title="Greenwood Lake" label="Greenwood Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477264" start="1001" end="1012" title="Lake Owassa" label="Lake Owassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673115" start="1052" end="1082" title="Long Pond Ironworks State Park" label="Long Pond Ironworks State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673100" start="1127" end="1150" title="Long Pond, Pennsylvania" label="Long Pond, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q55621230" start="1189" end="1199" title="Longs Pond" label="Longs Pond"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019889" wikidata="Q599073" url="?curid=1019889" title="San Rafael Mountains">
<text>The San Rafael Mountains are a mountain range in central Santa Barbara County, California, U.S., separating the drainages of the Santa Ynez River and the Santa Maria River. They are part of the Transverse Ranges system of Southern California which in turn are part of the Pacific Coast Ranges system of western North America.

==Geography==
Most of the mountain range is within the Los Padres National Forest, and the northern slopes are included in the remote San Rafael Wilderness area.

The highest peaks include Big Pine Mountain (), San Rafael Mountain () and McKinley Mountain (), none of which are easily accessible except by foot or horse. The highest peak at the southern edge of the range is Little Pine Mountain.

Hurricane Deck is a spectacular block of sandstone that can be found deep in the San Rafael Wilderness.

The Sisquoc River headwaters are on the north slopes of Big Pine Mountain. It is a designated Wild and Scenic River of the United States, and a tributary of the Santa Maria River. Sisquoc Falls, high, is located on a tributary of the Sisquoc River to the west of Big Pine Mountain.

Climate is moderate, with hot dry summers (rare thunderstorms) and cool to cold wet winters. Snow sometimes falls on the higher slopes between December and March during frontal passages. Annual precipitation totals are between 15 and 25 inches.

===Peaks===
The six highest peaks of the San Rafael Mountains with more than of prominence, listed by height:
# Big Pine Mountain, 
# San Rafael Mountain, 
# Madulce Peak, 
# Monte Arido, 
# Ortega Peak, 
# Figueroa Mountain 

==Geology==
The mountains mainly consist of sedimentary and metamorphic rocks, of Jurassic age or younger, though there are a few regions of igneous intrusions. Several prominent faults exist, including the Big Pine Fault, which trends eastward towards the San Andreas Fault about forty miles away.

==Habitats==
The mountains are steep and rugged, and the lower slopes are dominated by chaparral. This ecosystem is naturally adapted to large, high-severity fires every 30 to 100 years or more. Nearly every area within the San Rafael Mountains has burned within the last century, largely due to an increase in human-caused ignitions. In the more shaded and moist canyons and northern slopes oak woodlands, bigcone Douglas-fir, and Coulter pine are found. Gray pine is also interspersed across the chaparral-dominated slopes.

Above the montane chaparral and woodlands ecosystem zone are stands of conifers of the mixed evergreen forest ecosystem. These stands are composed of Jeffrey pine, ponderosa pine, Coulter pine, sugar pine, singleleaf pinyon pine, white fir, and incense cedar. Snow is common in the winter above about , though overall the climate of the mountain range is Mediterranean, with mild rainy winters and warm, dry summers.

==Human history==
The earliest known residents of the San Rafael Mountains were the Chumash Indians, and evidence of their habitation consists of pictograph rock paintings in remote areas.

In historic times, mercury mining was conducted on portions of the southern slopes. Tailings from these old mines sometimes contain high levels of mercury, and environmental investigations have been conducted to determine if cleanup is necessary and feasible.

The central part of the mountains is included into Santa Ynez Recreation area, a part of Los Padres National Forest, and is a popular hiking destination, with a dozen campgrounds.
==See also==
*Los Padres National Forest
*Santa Ynez Mountains
*Sierra Madre Mountains
*Mountain ranges of Santa Barbara County

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q599073" start="4" end="24" title="San Rafael Mountains" label="San Rafael Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q46831" start="31" end="45" title="mountain range" label="mountain range"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="57" end="77" title="Santa Barbara County, California" label="Santa Barbara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="79" end="89" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="91" end="95" title="United States" label="U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q280475" start="129" end="145" title="Santa Ynez River" label="Santa Ynez River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419697" start="154" end="171" title="Santa Maria River (California)" label="Santa Maria River"/>
<link wikidata="Q942677" start="194" end="211" title="Transverse Ranges" label="Transverse Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q844837" start="222" end="241" title="Southern California" label="Southern California"/>
<link wikidata="Q660304" start="272" end="292" title="Pacific Coast Ranges" label="Pacific Coast Ranges"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="311" end="324" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290802" start="382" end="408" title="Los Padres National Forest" label="Los Padres National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415227" start="461" end="482" title="San Rafael Wilderness" label="San Rafael Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906126" start="516" end="533" title="Big Pine Mountain" label="Big Pine Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154622" start="702" end="722" title="Little Pine Mountain" label="Little Pine Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153285" start="725" end="739" title="Hurricane Deck (California)" label="Hurricane Deck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7530919" start="834" end="847" title="Sisquoc River" label="Sisquoc River"/>
<link wikidata="Q846385" start="924" end="966" title="Wild and Scenic Rivers of the United States" label="Wild and Scenic River of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419697" start="991" end="1008" title="Santa Maria River (California)" label="Santa Maria River"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191697" start="1010" end="1023" title="Sisquoc Falls" label="Sisquoc Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906126" start="1471" end="1488" title="Big Pine Mountain" label="Big Pine Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154891" start="1517" end="1529" title="Madulce Peak" label="Madulce Peak"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447982" start="1566" end="1583" title="Figueroa Mountain" label="Figueroa Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="1630" end="1641" title="sedimentary" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="1646" end="1657" title="metamorphic" label="metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="1668" end="1676" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="1727" end="1734" title="igneous" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="1843" end="1860" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="1973" end="1982" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021282" start="2278" end="2290" title="California oak woodland" label="oak woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425070" start="2293" end="2312" title="bigcone Douglas-fir" label="bigcone Douglas-fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137001" start="2318" end="2330" title="Coulter pine" label="Coulter pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473331" start="2342" end="2351" title="Pinus sabiniana" label="Gray pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956484" start="2423" end="2454" title="California montane chaparral and woodlands" label="montane chaparral and woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q37813" start="2455" end="2464" title="ecosystem" label="ecosystem"/>
<link wikidata="Q132825" start="2484" end="2491" title="conifer" label="conifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021278" start="2500" end="2522" title="California mixed evergreen forest" label="mixed evergreen forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q251370" start="2563" end="2575" title="Jeffrey pine" label="Jeffrey pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460523" start="2577" end="2591" title="ponderosa pine" label="ponderosa pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q227779" start="2607" end="2617" title="sugar pine" label="sugar pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q583885" start="2619" end="2641" title="singleleaf pinyon pine" label="singleleaf pinyon pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q145939" start="2643" end="2652" title="white fir" label="white fir"/>
<link wikidata="Q765246" start="2658" end="2671" title="incense cedar" label="incense cedar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13996" start="2768" end="2781" title="Mediterranean climate" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251468" start="2915" end="2922" title="Chumash (tribe)" label="Chumash"/>
<link wikidata="Q52827" start="2977" end="2987" title="pictograph" label="pictograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q925" start="3040" end="3047" title="Mercury (element)" label="mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290802" start="3476" end="3502" title="Los Padres National Forest" label="Los Padres National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223302" start="3504" end="3524" title="Santa Ynez Mountains" label="Santa Ynez Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q847381" start="3526" end="3548" title="Sierra Madre Mountains (California)" label="Sierra Madre Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3550" end="3589" title=":Category:Mountain ranges of Santa Barbara County, California" label="Mountain ranges of Santa Barbara County"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019890" wikidata="Q718935" url="?curid=1019890" title="Tom Laughlin">
<text>Thomas Robert Laughlin Jr. (August 10, 1931 – December 12, 2013) was an American actor, director, screenwriter, author, educator, and activist.

Laughlin was best known for his series of &quot;Billy Jack&quot; films. He was married to actress Delores Taylor from 1954 until his death. Taylor co-produced and acted in all four &quot;Billy Jack&quot; films. His unique promotion of &quot;The Trial of Billy Jack&quot; (TV trailers during national news and an &quot;opening day&quot; nationwide release) was a major influence on the way films are marketed.

In the early 1960s, Laughlin put his film career on hiatus to start a Montessori preschool in Santa Monica, California; it became the largest school of its kind in the United States. In his later years, he sought the office of President of the United States in 1992, 2004, and 2008. He was involved in psychology and domestic violence counseling, writing several books on Jungian psychology and developing theories on the causes of cancer.

==Early life and career (1931–1960)==
Laughlin was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the son of Margaret and Thomas Laughlin. He attended Washington High School, where he was involved in an athletics controversy that made headlines throughout the city, caused by Laughlin being forced to attend another school for a brief period, making him ineligible to play football at his former school on his return.

Laughlin attended the University of Wisconsin, before transferring to Marquette University; he played football at both. He played safety and halfback at Marquette.

Laughlin decided to become an actor after seeing a production of &quot;A Streetcar Named Desire&quot;. According to a 1956 newspaper interview, he became involved in the drama program at Marquette after being encouraged by a university professor, Father John J. Walsh.

While a student, he formed a stock group and directed and starred in a production of Arthur Miller&#x27;s &quot;All My Sons&quot;. He finally transferred to the University of South Dakota, where he majored in radio acting, directing, and producing. He met his future wife Delores Taylor in South Dakota.

Laughlin wrote the original screenplay for the film &quot;Billy Jack&quot; in 1954, after witnessing the treatment of Native Americans in his wife&#x27;s hometown, Winner, South Dakota. The two wed on October 15, 1954.

He began his screen-acting career in the 1955 television series &quot;Climax!&quot;. From there, he went on to appear in several feature films, including: &quot;These Wilder Years,&quot; (1956), &quot;Tea and Sympathy&quot; (1956), &quot;Lafayette Escadrille&quot; (1958), and &quot;South Pacific&quot; (1958).

He appeared in several episodes of various television series throughout the late 1950s. In 1958, Mr. Laughlin appeared in a small but memorable role in &quot;South Pacific&quot;, the movie version of the James Michener book and Rodgers and Hammerstein musical as a Navy pilot, Lt. Buzz Adams. In 1959, he was cast as young Tom Fowler in the episode &quot;The Fight Back&quot; of the NBC Western series, &quot;Riverboat&quot;. In the story line, Fowler has made himself the boss of Hampton, a corrupt river town near Vicksburg, Mississippi. He blocks farmers from shipping their crops to market. In a dispute over a wedding held on the river vessel, the &quot;Enterprise&quot;, a lynch mob led by Fowler comes after Captain Grey Holden (series star Darren McGavin). Also appearing in this episode are John Ireland as Chris Slade and Karl Swenson as Ansel Torgin. That same year, Laughlin starred in the western series &quot;Tales of Wells Fargo&quot;, the episode titled &quot;The Quiet Village&quot;. Laughlin also appeared in the 1959 movie &quot;Battle of the Coral Sea&quot; with Cliff Robertson and L. Q. Jones.

Also in 1959, Laughlin appeared in the film &quot;Gidget&quot; as Lover Boy. However, he failed to earn a living in the early years, having told &quot;People&quot; magazine in 1975, &quot;We were living on $5 a week and eating Spam. I stole Christmas cards from a church so I could write home saying how well we were, but then I couldn&#x27;t afford the stamps.&quot;

Laughlin&#x27;s first starring film role was in Robert Altman&#x27;s 1957 film &quot;The Delinquents&quot;, in which he played Scotty White, a teenager who gets mixed up with a gang when he is told he can no longer see his girlfriend. Despite the film&#x27;s low budget, it became a cult film, with Alfred Hitchcock reportedly among its fans. However, Laughlin and Altman did not get along well, having sharply differing views on acting, Altman later describing Laughlin as &quot;an unbelievable pain in the ass.&quot;

Laughlin made his directorial debut later that year with &quot;The Proper Time&quot;, though the film wasn&#x27;t released until 1962. The film was a romantic drama set on the campus of UCLA. Laughlin shot the film on the campus in six days working with a $20,000 budget.

Laughlin wrote, directed, and starred in &quot;The Young Sinner&quot;. Originally filmed in 1960, and shot in Milwaukee over a period of 14 days, it is the story of a star high-school athlete who falls deeper and deeper into trouble after being caught in bed with his girlfriend. The film was intended to be the first of a trilogy titled &quot;We Are All Christ&quot;. It premiered in 1963 under the original title &quot;Among the Thorns&quot;, which was changed to &quot;The Young Sinner&quot; upon its 1965 re-release. In 1960, Laughlin planned to make a film, &quot;Poison in Our Land&quot;, based on the true story of a Texas couple affected by atomic radiation, but the project was never realized.

==Leaving Hollywood (1961–1966)==
In 1959, Laughlin and his wife founded a Montessori preschool in Santa Monica, California. By 1961, Laughlin had left the film business to devote all of his time to the school, which by 1964 had become the largest school of its kind in the United States. It was profiled by &quot;Time&quot; in July of that year. However, by 1965, the school had gone bankrupt. One of his students was Christian Brando, son of Laughlin&#x27;s friend, Marlon Brando.

==Billy Jack years (1967–1977)==
In 1965, Laughlin told the &quot;Milwaukee Sentinel&quot; that he planned to make a film on the life of a noted Catholic priest, Father William DuBay. However, the picture did not get past the planning stages. Two years later, in 1967, he wrote, directed (as T. C. Frank), and starred in the motorcycle-gang exploitation film &quot;The Born Losers&quot;. This was the first picture in which the character of Billy Jack appeared. It was a surprise box-office hit.

After &quot;The Born Losers,&quot; Laughlin was set to begin a film project with backing from such figures as Marlon Brando, Jack Lemmon, Candice Bergen, and director Robert Wise. The movie was to be a documentary on the issues facing African Americans in the 1960s and would have focused greatly on the life of Martin Luther King Jr., followed by a discussion of race. However, the film was never made.

He followed this up with the sequel to &quot;The Born Losers,&quot; &quot;Billy Jack,&quot; in 1971. American International Pictures initially agreed to distribute the picture, but after viewing it, the studio refused to release the film unless many of the political references – as well as frontal nudity – were cut. This led the Laughlins to withhold the sound reels of the movie, which in effect made it a silent film. Eventually, Laughlin made a distribution deal with Warner Bros., but he disapproved of the studio&#x27;s marketing of the film, sued Warner, and re-released the picture himself in 1973. The movie&#x27;s re-release was successful but controversial. Roger Ebert, in his review of the film, wrote, &quot;Billy Jack seems to be saying that a gun is better than a constitution in the enforcement of justice. Is democracy totally obsolete, then? Is our only hope that the good fascists defeat the bad fascists?&quot;

However, the picture was embraced by much of America&#x27;s youth, leading Laughlin to claim in 1975, &quot;The youth of this country have only two heroes, Ralph Nader and Billy Jack.&quot; When adjusted for inflation, Billy Jack was, as of 2007, the highest-grossing independent film of all time. The film was among the first to introduce martial arts, especially hapkido, to American audiences and contained elements of Jungian psychology, and fictional depictions of American Indian beliefs, depicting a tribe that does not exist, the &quot;Nishnobie&quot;. As part of the film&#x27;s promotion, Bong Soo Han, who was in charge of the martial arts choreography for the film, toured the United States giving hapkido demonstrations.

&quot;The Born Losers&quot; was reissued in 1974 and earned more than twice as much as it had in its original release.

The second sequel, &quot;The Trial of Billy Jack&quot;, released in late 1974, was a huge box-office hit, while not registering as quite as big a critical success. It is notable for its casting of notable Native Americans, and counterculture figures like Rolling Thunder, as well as its strong criticism of the Kent State shootings. However, Laughlin&#x27;s unique promotion of the film was its real legacy. Unlike most films of the era, which opened in only a few cities before gradually spreading across the country, &quot;The Trial of Billy Jack&quot; opened in cities nationwide on the same day and commercials were broadcast for it during the national news. This promotion forever changed the way films are marketed and has been called &quot;the first blockbuster.&quot;

Laughlin had been in dispute with AIP and reached a settlement in 1974, agreeing to pay them $2 million, including $500,000 from &quot;The Born Losers&quot; reissue and $250,000 for AIP&#x27;s percentage share of &quot;The Trial of Billy Jack&quot;.

In 1975, Laughlin released &quot;The Master Gunfighter&quot;, a Western set in the 1840s, detailing the plight of the Chumash people. Laughlin grew a full beard for the film and his character fought with both a 12-shot revolver and a samurai sword. Although it did reasonably well at the box office, critics were not pleased with the film.

Laughlin returned to the Billy Jack franchise in 1977. However, the fourth entry in the series, &quot;Billy Jack Goes to Washington&quot;, was a failure because of distribution problems, and it proved to be Laughlin&#x27;s final film. Laughlin blamed individuals within the United States government for the failure of the picture, telling CNN&#x27;s &quot;Showbiz Tonight&quot; in 2005:At a private screening, Senator Vance Hartke [Note: Hartke was not re-elected in 1976] got up, because it was about how the Senate was bought out by the nuclear industry. He got up and charged me. Walter Cronkite&#x27;s daughter was there, [and] Lucille Ball. And he said, &#x27;You&#x27;ll never get this released. This house you have, everything will be destroyed.&#x27; &quot;

At the time of the picture&#x27;s release, Laughlin&#x27;s company, Billy Jack Enterprises, had plans for a new Montessori school funded by his own foundation, a record label, an investigative magazine, books, a distribution company, and more message-laden movies, including a special subsidiary to produce films for children. He told &quot;People&quot; magazine at the time, &quot;Three years from today, we&#x27;ll be the new United Artists. Either that, or we&#x27;ll be out on our butt on the street.&quot; In 1976, Laughlin announced that he was more than $7 million in debt and blamed the financial troubles on unethical behavior by Warner Bros. Pictures, which he said had illegally sold the television rights to his films.

==Later career==
In 1984, he purchased a series of 12 advertisements in &quot;Variety&quot; condemning various aspects of the film industry and its treatment of independent filmmakers. He created a blueprint for taking control of the home video distribution industry as a way for independent films to be seen. In 1985, he began production of a fifth Billy Jack film, &quot;The Return of Billy Jack&quot;, which featured the title character fighting child pornographers in New York City. However, he suffered a concussion and neck injury during filming, which led to the production being suspended. During this hiatus, funding for the picture ran out and production was never resumed. Later on, Laughlin had his mansion in Brentwood, California foreclosed. He attempted to sue to get it back a couple of years later.

In 2009, a few scenes from the unfinished film were released on Laughlin&#x27;s website. A notable incident occurred while he was filming in New York City, when he broke up a street fight on Manhattan&#x27;s West Side, threatening to rip a man&#x27;s arm off. He garnered notoriety at this time for making a citizen&#x27;s arrest of a man after an argument over Laughlin&#x27;s driving.

Laughlin had sought funding to finish the fifth Billy Jack film since at least 1996, when he spoke about it during a lawsuit against a man who had (Laughlin claimed) illegally changed his name to &quot;Billy Jack&quot;, and at one point Laughlin had plans to make a Billy Jack television series. In 2004, he announced that the film would be entitled &quot;Billy Jack&#x27;s Crusade to End the War in Iraq and Restore America to Its Moral Purpose&quot;; this was shortened to &quot;Billy Jack&#x27;s Moral Revolution&quot; in 2006.

In 2008, the film&#x27;s title was changed to &quot;Billy Jack for President&quot;. It was retitled &quot;Billy Jack and Jean&quot;. Laughlin claimed it would be a &quot;new genre of film&quot; and a great deal of social commentary on politics, religion, and psychology will be discussed, and a debate will take place between Billy Jack and President George W. Bush via computer manipulation of archived speeches.

In 2009, Laughlin released plot details of this film on a video on his website. The video contained several scenes from the film.

In 2010, Frank, Chris, and Teresa Laughlin co-founded Billy Jack Rights, LLC, which manages the rights to all of Tom Laughlin&#x27;s films, including the &quot;Billy Jack&quot; franchise.

==Other work==
===Politics===
In his later years, Laughlin turned his attention to politics. He had developed an idea for a film involving a general who returns from war to run for President, but when researching by talking to voters, he thought about running for the office himself. In 1992, as a protest he sought the Democratic Party nomination for U.S. President. He told the &quot;Milwaukee Sentinel&quot;, &quot;I am the least qualified person I know to be President, except George Bush.&quot;

He appeared on the primary ballots in New Hampshire and Louisiana. He campaigned on a platform of a tax cut for &quot;ordinary Americans&quot;, term limits, an overhaul of public education, universal health care, and nuclear disarmament. While campaigning for the Iowa caucus, he said of a fellow candidate and an Iowan, U.S. Senator Tom Harkin: &quot;I think he&#x27;s a sleazebag. I despise him.&quot;

Excluded from debates by party officials who did not consider him a serious candidate, Laughlin received 1,986 votes in the New Hampshire primary. He blamed the results on lack of cooperation by the Democratic Party, which allowed him and other candidates only five minutes to speak at the state&#x27;s convention while giving the five front-runners 20 minutes each. He participated in the independent presidential candidates&#x27; debate on March 25, 1992, along with former U.S. Senator Eugene J. McCarthy and others who had been excluded from the major debates. However, he was seen by much of the press as a &quot;fringe candidate&quot;.

Laughlin later protested at being excluded from the primary ballot in his home state of Wisconsin at the same time that David Duke, the former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, was included. After dropping out of the race, he worked as an advisor to the campaign of Ross Perot.

He ran for president again in 2004, this time as a Republican. Campaigning as an opponent of the Iraq War, he received 154 votes in the New Hampshire primary against President George W. Bush, who received 53,962 votes. He again was not allowed to participate in the debates. He ran again for president in 2008 as a Democrat, getting 47 votes in the New Hampshire primary.

Laughlin was an outspoken critic of the Iraq War and President George W. Bush. His website presented several writings calling the Iraq conflict worse than the Vietnam War, in addition to pieces on what he called &quot;realistic exit strategies&quot;. He devoted several pages of the Billy Jack website to reasons that he felt justified an impeachment of George W. Bush and repeatedly stated the need for a viable, mainstream third political party. In addition, he criticized what he called the &quot;Christian right&quot;, which he called &quot;false Evangelicals&quot;, &quot;false prophets&quot;, and the &quot;Christo-fascist movement&quot;. He released several videos and writings during the 2008 election.

===Psychology and counseling===
Although not a professionally trained psychologist, Laughlin had an interest in psychology, having studied the subject independently. A 1975 profile of Laughlin in &quot;People&quot; mentioned his deep interest in psychology and mentioned that he had a personal &quot;dream secretary&quot; to whom Laughlin told his recollections of his dreams. They were written down to be analyzed later.

Laughlin lectured on Jungian psychology at universities and colleges throughout the United States since the 1970s, including Yale University and Stanford University.

In 1995, because of his background in football and psychology, he was brought in to counsel University of Nebraska football player Lawrence Phillips after Phillips&#x27; suspension from the team. He said of Phillips at the time, &quot;He should not be rewarded by being allowed to play unless there is real substantive change. I don&#x27;t mean surface change. But if he does change, then he&#x27;s not only going to not batter this girl, he&#x27;s not going to batter the girl he marries at 30 and 35. If he just pretends to change, of course he should not be allowed to play, but Lawrence has already been sanctioned in ways other batterers on this campus are not&quot;. Phillips ended up being reinstated late in the season and left for the pros after 1995.

Laughlin wrote several books on psychology, including &quot;The Psychology of Cancer&quot;; &quot;Jungian Psychology vol. 2: Jungian Theory and Therapy&quot;, published in 1980; &quot;9 Indispendable Ingredients to Writing a Hit&quot; (1999), which details the psychology involved in the box office and hit filmmaking, and &quot;The Cancer Personality&quot; (1998), in which he posited his theories about cancer.

One of his concerns was the issue of domestic abuse. He became involved in this after witnessing a neighbor, a police officer, beating his wife. He blamed the murder of Nicole Brown Simpson on domestic abuse, saying:O.J. Simpson was my neighbor up the street on Rockingham. He lived at 300 Rockingham Drive, I lived at 100 Rockingham. I&#x27;ve known O.J. forever. This is one of the sickest, sorriest days in our culture, that he was [found] not guilty... I&#x27;ve told him since 1985 he&#x27;d end up in jail... Eight times [Nicole] cried out and eight times, because it was O.J. and it was woman-battering, it was dismissed. But now, with the trivialization, people are afraid to call because they don&#x27;t trust that the system will help them. The fact that he was found not guilty is going to make that 10 times worse.

==Personal life==
Laughlin married Delores Taylor in 1954. They had three children: Frank, Teresa, and Christina. His daughter Teresa is a fashion designer. He derived at least two of his pseudonyms from his children: Frank Laughlin, his son&#x27;s name and the name he used to direct &quot;The Trial of Billy Jack&quot; and &quot;The Master Gunfighter&quot;, and T.C. Frank, which stood for Teresa Christina Frank.

In 2001, it was announced that Laughlin was suffering from a cancer of the tongue that was inoperable. His website claimed the cancer was in remission. His book &quot;The Psychology of Cancer&quot; was about faith, attitude, and other factors that might affect cancer.

In January 2007, a tearful Tom Laughlin gave the eulogy for the man who taught him hapkido for the movie &quot;Billy Jack&quot;, the late hapkido grandmaster Han Bong-soo, whom Laughlin remembered as &quot;a holy man&quot;.

On November 20, 2007, he posted a video on YouTube explaining that poor health had caused him to leave his BillyJack.com website in a dormant state. The site was later revived. Laughlin suffered from celiac disease, an autoimmune disorder, and suffered a series of strokes. In the video, he announced that he had his health issues under control, that he updated the website, and that he was planning a new Billy Jack film. However, that film was never made.

==Filmography==
&quot;As director&quot;
* &quot;The Proper Time&quot; (1960) (also served as writer)
* &quot;Like Father, Like Son (1961 film)&quot; (1961) (also served as writer)
* &quot;The Born Losers&quot; (1967) 
* &quot;Billy Jack&quot; (1971) (also served as writer)
* &quot;The Trial of Billy Jack&quot; (1974) (also served as writer)
* &quot;The Master Gunfighter&quot; (1975) (also served as writer)
* &quot;Billy Jack Goes to Washington&quot; (1977) (also served as writer)
* &quot;The Return of Billy Jack&quot; (1986; unreleased)

==Death==
Laughlin died of complications from pneumonia on December 12, 2013, at Los Robles Hospital and Medical Center in Thousand Oaks, California.

==See also==
* List of people diagnosed with coeliac disease
* Political cinema
==Footnotes==
==References==
==External links==
* Official &quot;Billy Jack&quot; website 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q718935" start="0" end="26" title="Tom Laughlin" label="Thomas Robert Laughlin Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2027905" start="193" end="203" title="Billy Jack" label="Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254342" start="243" end="257" title="Delores Taylor" label="Delores Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770144" start="386" end="409" title="The Trial of Billy Jack" label="The Trial of Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="625" end="635" title="Montessori" label="Montessori"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="649" end="673" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="816" end="820" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="822" end="826" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q45578" start="832" end="836" title="2008 United States presidential election" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="872" end="889" title="domestic violence" label="domestic violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="927" end="945" title="Jungian psychology" label="Jungian psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="1055" end="1064" title="Milwaukee" label="Milwaukee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971918" start="1130" end="1152" title="Washington High School (Milwaukee, Wisconsin)" label="Washington High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="1420" end="1443" title="University of Wisconsin" label="University of Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188370" start="1468" end="1488" title="Marquette University" label="Marquette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24994" start="1528" end="1534" title="Safety (American and Canadian football position)" label="safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q589410" start="1539" end="1547" title="halfback (American football)" label="halfback"/>
<link wikidata="Q842106" start="1634" end="1658" title="A Streetcar Named Desire" label="A Streetcar Named Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q80596" start="1918" end="1931" title="Arthur Miller" label="Arthur Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2837516" start="1945" end="1956" title="All My Sons" label="All My Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305521" start="1994" end="2020" title="University of South Dakota" label="University of South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027905" start="2196" end="2206" title="Billy Jack" label="Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q930440" start="2302" end="2322" title="Winner, South Dakota" label="Winner, South Dakota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072832" start="2428" end="2435" title="Climax!" label="Climax!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368427" start="2519" end="2537" title="These Wilder Years" label="These Wilder Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q491341" start="2559" end="2575" title="Tea and Sympathy (film)" label="Tea and Sympathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622104" start="2596" end="2616" title="Lafayette Escadrille (film)" label="Lafayette Escadrille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610975" start="2641" end="2654" title="South Pacific (1958 film)" label="South Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q361653" start="2874" end="2888" title="James Michener" label="James Michener"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275079" start="2898" end="2921" title="Rodgers and Hammerstein" label="Rodgers and Hammerstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="3053" end="3056" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="3057" end="3064" title="Western (genre)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631246" start="3079" end="3088" title="Riverboat (TV series)" label="Riverboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q493787" start="3186" end="3208" title="Vicksburg, Mississippi" label="Vicksburg, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150547" start="3418" end="3432" title="Darren McGavin" label="Darren McGavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q395494" start="3470" end="3482" title="John Ireland" label="John Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q690569" start="3502" end="3514" title="Karl Swenson" label="Karl Swenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="3572" end="3579" title="Western (genre)" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q3980406" start="3593" end="3613" title="Tales of Wells Fargo" label="Tales of Wells Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207165" start="3718" end="3741" title="Battle of the Coral Sea" label="Battle of the Coral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q181899" start="3753" end="3768" title="Cliff Robertson" label="Cliff Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q934345" start="3773" end="3784" title="L. Q. Jones" label="L. Q. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q622049" start="3837" end="3843" title="Gidget (film)" label="Gidget"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="3938" end="3944" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q606132" start="4014" end="4018" title="Spam (food)" label="Spam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="4204" end="4217" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986580" start="4241" end="4256" title="The Delinquents (1957 film)" label="The Delinquents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="4455" end="4471" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758569" start="4739" end="4754" title="The Proper Time" label="The Proper Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q174710" start="4862" end="4866" title="UCLA" label="UCLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073597" start="4996" end="5012" title="The Young Sinner (1965 film)" label="The Young Sinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190218" start="5728" end="5738" title="Montessori" label="Montessori"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="5752" end="5776" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="5967" end="5971" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797883" start="6072" end="6088" title="Christian Brando" label="Christian Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q34012" start="6121" end="6134" title="Marlon Brando" label="Marlon Brando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765623" start="6203" end="6221" title="Milwaukee Journal Sentinel" label="Milwaukee Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008021" start="6306" end="6319" title="William DuBay" label="William DuBay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961825" start="6502" end="6517" title="The Born Losers" label="The Born Losers"/>
<link wikidata="Q94123" start="6759" end="6770" title="Jack Lemmon" label="Jack Lemmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q106942" start="6772" end="6786" title="Candice Bergen" label="Candice Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q59821" start="6801" end="6812" title="Robert Wise" label="Robert Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027" start="6946" end="6968" title="Martin Luther King Jr." label="Martin Luther King Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2027905" start="7113" end="7123" title="Billy Jack" label="Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q465224" start="7140" end="7171" title="American International Pictures" label="American International Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="7512" end="7524" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="7709" end="7720" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q193156" start="8129" end="8140" title="Ralph Nader" label="Ralph Nader"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="8241" end="8257" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q200333" start="8338" end="8345" title="hapkido" label="hapkido"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="8395" end="8413" title="Jungian psychology" label="Jungian psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646570" start="8572" end="8584" title="Bong Soo Han" label="Bong Soo Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770144" start="8853" end="8876" title="The Trial of Billy Jack" label="The Trial of Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631075" start="9083" end="9098" title="Rolling Thunder (person)" label="Rolling Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="9139" end="9159" title="Kent State shootings" label="Kent State shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q505119" start="9585" end="9596" title="blockbuster (entertainment)" label="blockbuster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196579" start="9889" end="9910" title="The Master Gunfighter" label="The Master Gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251468" start="9974" end="9988" title="Chumash people" label="Chumash people"/>
<link wikidata="Q172736" start="10090" end="10103" title="samurai sword" label="samurai sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q11331004" start="10299" end="10328" title="Billy Jack Goes to Washington" label="Billy Jack Goes to Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="10536" end="10539" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q16949536" start="10553" end="10568" title="Showbiz Tonight" label="Showbiz Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q958399" start="10615" end="10627" title="Vance Hartke" label="Vance Hartke"/>
<link wikidata="Q31073" start="10780" end="10795" title="Walter Cronkite" label="Walter Cronkite"/>
<link wikidata="Q209662" start="10829" end="10841" title="Lucille Ball" label="Lucille Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q219400" start="11392" end="11406" title="United Artists" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q471728" start="11774" end="11781" title="Variety (magazine)" label="Variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760392" start="12069" end="12093" title="The Return of Billy Jack" label="The Return of Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669334" start="12821" end="12842" title="citizen&amp;#x27;s arrest" label="citizen&amp;#x27;s arrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="13784" end="13798" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="14488" end="14504" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892934" start="14707" end="14720" title="United States presidential election in New Hampshire, 1992" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="14725" end="14734" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689423" start="14769" end="14776" title="tax cut" label="tax cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="14813" end="14823" title="term limit" label="term limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="14841" end="14857" title="public education" label="public education"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274205" start="14859" end="14880" title="universal health care" label="universal health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200085" start="14886" end="14905" title="nuclear disarmament" label="nuclear disarmament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443004" start="14933" end="14944" title="Iowa caucus" label="Iowa caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="14990" end="15002" title="U.S. Senator" label="U.S. Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q465617" start="15003" end="15013" title="Tom Harkin" label="Tom Harkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899221" start="15198" end="15219" title="New Hampshire primary" label="New Hampshire primary"/>
<link wikidata="Q380550" start="15563" end="15581" title="Eugene J. McCarthy" label="Eugene J. McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163042" start="15837" end="15847" title="David Duke" label="David Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542903" start="15860" end="15872" title="Grand Wizard" label="Grand Wizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="15880" end="15892" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313697" start="15983" end="15993" title="Ross Perot" label="Ross Perot"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="16047" end="16057" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="16093" end="16101" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="16528" end="16539" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="16708" end="16719" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="16869" end="16884" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="17193" end="17203" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="17629" end="17644" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="17649" end="17668" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353679" start="17763" end="17785" title="University of Nebraska" label="University of Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q14950350" start="17802" end="17819" title="Lawrence Phillips" label="Lawrence Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984693" start="17857" end="17865" title="Nebraska Cornhuskers football" label="the team"/>
<link wikidata="Q156537" start="18884" end="18898" title="domestic abuse" label="domestic abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2669947" start="19002" end="19012" title="O. J. Simpson murder case" label="the murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q268018" start="19016" end="19036" title="Nicole Brown Simpson" label="Nicole Brown Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254342" start="19710" end="19724" title="Delores Taylor" label="Delores Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20233" end="20242" title="Cure#Remission" label="remission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646570" start="20520" end="20532" title="Han Bong-soo" label="Han Bong-soo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11088" start="20787" end="20801" title="celiac disease" label="celiac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758569" start="21094" end="21109" title="The Proper Time" label="The Proper Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q39073597" start="21155" end="21188" title="Like Father, Like Son (1961 film)" label="Like Father, Like Son (1961 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961825" start="21234" end="21249" title="The Born Losers" label="The Born Losers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027905" start="21272" end="21282" title="Billy Jack" label="Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770144" start="21328" end="21351" title="The Trial of Billy Jack" label="The Trial of Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196579" start="21397" end="21418" title="The Master Gunfighter" label="The Master Gunfighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11331004" start="21464" end="21493" title="Billy Jack Goes to Washington" label="Billy Jack Goes to Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760392" start="21539" end="21563" title="The Return of Billy Jack" label="The Return of Billy Jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q208447" start="21713" end="21738" title="Thousand Oaks, California" label="Thousand Oaks, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q16164454" start="21756" end="21801" title="List of people diagnosed with coeliac disease" label="List of people diagnosed with coeliac disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973201" start="21804" end="21820" title="Political cinema" label="Political cinema"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019894" wikidata="Q401948" url="?curid=1019894" title="Aliacensis (crater)">
<text>Aliacensis is a lunar impact crater that is located in the rugged southern highlands of the Moon. The crater Werner is located just to its north-northwest, and a narrow, rugged valley lies between the two comparably sized formations. To the southwest is Walther, and Apianus is to the northeast. Aliacensis is named after the 14th century French geographer and theologian Pierre d&#x27;Ailly in 1935. It is from the Nectarian period, which lasted from 3.92 to 3.85 billion years ago.

The rim of Aliacensis is generally circular, with an outward bulge on the eastern wall. The inner wall has some slight particularly in the northeast. There is a small crater located across the southern rim. The interior floor is generally flat, with a low central peak slightly offset to the northwest of the midpoint. South of it lie two somewhat broken rings, Kaiser and Nonius. It is 52 kilometers in diameter and there is a 3.7 kilometer difference in height between its deepest part and its rim.

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Aliacensis.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q401948" start="0" end="10" title="Aliacensis (crater)" label="Aliacensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="16" end="21" title="lunar crater" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="22" end="35" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="75" end="84" title="Highland (geography)" label="highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="92" end="96" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571793" start="109" end="115" title="Werner (crater)" label="Werner"/>
<link wikidata="Q462673" start="254" end="261" title="Walther (crater)" label="Walther"/>
<link wikidata="Q618578" start="267" end="274" title="Apianus (crater)" label="Apianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="339" end="345" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q318580" start="372" end="391" title="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly" label="Pierre d&amp;#x27;Ailly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030016" start="416" end="425" title="Nectarian" label="Nectarian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019903" wikidata="Q956396" url="?curid=1019903" title="Donald Bitzer">
<text>Donald Lester Bitzer (January 1, 1934 – December 10, 2024) was an American electrical engineer and computer scientist. He was the co-inventor of the plasma display and was widely regarded as the &quot;father of PLATO&quot;.

==Life and career==
Donald Lester Bitzer was born in East St. Louis, Illinois, on January 1, 1934. He grew up in Collinsville, Illinois. Bitzer received three degrees in electrical engineering (B.S., 1955; M.S., 1956; Ph.D., 1960) from the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. 

Bitzer held several patents in numerous areas, while the PLATO computer system, the first system to combine graphics and touchscreens, is the most famous of his inventions.

Bitzer co-invented the flat plasma display panel in 1964.

In 1974, Bitzer was elected as a member into the National Academy of Engineering for &quot;his leadership in the utilization and development of technology for improving the effectiveness of education&quot;.

From 1989, Bitzer was a Distinguished University Research Professor of Computer Science at North Carolina State University.

Bitzer was married to Maryann Drost, a nurse and educator, from 1955 until her death in 2022 and had a son, along with three grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. He died of congestive heart failure at home in Cary, North Carolina, on December 10, 2024, at the age of 90.

==Awards==
In 1973, the National Academy of Engineering presented Bitzer with the Vladimir K. Zworykin Award, which honors the inventor of the iconoscope.

Bitzer was a designated National Associate, an honor which was granted to him by the National Academies in 2002. He was also a member of the American Society for Engineering Education.

*Member of the National Academy of Engineering (1974)
*Computer Society Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (1982)
*Slottow Creativity Award (1989)
*Emmy Award (2002)
*Inducted into National Inventors Hall of Fame (2013)
*Fellow of the National Academy of Inventors (2018)
*Holladay Medal (2019)
*Fellow of the Computer History Museum (2022)

==References==
==External links==
*NCSU Faculty Profile
*Oral history interview with Donald L. Bitzer. Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Bitzer discusses his relationship with Control Data Corporation during the development of the PLATO system.
*Oral history interview with Thomas Muir Gallie. Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Gallie, a program officer at the National Science Foundation, describes the impact of Bitzer and the PLATO system.
*University of Illinois Computer-based Education Research Laboratory PLATO Reports, PLATO Documents, and CERL Progress Reports. Charles Babbage Institute, University of Minnesota. Archival collection that contains internal and external reports and publications related to the development of PLATO and its operations.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q956396" start="0" end="20" title="Donald Bitzer" label="Donald Lester Bitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="149" end="163" title="plasma display" label="plasma display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755406" start="211" end="216" title="PLATO (computer system)" label="PLATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q577891" start="278" end="302" title="East St. Louis, Illinois" label="East St. Louis, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q577845" start="338" end="360" title="Collinsville, Illinois" label="Collinsville, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q43035" start="395" end="417" title="electrical engineering" label="electrical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="419" end="423" title="Bachelor of Science" label="B.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q950900" start="431" end="435" title="Master of Science" label="M.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="443" end="448" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q457281" start="465" end="504" title="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign" label="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755406" start="565" end="570" title="PLATO (computer system)" label="PLATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q165970" start="629" end="641" title="touchscreen" label="touchscreens"/>
<link wikidata="Q185146" start="710" end="724" title="plasma display" label="plasma display"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="790" end="821" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q23680173" start="973" end="1016" title="Distinguished University Research Professor" label="Distinguished University Research Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132346" start="1040" end="1071" title="North Carolina State University" label="North Carolina State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q852665" start="1289" end="1309" title="Cary, North Carolina" label="Cary, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="1376" end="1407" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q296545" start="1434" end="1454" title="Vladimir K. Zworykin" label="Vladimir K. Zworykin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570706" start="1495" end="1505" title="iconoscope" label="iconoscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233780" start="1593" end="1611" title="National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine" label="National Academies"/>
<link wikidata="Q466793" start="1649" end="1691" title="American Society for Engineering Education" label="American Society for Engineering Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493021" start="1709" end="1740" title="National Academy of Engineering" label="National Academy of Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q65052092" start="1766" end="1829" title="Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers" label="Fellow of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7692549" start="1871" end="1881" title="Technology and Engineering Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366018" start="1904" end="1935" title="National Inventors Hall of Fame" label="National Inventors Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379367" start="1958" end="1987" title="National Academy of Inventors" label="National Academy of Inventors"/>
<link wikidata="Q964035" start="2033" end="2056" title="Computer History Museum" label="Computer History Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5975167" start="2168" end="2193" title="Charles Babbage Institute" label="Charles Babbage Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="2195" end="2218" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129191" start="2259" end="2283" title="Control Data Corporation" label="Control Data Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="2462" end="2489" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019906" wikidata="Q2167922" url="?curid=1019906" title="Roswell P. Bishop">
<text>Roswell Peter Bishop (January 6, 1843 – March 4, 1920) was an American Civil War veteran, lawyer, and a politician from the U.S. state of Michigan. He served six terms in the United States House of Representatives from 1895 to 1907.

==Early life, Civil War service and education==
Bishop was born in Sidney, New York, and attended Unadilla Academy, Cooperstown Seminary and Walton Academy, all in Upstate New York, after which he taught school for several years.

During the American Civil War, he enlisted as a private in Company C, Forty-third Regiment, New York Volunteer Infantry, in 1861, and was discharged in December 1862 because of a wound which necessitated the amputation of his right arm.

He entered the University of Michigan in September 1868 where he remained until December 1872. He studied law, was admitted to the bar in Ann Arbor in May 1875, and commenced practice in Ludington, Michigan.

==Political career==
He was elected prosecuting attorney of Mason County in 1876, 1878, and 1884. He was a member of the Michigan State House of Representatives in 1882 and 1892.

Bishop was elected as a Republican from Michigan&#x27;s 9th congressional district to the United States House of Representatives for the 54th Congress and to the five succeeding Congresses, serving from March 4, 1895, until March 3, 1907. He was chairman of the House Committee on Ventilation and Acoustics in the 57th through 59th Congresses.

He was an unsuccessful candidate for re-nomination in 1906 and resumed the practice of law in Ludington. He served as a member of the Michigan constitutional convention in 1907 and was appointed a member of the Spanish Treaty Claims Commission in December 1907 and served until the work of the commission was completed.

==After Congress==
He moved to Hollister, California, in 1910 and engaged in fruit growing. He died at Pacific Grove, California, aged 77, and is interred in the El Carmelo Cemetery there.

His former home 302 N. Harrison Street in Ludington, erected in 1892, has been the rectory of Grace Episcopal Church since 1945.

== References ==

 Retrieved on 2008-02-14
*The Political Graveyard
*James L. Cabot, &quot;Ludington: 1830-1930&quot;, p. 69. Charleston, South Carolina: Arcadia Publishing, 2005. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2167922" start="0" end="20" title="Roswell P. Bishop" label="Roswell Peter Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="71" end="80" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="104" end="114" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="124" end="134" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="138" end="146" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="175" end="213" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352427" start="301" end="317" title="Sidney, New York" label="Sidney, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018923" start="398" end="414" title="Upstate New York" label="Upstate New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="476" end="494" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q158668" start="513" end="520" title="Private (rank)" label="private"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="718" end="740" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015569" start="834" end="837" title="bar (law)" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="841" end="850" title="Ann Arbor, Michigan" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161723" start="890" end="909" title="Ludington, Michigan" label="Ludington, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="948" end="968" title="prosecuting attorney" label="prosecuting attorney"/>
<link wikidata="Q63718" start="972" end="984" title="Mason County, Michigan" label="Mason County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494590" start="1033" end="1072" title="Michigan State House of Representatives" label="Michigan State House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="1116" end="1126" title="U.S. Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837426" start="1132" end="1174" title="Michigan&amp;#x27;s 9th congressional district" label="Michigan&amp;#x27;s 9th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="1182" end="1220" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640529" start="1229" end="1242" title="54th United States Congress" label="54th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889984" start="1354" end="1398" title="United States House Committee on Ventilation and Acoustics" label="House Committee on Ventilation and Acoustics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640851" start="1406" end="1410" title="57th United States Congress" label="57th"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641029" start="1419" end="1423" title="59th United States Congress" label="59th"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573321" start="1648" end="1680" title="Spanish Treaty Claims Commission" label="Spanish Treaty Claims Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q936919" start="1789" end="1810" title="Hollister, California" label="Hollister, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q117514" start="1861" end="1886" title="Pacific Grove, California" label="Pacific Grove, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="2031" end="2038" title="rectory" label="rectory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019907" wikidata="Q2826634" url="?curid=1019907" title="Revenu Québec">
<text>Revenu Québec (; formerly the Ministère du Revenu du Québec, Quebec Ministry of Revenue) is an agency of the government of the Province of Quebec, Canada. It collects taxes to fund public services, ensures that all citizens pay their fair share, and administers programs. Unlike other Canadian provinces, Québec collects its own provincial income tax rather than entrusting that responsibility to the federal government.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2826634" start="0" end="13" title="Revenu Québec" label="Revenu Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2826634" start="30" end="59" title="Revenu Québec" label="Ministère du Revenu du Québec"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="139" end="145" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019908" wikidata="Q160122" url="?curid=1019908" title="Influenza A virus subtype H5N1">
<text>Influenza A virus subtype H5N1 (A/H5N1) is a subtype of the influenza A virus, which causes the disease avian influenza (often referred to as &quot;bird flu&quot;). It is enzootic (maintained in the population) in many bird populations, and also panzootic (affecting animals of many species over a wide area). A/H5N1 virus can also infect mammals (including humans) that have been exposed to infected birds; in these cases, symptoms are frequently severe or fatal.

A/H5N1 virus is shed in the saliva, mucus, and feces of infected birds; other infected animals may shed bird flu viruses in respiratory secretions and other body fluids (such as milk). The virus can spread rapidly through poultry flocks and among wild birds. An estimated half billion farmed birds have been slaughtered in efforts to contain the virus.

Symptoms of A/H5N1 influenza vary according to both the strain of virus underlying the infection and on the species of bird or mammal affected. Classification as either Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza (LPAI) or High Pathogenic Avian Influenza (HPAI) is based on the severity of symptoms in domestic chickens and does not predict the severity of symptoms in other species. Chickens infected with LPAI A/H5N1 virus display mild symptoms or are asymptomatic, whereas HPAI A/H5N1 causes serious breathing difficulties, a significant drop in egg production, and sudden death.
In mammals, including humans, A/H5N1 influenza (whether LPAI or HPAI) is rare. Symptoms of infection vary from mild to severe, including fever, diarrhea, and cough. Human infections with A/H5N1 virus have been reported in 23 countries since 1997, resulting in severe pneumonia and death in about 50% of cases. 

A/H5N1 influenza virus was first identified in farmed birds in southern China in 1996. Between 1996 and 2018, A/H5N1 coexisted in bird populations with other subtypes of the virus, but since then, the highly pathogenic subtype HPAI A(H5N1) has become the dominant strain in bird populations worldwide. Some strains of A/H5N1 which are highly pathogenic to chickens have adapted to cause mild symptoms in ducks and geese, and are able to spread rapidly through bird migration. Mammal species in addition to humans that have been recorded with H5N1 infection include cattle, seals, goats, and skunks.

Due to the high lethality and virulence of HPAI A(H5N1), its worldwide presence, its increasingly diverse host reservoir, and its significant ongoing mutations, the H5N1 virus is regarded as the world&#x27;s largest pandemic threat. Domestic poultry may potentially be protected from specific strains of the virus by vaccination. In the event of a serious outbreak of H5N1 flu among humans, health agencies have prepared &quot;candidate&quot; vaccines that may be used to prevent infection and control the outbreak; however, it could take several months to ramp up mass production.

==Signs and symptoms==
===Humans===

Avian flu viruses, both HPAI and LPAI, can infect humans who are in close, unprotected contact with infected poultry. Incidents of cross-species transmission are rare, with symptoms ranging in severity from no symptoms or mild illness, to severe disease that resulted in death. As of February 2024 there have been very few instances of human-to-human transmission, and each outbreak has been limited to a few people. All subtypes of avian Influenza A have potential to cross the species barrier, with H5N1 and H7N9 considered the biggest threats. In December 2024, researchers showed one mutation could allow the virus to switch its specificity to human receptors, increasing the risk of human-to-human transmission.

In order to avoid infection, the general public are advised to avoid contact with sick birds or potentially contaminated material such as carcasses or feces. People working with birds, such as conservationists or poultry workers, are advised to wear appropriate personal protection equipment.

The avian influenza hemagglutinin prefers to bind to alpha-2,3 sialic acid receptors, while the human influenza hemagglutinin prefers to bind to alpha-2,6 sialic acid receptors. This means that when the H5N1 strain infects humans, it will replicate in the lower respiratory tract (where alpha-2,3 sialic acid receptors are more plentiful in humans) and consequently cause viral pneumonia.

On January 6, 2025, the first death from avian influenza in the United States was recorded. This was the first case considered to officially link transmission of avian influenza to backyard flocks. The individual was reported to have been older than 65, had underlying medical problems as well as being in contact with multiple sick and dead birds from their backyard flock.

==Virology==
=== Influenza virus nomenclature ===

To unambiguously describe a specific isolate of virus, researchers use the internationally accepted &quot;Influenza virus nomenclature,&quot; which describes, among other things, the species of animal from which the virus was isolated, and the place and year of collection. For example, A/chicken/Nakorn-Patom/Thailand/CU-K2/04(H5N1):
* A stands for the genus of influenza (A, B or C)
* chicken is the animal species the isolate was found in (note: human isolates lack this component term and are thus identified as human isolates by default)
* Nakorn-Patom/Thailand is the place this specific virus was isolated
* CU-K2 is the laboratory reference number that identifies it from other influenza viruses isolated at the same place and year
* 04 represents the year of isolation 2004
* H5 stands for the fifth of several known types of the protein hemagglutinin
* N1 stands for the first of several known types of the protein neuraminidase.
Other examples include: A/duck/Hong Kong/308/78(H5N3), and A/shoveler/Egypt/03(H5N2).

===Genetic structure===

H5N1 is a subtype of Influenza A virus. Like all subtypes it is an enveloped negative-sense RNA virus, with a segmented genome. Subtypes of IAV are defined by the combination of the antigenic hemagglutinin and neuraminidase proteins in the viral envelope. &quot;H5N1&quot; designates an IAV subtype that has a type 5 hemagglutinin (H) protein and a type-1 neuraminidase (N) protein. Further variations exist within the subtypes and can lead to very significant differences in the virus&#x27;s ability to infect and cause disease, as well as to the severity of symptoms.

Influenza viruses have a relatively high mutation rate that is characteristic of RNA viruses. The segmentation of its genome facilitates genetic recombination by segment reassortment in hosts infected with two different strains of influenza viruses at the same time. Through a combination of mutation and genetic reassortment the virus can evolve to acquire new characteristics, enabling it to evade host immunity and occasionally to jump from one species of host to another.

==Prevention and treatment==
===Vaccine===

Humans – Several &quot;candidate&quot; (unproved) vaccines are available in case an avian virus acquires the ability to infect and transmit among humans; as of July 2024 these include Aflunov, Celldemic and Seqirus/Audenz. Some governments have prepared strategic stockpiles of vaccines against the H5N1 subtype which is considered the biggest risk among subtypes. However, because the influenza virus is highly variable, any vaccine needs to be specifically targeted against the particular strain of virus which is causing concern. Existing influenza vaccine technologies can be adapted to a H5N1 strain causing the pandemic; in the event of an outbreak, the candidate vaccine would be rapidly tested for safety as well as efficacy against the zoonotic strain, and then authorised and distributed to vaccine manufacturers.

Poultry – it is possible to vaccinate poultry against specific strains of HPAI influenza. Vaccination should be combined with other control measures such as infection monitoring, early detection and biosecurity. In many countries, it is routine to vaccinate poultry against H5N1. In China, the world&#x27;s biggest poultry producer, there has been is a mandatory vaccination requirement since 2017; the vaccine is bivalent or trivalent, targeting the H5 and H7 subtypes of influenza A virus. It is manufactured using recombinant influenza virus.

=== Treatment ===

In the event of an outbreak of human H5N1, the main antiviral drugs recommended are neuraminidase inhibitors, such as zanamivir (Relenza) and oseltamivir (Tamiflu). These drugs can reduce the severity of symptoms if taken soon after infection and can also be taken as prophylaxis to decrease the risk of infection.

==Epidemiology==
=== History ===
Influenza A/H5N1 was first detected in 1959 after an outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza in Scotland, which infected two flocks of chickens. The next detection, and the earliest infection of humans by H5N1, was an epizootic (an epidemic in nonhumans) of H5N1 influenza in Hong Kong&#x27;s poultry population in 1997. This outbreak was stopped by the killing of the entire domestic poultry population within the territory. Human infection was confirmed in 18 individuals who had been in close contact with poultry, 6 of whom died.

Since then, avian A/H5N1 bird flu has become widespread in wild birds worldwide, with numerous outbreaks among both domestic and wild birds. An estimated half a billion farmed birds have been slaughtered in efforts to contain the virus.

=== Pandemic potential ===
Influenza viruses have a relatively high mutation rate that is characteristic of RNA viruses. The segmentation of the influenza A virus genome facilitates genetic recombination by segment reassortment in hosts who become infected with two different strains of influenza viruses at the same time. With reassortment between strains, an avian strain which does not affect humans may acquire characteristics from a different strain which enable it to infect and pass between humans – a zoonotic event.

As of June 2024, there is concern about two subtypes of avian influenza which are circulating in wild bird populations worldwide, A/H5N1 and A/H7N9. Both of these have potential to devastate poultry stocks, and both have jumped to humans with relatively high case fatality rates. A/H5N1 in particular has infected a wide range of mammals and may be adapting to mammalian hosts.

=== Surveillance ===
The Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System (GISRS) is a global network of laboratories that monitor the spread of influenza with the aim to provide the World Health Organization with influenza control information and to inform vaccine development. Several millions of specimens are tested by the GISRS network annually through a network of laboratories in 127 countries. GISRS monitors avian, swine, and other potentially zoonotic influenza viruses as well as human viruses.

=== Transmission and prevention ===

Birds – Influenza A viruses of various subtypes have a large reservoir in wild waterfowl, which can infect the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract without affecting the health of the host. They can then be carried by the bird over large distances especially during annual migration. Infected birds can shed avian influenza A viruses in their saliva, nasal secretions, and feces; susceptible birds become infected when they have contact with the virus as it is shed by infected birds. The virus can survive for long periods in water and at low temperatures, and can be spread from one farm to another on farm equipment. Domesticated birds (chickens, turkeys, ducks, etc.) may become infected with avian influenza A viruses through direct contact with infected waterfowl or other infected poultry, or through contact with contaminated feces or surfaces.

Avian influenza outbreaks in domesticated birds are of concern for several reasons. There is potential for low pathogenic avian influenza viruses (LPAI) to evolve into strains which are high pathogenic to poultry (HPAI), and subsequent potential for significant illness and death among poultry during outbreaks. Because of this, international regulations state that any detection of H5 or H7 subtypes (regardless of their pathogenicity) must be notified to the appropriate authority. It is also possible that avian influenza viruses could be transmitted to humans and other animals which have been exposed to infected birds, causing infection with unpredictable but sometimes fatal consequences.

When an HPAI infection is detected in poultry, it is normal to cull infected animals and those nearby in an effort to rapidly contain, control and eradicate the disease. This is done together with movement restrictions, improved hygiene and biosecurity, and enhanced surveillance.

Humans – Avian flu viruses, both HPAI and LPAI, can infect humans who are in close, unprotected contact with infected poultry. Incidents of cross-species transmission are rare, with symptoms ranging in severity from no symptoms or mild illness, to severe disease that resulted in death. As of February 2024, there have been very few instances of human-to-human transmission, and each outbreak has been limited to a few people. All subtypes of avian Influenza A have potential to cross the species barrier, with H5N1 and H7N9 considered the biggest threats.

In order to avoid infection, the general public are advised to avoid contact with sick birds or potentially contaminated material such as carcasses or feces. People working with birds, such as conservationists or poultry workers, are advised to wear appropriate personal protection equipment.

Cattle – The H5N1 avian flu variant had first been identified in cattle around March 25, 2024. Since then the variant has been identified in 845 individual cases across 16 states as of early December, 2024. Recent tests have shown that the most common clade of the H5N1 variant found in cattle has been Eurasian lineage goose/Guangdong clade 2.3.4.4b which is also commonly found in commercial poultry and wild birds. According to the American Veterinary Medical Association, common clinical signs of H5N1 infection in dairy cattle include symptoms such as a reduced appetite, lower milk production, and abnormal milk appearance (e.g., thickened or discolored). While lactating cows are the most affected, illness is still often only reported in less than 10% of a herd, with a low mortality or culling rate of 2% or less. The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has started to require testing of lactating dairy cattle before interstate movement or travel and now mandates reporting of positive test results to the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS). Internationally, Canada tightened import rules for U.S. dairy cattle as a response. The USDA then introduced various forms of financial support for producers to bolster biosecurity and offset losses from production disruptions as a result of the spread. As for the future, the American Association of Bovine Practitioners (AABP) and the AVMA are coordinating with federal and state officials to provide further biosecurity guidance.

The commercial milk supply has not been affected, as milk from H5N1-affected animals is almost always diverted or destroyed before entering the food supply, and then as milk goes through pasteurization the virus becomes effectively inactivated. Testing of retail dairy products, including milk, butter, cheese, and ice cream, has found no live, infectious H5N1 virus which further supports the FDA&#x27;s position that pasteurized milk is safe for consumption. The USDA&#x27;s Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) has also tested ground beef and muscle samples from culled dairy cows, with the results also confirming the absence of H5N1 in meat products. Any meat from condemned cows is prohibited from entering the human food supply. Beginning in September 2024, the FSIS has expanded testing of dairy cows that are going to be slaughtered to further safeguard the meat supply. For states permitting raw milk sales, the FDA has advised halting such sales if the milk may contain viable H5N1 virus. In December, a California dairy recalled raw milk and cream after multiple samples tested positive for the virus, which underscored the risks of consuming unpasteurized dairy products. The FDA recommended heat-treating milk intended for calf feeding to eliminate harmful pathogens. Consumers were also advised by the FDA to avoid raw milk, properly handle raw meat, and cook meat to an internal temperature of at least 165 °F, including meat used for pet food.

Other animals – a wide range of other animals have been affected by avian flu, generally due to eating birds which had been infected. There have been instances where transmission of the disease between mammals, including seals and cattle, may have occurred.

=== Mortality ===
== Outbreaks ==
=== 1959–1997 ===

* A highly pathogenic strain of H5N1 caused flu outbreaks in 1959 in Scotland in chickens.
* In 1997, in Hong Kong, 18 humans were infected and 6 died in the first known case of H5N1 infecting humans. Subsequently 1.3 million chickens were culled in the territory of Hong Kong. The government also suspended the import of chickens from mainland China.

=== 2003 ===

* In 2003 the first cases in humans since 1997 were diagnosed. Three people in one family were infected after visiting Fujian province in mainland China and 2 died.
* By midyear of 2003 outbreaks of poultry disease caused by H5N1 occurred in Asia, but were not recognized as such. In December animals in a Thai zoo died after eating infected chicken carcasses. Later that month H5N1 infection was detected in 3 flocks in the Republic of Korea.

=== 2004 ===

* In January 2004 a major new outbreak of H5N1 surfaced in Vietnam and Thailand&#x27;s poultry industry, and within weeks spread to ten countries and regions in Asia, including Indonesia, South Korea, Japan and China.
* Variants have been found in a number of domestic cats, leopards, and tigers in Thailand, with high lethality. &quot;The Thailand Zoo tiger outbreak killed more than 140 tigers, causing health officials to make the decision to cull all the sick tigers in an effort to stop the zoo from becoming a reservoir for H5N1 influenza.

=== 2005 ===

* In January 2005 an outbreak of avian influenza affected thirty three out of sixty four cities and provinces in Vietnam, leading to the forced killing of nearly 1.2 million poultry.
* In April 2005 there begins an unprecedented die-off of over 6,000 migratory birds at Qinghai Lake in central China over three months. Later in the year H5N1 was detected in Kazakhstan, Mongolia and Russia, Turkey, Romania, Croatia and Kuwait. 
* H5N1 was found to be infecting pigs in Indonesia, but without causing symptoms.

=== 2006 ===

* In the first two months of 2006 H5N1 spread to India, north Africa, and Europe in wild bird populations.
* February/March 2006 – A dead cat infected with the H5N1 bird flu virus was found in Germany.

=== 2007 ===

* Significant outbreaks recorded in Japan, Hungary, Russia, United Kingdom, Pakistan, Turkey, Afghanistan, Myanmar, Bangladesh, Saudi Arabia, Ghana, Malaysia, Germany, Czech Republic, Togo, France and India.

=== 2008–2019 ===
Many more outbreaks are recorded, in almost every country in the world, affecting both wild birds and poultry, with occasional spillover events infecting humans.

=== 2020–2025 ===
===Mammalian infections===

In October 2022 an outbreak of H5N1 on a Spanish mink farm showed evidence of being the first recorded case of mammal-to-mammal transmission, with 4 percent of the farm&#x27;s mink population dying from H5N1-related haemorrhagic pneumonia. This coincided with H5N1 detections in the area among gulls and other seabirds, which are the presumed source of the outbreak.

A mass Caspian seal die-off in December 2022, with 700 infected seals found dead along the Caspian Sea coastline of Russia&#x27;s Dagestan republic, worried researchers regarding the possibility that wild mammal-to-mammal spread had begun. A similar mass die-off of 95% of southern elephant seal pups in 2023 also raised concerns of mammal-to-mammal spread, as nursing pups would have had less exposure to birds. Between January and October 2023, at least 24,000 South American sea lions died from H5N1 flu, with the outbreak starting on the Pacific coast of Peru, moving down the coast to Chile and then up the Atlantic coast of Argentina.

In April 2024, spread of H5N1 amongst dairy cow herds in nine states of the USA strongly indicated the presence of cow-to-cow transmission possibly occurring while the animals were being milked. Although mortality in bovines infected with H5N1 is rare, viable virus can be shed in the milk. Around 50% of cats that lived on the affected dairy farms and were fed unpasteurised milk from symptomatic cows died within a few days from severe systemic influenza infection, raising significant concerns of cross-species mammal-to-mammal transmission.

==Research==
=== H5N1 transmission studies in ferrets (2011) ===

Novel, contagious strains of H5N1 were created by Ron Fouchier of the Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, who first presented his work to the public at an influenza conference in Malta in September 2011. Three mutations were introduced into the H5N1 virus genome, and the virus was then passed from the noses of infected ferrets to the noses of uninfected ones, which was repeated 10 times. After these 10 passages the H5N1 virus had acquired the ability of transmission between ferrets via aerosols or respiratory droplets.

After Fouchier offered an article describing this work to the leading academic journal &quot;Science&quot;, the US National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity (NSABB) recommended against publication of the full details of the study, and the one submitted to Nature by Yoshihiro Kawaoka of the University of Wisconsin describing related work. However, after additional consultations at the World Health Organization and by the NSABB, the NSABB reversed its position and recommended publication of revised versions of the two papers. However, then the Dutch government declared that this type of manuscripts required Fouchier to apply for an export permit in the light of EU directive 428/2009 on dual use goods. After much controversy surrounding the publishing of his research, Fouchier complied (under formal protest) with Dutch government demands to obtain a special permit for submitting his manuscript, and his research appeared in a special issue of the journal &quot;Science&quot; devoted to H5N1. The papers by Fouchier and Kawaoka conclude that it is entirely possible that a natural chain of mutations could lead to an H5N1 virus acquiring the capability of airborne transmission between mammals, and that a H5N1 influenza pandemic would not be impossible.

In May 2013, it was reported that scientists at the Harbin Veterinary Research Institute in Harbin, China, had created H5N1 strains which passed between guinea pigs.

In response to Fouchier and Kawaoka&#x27;s work, a number of scientists expressed concerns with the risks of creating novel potential pandemic pathogens, culminating in the formation of the Cambridge Working Group, a consensus statement calling for an assessment of the risks and benefits of such research.

==See also==
* Antigenic shift
* Avian influenza virus
* Favipiravir
* Fujian flu
* H5N1 clinical trials
* H7N9
* Influenzavirus A
* International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases
* National Influenza Centers
* Swine influenza
* Zoonosis

== Notes ==
== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===

* Analysis of the efficacy of an adjuvant-based inactivated pandemic H5N1 influenza virus vaccine. https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007%2Fs00705-019-04147-7 Ainur NurpeisovaEmail authorMarkhabat KassenovNurkuisa RametovKaissar TabynovGourapura J. RenukaradhyaYevgeniy VolginAltynay SagymbayAmanzhol MakbuzAbylay SansyzbayBerik Khairullin
Research Institute for Biological Safety Problems (RIBSP), Zhambyl Region, Republic of Kazakhstan.
==External links==
* Influenza Research Database – Database of influenza genomic sequences and related information.
* WHO World Health Organization
** WHO&#x27;s Avian Flu Facts Sheet for 2006
** Epidemic and Pandemic Alert and Response Guide to WHO&#x27;s H5N1 pages
** Avian Influenza Resources (updated) – tracks human cases and deaths
** National Influenza Pandemic Plans
** WHO Collaborating Centres and Reference Laboratories Centers, names, locations, and phone numbers
* FAO Avian Influenza portal Information resources, animations, videos, photos
** FAO Food and Agriculture Organisation – Bi-weekly Avian Influenza Maps – tracks animal cases and deaths
** FAO Bird Flu disease card
** FAO Socio-Economic impact of AI Projects, Information resources
* OIE World Organisation for Animal Health – tracks animal cases and deaths
** Official outbreak reports by country 
** Official outbreak reports by week
** Chart of outbreaks by country 

;European Union
* &quot;Health-EU Portal&quot; EU response to Avian Influenza.

;United Kingdom
* Exotic Animal Disease Generic Contingency Plan – DEFRA generic contingency plan for controlling and eradicating an outbreak of an exotic animal disease. PDF hosted by BBC.
* UK Influenza Pandemic Contingency Plan by the National Health Service – a government entity. PDF hosted by BBC
* UK Department of Health. 

;United States
* Center for Infectious Disease Research and Policy. Avian Influenza (Bird Flu): Implications for Human Disease – An overview of Avian Influenza
* PandemicFlu.Gov U.S. Government&#x27;s avian flu information site
* USAID U.S. Agency for International Development – Avian Influenza Response
* CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – responsible agency for avian influenza in humans in US – Facts About Avian Influenza (Bird Flu) and Avian Influenza A (H5N1) Virus
* USGS – NWHC National Wildlife Health Center – responsible agency for avian influenza in animals in US
* Wildlife Disease Information Node A part of the National Biological Information Infrastructure and partner of the NWHC, this agency collects and distributes news and information about wildlife diseases such as avian influenza and coordinates collaborative information sharing efforts
* HHS U.S. Department of Health &amp; Human Services&#x27;s Pandemic Influenza Plan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="0" end="30" title="Influenza A virus subtype H5N1" label="Influenza A virus subtype H5N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="32" end="38" title="Influenza A virus subtype H5N1" label="A/H5N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q834390" start="60" end="77" title="influenza A virus" label="influenza A virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="104" end="119" title="avian influenza" label="avian influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346169" start="171" end="179" title="enzootic" label="enzootic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368774" start="246" end="255" title="panzootic" label="panzootic"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="1118" end="1125" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707292" start="1261" end="1273" title="asymptomatic" label="asymptomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460232" start="2332" end="2341" title="virulence" label="virulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q221673" start="2408" end="2412" title="Host (biology)" label="host"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361531" start="2413" end="2422" title="Natural reservoir" label="reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184" start="2518" end="2526" title="pandemic" label="pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087616" start="3432" end="3436" title="Influenza A virus subtype H7N9" label="H7N9"/>
<link wikidata="Q9136673" start="3954" end="3967" title="Hemagglutinin (influenza)" label="hemagglutinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q419311" start="3997" end="4008" title="sialic acid" label="sialic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603200" start="4306" end="4321" title="viral pneumonia" label="viral pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212305" start="4788" end="4795" title="Isolation (microbiology)" label="isolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q834390" start="5125" end="5126" title="Influenzavirus A" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q51916573" start="5128" end="5129" title="Influenzavirus B" label="B"/>
<link wikidata="Q51916591" start="5133" end="5134" title="Influenzavirus C" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q9136673" start="5598" end="5611" title="hemagglutinin (influenza)" label="hemagglutinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3447836" start="5676" end="5689" title="Viral neuraminidase" label="neuraminidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q994215" start="5870" end="5879" title="Viral envelope" label="enveloped"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362279" start="5880" end="5894" title="Sense (molecular biology)" label="negative-sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q751911" start="5895" end="5904" title="RNA virus" label="RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="5923" end="5929" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q9136673" start="5995" end="6008" title="Hemagglutinin (influenza)" label="hemagglutinin"/>
<link wikidata="Q409485" start="6013" end="6026" title="neuraminidase" label="neuraminidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q994215" start="6043" end="6057" title="viral envelope" label="viral envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q751911" start="6455" end="6464" title="RNA virus" label="RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="6492" end="6498" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="6511" end="6532" title="genetic recombination" label="genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004399" start="6544" end="6556" title="reassortment" label="reassortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="6666" end="6674" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004399" start="6687" end="6699" title="reassortment" label="reassortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q855769" start="7386" end="7392" title="Strain (biology)" label="strain"/>
<link wikidata="Q383260" start="7437" end="7454" title="influenza vaccine" label="influenza vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7302706" start="8237" end="8248" title="Recombinant virus" label="recombinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q846227" start="8338" end="8352" title="antiviral drug" label="antiviral drug"/>
<link wikidata="Q425196" start="8370" end="8393" title="neuraminidase inhibitor" label="neuraminidase inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q146075" start="8404" end="8423" title="Zanamivir" label="zanamivir (Relenza)"/>
<link wikidata="Q211509" start="8428" end="8449" title="Oseltamivir" label="oseltamivir (Tamiflu)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773974" start="8554" end="8565" title="Preventive healthcare" label="prophylaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126331" start="8859" end="8868" title="epizootic" label="epizootic"/>
<link wikidata="Q751911" start="9522" end="9531" title="RNA virus" label="RNA virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="9577" end="9583" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q211675" start="9596" end="9617" title="genetic recombination" label="genetic recombination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004399" start="9629" end="9641" title="reassortment" label="reassortment"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="9923" end="9931" title="Zoonosis" label="zoonotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087616" start="10081" end="10087" title="Influenza A virus subtype H7N9" label="A/H7N9"/>
<link wikidata="Q92307203" start="10199" end="10217" title="case fatality rate" label="case fatality rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q116846722" start="10256" end="10277" title="List of mammals that can get H5N1" label="wide range of mammals"/>
<link wikidata="Q96379598" start="10344" end="10393" title="Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System" label="Global Influenza Surveillance and Response System"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840" start="10465" end="10474" title="influenza" label="influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="10503" end="10528" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="10773" end="10781" title="Zoonosis" label="zoonotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740042" start="12480" end="12484" title="Culling" label="cull"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087616" start="13219" end="13223" title="Influenza A virus subtype H7N9" label="H7N9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843064" start="13986" end="14025" title="American Veterinary Medical Association" label="American Veterinary Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="14378" end="14417" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764929" start="14578" end="14620" title="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service" label="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743047" start="14907" end="14951" title="American Association of Bovine Practitioners" label="American Association of Bovine Practitioners"/>
<link wikidata="Q58148" start="15251" end="15265" title="pasteurization" label="pasteurization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465387" start="15541" end="15575" title="Food Safety and Inspection Service" label="Food Safety and Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q116846722" start="16547" end="16576" title="List of mammals that can get H5N1" label="a wide range of other animals"/>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="16875" end="16879" title="H5N1" label="H5N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="16948" end="16957" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="17179" end="17193" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="17329" end="17335" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="17516" end="17520" title="Thailand" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="17635" end="17652" title="Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="17711" end="17715" title="H5N1" label="H5N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="17830" end="17834" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q201294" start="18500" end="18512" title="Qinghai Lake" label="Qinghai Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="18588" end="18598" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="18600" end="18608" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="18613" end="18619" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="18621" end="18627" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="18629" end="18636" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="18638" end="18645" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="18650" end="18656" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="18700" end="18709" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4606331" start="18805" end="18810" title="Bird flu in India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="18818" end="18824" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="18830" end="18836" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="18916" end="18920" title="H5N1" label="H5N1"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="18949" end="18956" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000336" start="19327" end="19336" title="Spillover infection" label="spillover"/>
<link wikidata="Q742727" start="19784" end="19796" title="Caspian seal" label="Caspian seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="19868" end="19879" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="19907" end="19915" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q41162" start="19916" end="19924" title="Republics of Russia" label="republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215343" start="20050" end="20072" title="southern elephant seal" label="southern elephant seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q333649" start="20240" end="20263" title="South American sea lion" label="South American sea lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995419" start="21038" end="21048" title="Contagious disease" label="contagious"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126873" start="21101" end="21123" title="Erasmus Medical Center" label="Erasmus Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q178973" start="21370" end="21376" title="ferret" label="ferret"/>
<link wikidata="Q192864" start="21668" end="21675" title="Science (journal)" label="Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978270" start="21690" end="21737" title="National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity" label="National Science Advisory Board for Biosecurity"/>
<link wikidata="Q877631" start="22129" end="22145" title="Dutch government" label="Dutch government"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020853" start="22898" end="22934" title="Harbin Veterinary Research Institute" label="Harbin Veterinary Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q42956" start="22938" end="22944" title="Harbin" label="Harbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79803" start="22999" end="23010" title="guinea pigs" label="guinea pigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q24949638" start="23113" end="23118" title="Biotechnology risk" label="risks"/>
<link wikidata="Q105590653" start="23199" end="23226" title="the Cambridge Working Group" label="the Cambridge Working Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q575314" start="23336" end="23351" title="Antigenic shift" label="Antigenic shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q43987" start="23354" end="23375" title="Avian influenza virus" label="Avian influenza virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934561" start="23378" end="23389" title="Favipiravir" label="Favipiravir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507378" start="23392" end="23402" title="Fujian flu" label="Fujian flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628865" start="23405" end="23425" title="H5N1 clinical trials" label="H5N1 clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q9087616" start="23428" end="23432" title="H7N9" label="H7N9"/>
<link wikidata="Q834390" start="23435" end="23451" title="Influenzavirus A" label="Influenzavirus A"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049625" start="23454" end="23510" title="International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases" label="International Conference on Emerging Infectious Diseases"/>
<link wikidata="Q12812369" start="23513" end="23539" title="National Influenza Centers" label="National Influenza Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q36855" start="23542" end="23557" title="Swine influenza" label="Swine influenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q182672" start="23560" end="23568" title="Zoonosis" label="Zoonosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="24198" end="24223" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058594" start="24841" end="24877" title="World Organisation for Animal Health" label="World Organisation for Animal Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="25025" end="25039" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044721" start="25171" end="25176" title="Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs" label="DEFRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="25275" end="25278" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="25289" end="25292" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="25342" end="25365" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q42332" start="25389" end="25392" title="PDF" label="PDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="25403" end="25406" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q583725" start="25748" end="25790" title="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention" label="Centers for Disease Control and Prevention"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="26325" end="26366" title="Department of Health &amp;amp; Human Services" label="Department of Health &amp;amp; Human Services"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019920" wikidata="Q1076290" url="?curid=1019920" title="Laxå">
<text>Laxå is a locality and the seat of Laxå Municipality in Örebro County, Sweden with 3,064 inhabitants in 2010.

==History==
The town was founded in the mid-19th century when the main line railway between Gothenburg and Stockholm (Västra Stambanan) was built in 1883. Laxå is exactly from both those cities.

In the vicinity of the town Laxå lies the Porla Well. Its iron rich water made it a popular spa between 1724 until 1939. Although not a spa anymore, its water is sold in bottles with the brand &quot;Porlavatten&quot; and have been distributed nationwide since the 1920s.

On August 17, 2012, it was reported in Dagens Nyheter that Laxå is Sweden&#x27;s poorest municipality and the only one in the country with a net debt.

== References ==
==External links==

*Official website of Laxå municipality</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1076290" start="0" end="4" title="Laxå" label="Laxå"/>
<link wikidata="Q12813115" start="10" end="18" title="Urban areas in Sweden" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q515326" start="35" end="52" title="Laxå Municipality" label="Laxå Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q104257" start="56" end="69" title="Örebro County" label="Örebro County"/>
<link wikidata="Q25287" start="203" end="213" title="Gothenburg" label="Gothenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="218" end="227" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q54081" start="229" end="245" title="Västra Stambanan" label="Västra Stambanan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019923" wikidata="Q813495" url="?curid=1019923" title="Beaverbrook">
<text>Beaverbrook may refer to:

==People==
*Baron Beaverbrook, of Beaverbrook in the Province of New Brunswick in the Dominion of Canada and of Cherkley in the County of Surrey, a title in the Peerage of the United Kingdom
**Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook, newspaper publisher and World War II Minister of Aircraft Production
***Beaverbrook Newspapers
**Maxwell Aitken, 3rd Baron Beaverbrook, British politician and honorary RAF officer

==Places==
*Beaverbrook, Alberta, Canada
*Beaverbrook, Ottawa, Canada
*Beaver Brook Station, New Brunswick, from which Baron Beaverbrook is named
*Beaverbrook, Connecticut, United States

==Other uses==
*Beaverbrooks, a British jeweller
*Beaverbrook Art Gallery, in Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada

==See also==
*Beaver Brook (disambiguation)
*Camp Beaverbrook, near Cobb Mountain, in Lake County, California, U.S.
*Lord Beaverbrook High School in Calgary, Alberta, Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q813495" start="0" end="11" title="Beaverbrook" label="Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q808593" start="39" end="56" title="Baron Beaverbrook" label="Baron Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q332454" start="220" end="253" title="Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook" label="Max Aitken, 1st Baron Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="327" end="349" title="Beaverbrook Newspapers" label="Beaverbrook Newspapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q254422" start="352" end="389" title="Maxwell Aitken, 3rd Baron Beaverbrook" label="Maxwell Aitken, 3rd Baron Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7138563" start="448" end="468" title="Beaverbrook, Alberta" label="Beaverbrook, Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878225" start="478" end="497" title="Beaverbrook, Ottawa" label="Beaverbrook, Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877998" start="507" end="542" title="Beaver Brook Station, New Brunswick" label="Beaver Brook Station, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q116507934" start="583" end="607" title="Beaverbrook, Connecticut" label="Beaverbrook, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878226" start="640" end="652" title="Beaverbrooks" label="Beaverbrooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094641" start="674" end="697" title="Beaverbrook Art Gallery" label="Beaverbrook Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q813471" start="752" end="781" title="Beaver Brook (disambiguation)" label="Beaver Brook (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026996" start="783" end="799" title="Camp Beaverbrook" label="Camp Beaverbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678967" start="855" end="883" title="Lord Beaverbrook High School" label="Lord Beaverbrook High School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019924" wikidata="Q2366825" url="?curid=1019924" title="The Hay Wain">
<text>The Hay Wain – originally titled Landscape: Noon – is a painting by John Constable, completed in 1821, which depicts a rural scene on the River Stour between the English counties of Suffolk and Essex. It hangs in the National Gallery in London and is regarded as &quot;Constable&#x27;s most famous image&quot; and one of the greatest and most popular English paintings.

Painted in oils on canvas, the work depicts as its central feature three horses pulling what appears to be a wood wain or large farm waggon across the river. Willy Lott&#x27;s Cottage, also the subject of an eponymous painting by Constable, is visible on the far-left. The scene takes place near Flatford Mill in Suffolk, though since the Stour forms the border of two counties, the left bank is in Suffolk and the landscape on the right bank is in Essex.

&quot;The Hay Wain&quot; is one of a series of paintings by Constable called the &quot;six-footers&quot;, large-scale canvasses which he painted for the annual summer exhibitions at the Royal Academy. As with all of the paintings in this series, Constable produced a full-scale oil sketch for the work; this is now in the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. Another small oil-sketch, the first in his experimentation with extending of the composition of the painting to the right, is now in the collection of the Yale Center for British Art. Constable originally exhibited the finished work with the title &quot;Landscape: Noon&quot;, suggesting that he envisaged it as belonging to the classical landscape tradition of representing the cycles of nature.

The painting measures .

==History==
Flatford Mill was owned by Constable&#x27;s father. The house on the left side of the painting belonged to a neighbour, Willy Lott, a tenant farmer, who was said to have been born in the house and never to have left it for more than four days in his lifetime. Willy Lott&#x27;s Cottage still survives practically unaltered, but none of the trees in the painting exist today.

Although &quot;The Hay Wain&quot; is revered today as one of the greatest British paintings, when it was originally appeared at the Royal Academy Exhibition of 1821 at Somerset House (under the title &quot;Landscape: Noon&quot;), it failed to find a buyer.
It was considerably better received in France where it was praised by Théodore Géricault. The painting caused a sensation when it was exhibited, along with &quot;View on the Stour near Dedham&quot; and &quot;Yarmouth Jetty&quot;, at the Salon of 1824 in Paris (it has been suggested that the inclusion of Constable&#x27;s paintings in the exhibition was a tribute to Géricault, who died early that year). In that exhibition, &quot;The Hay Wain&quot; was singled out for a gold medal awarded by Charles X of France, a cast of which is incorporated into the picture&#x27;s frame. The works by Constable in the exhibition inspired a new generation of French painters, including Eugène Delacroix. The French writer Stendhal, who visited the exhibition, wrote: &quot;We have never seen anything like these pictures before. It is their truthfulness that is so striking.&quot; According to Christine Riding, Director of Collections and Research at the National Gallery, though, &quot;In some ways, he&#x27;s offering up a fiction: a highly curated landscape containing elements that have been added later to improve the composition and broaden its appeal (…) There&#x27;s nothing natural about that landscape (…) It&#x27;s all man-made (…) The fields are agriculture, a managed landscape&quot;.

Sold at the exhibition with three other Constables to the dealer John Arrowsmith, &quot;The Hay Wain&quot; was brought back to England by another dealer, D. T. White; he sold it to a Mr. Young who resided in Ryde on the Isle of Wight. It was there that the painting came to the attention of the collector Henry Vaughan and the painter Charles Robert Leslie. On the death of his friend Mr. Young, Vaughan bought the painting from the former&#x27;s estate; in 1886, he presented it to the National Gallery in London, where it still hangs today. In his will, Vaughan bequeathed the full-scale oil sketch for &quot;The Hay Wain&quot;, made with a palette knife, to the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum).

&quot;The Hay Wain&quot; was voted the second most popular painting in any British gallery, second only to Turner&#x27;s &quot;Fighting Temeraire&quot;, in a 2005 poll organised by BBC Radio 4&#x27;s &quot;Today&quot; programme.

A study produced by the charity Art History in Schools suggests that the waggon has stopped in the river to allow the horses to drink and to cool down, but also to cool the waggon&#x27;s wheels. The hot weather prevailing at the time of the harvest would cause the wooden wheels to shrink while the iron rims around them would expand, leading the wheels to wobble. Cooling the rims in the river addressed the problem. It notes that such details of agricultural life would have been well known to Constable.

On 28 June 2013, a protester, reported to be connected with Fathers 4 Justice, glued a photograph of a young boy to the painting while it was on display at the National Gallery. The work was not permanently damaged. On 4 July 2022, two Just Stop Oil protestors attached their own modified &quot;apocalyptic vision of the future&quot; version of the painting to the original and glued themselves to the frame. The National Gallery said the surface varnish of the painting and its frame suffered minor damage.

==See also==
* List of paintings by John Constable

==References==
==External links==

* National Gallery information
* &quot;Constable&#x27;s England&quot;, the full text of an exhibition catalogue from the Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on &quot;The Hay Wain&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="68" end="82" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941117" start="138" end="149" title="River Stour, Suffolk" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="182" end="189" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="194" end="199" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="217" end="233" title="National Gallery" label="National Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3103237" start="351" end="368" title="English art" label="English paintings"/>
<link wikidata="Q859281" start="485" end="489" title="Wagon" label="wain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022575" start="529" end="554" title="Willy Lott&amp;#x27;s Cottage" label="Willy Lott&amp;#x27;s Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457890" start="667" end="680" title="Flatford Mill" label="Flatford Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373579" start="988" end="1006" title="Royal Academy summer exhibition" label="summer exhibitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="1014" end="1027" title="Royal Academy of Arts" label="Royal Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="1150" end="1176" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6352575" start="1343" end="1370" title="Yale Center for British Art" label="Yale Center for British Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="1757" end="1770" title="tenant farmer" label="tenant farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022575" start="1883" end="1908" title="Willy Lott&amp;#x27;s Cottage" label="Willy Lott&amp;#x27;s Cottage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2131" end="2163" title="Royal Academy Exhibition of 1821" label="Royal Academy Exhibition of 1821"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344889" start="2167" end="2181" title="Somerset House" label="Somerset House"/>
<link wikidata="Q184212" start="2326" end="2344" title="Théodore Géricault" label="Théodore Géricault"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2418" end="2447" title="View on the Stour near Dedham" label="View on the Stour near Dedham"/>
<link wikidata="Q28533164" start="2464" end="2478" title="Yarmouth Jetty" label="Yarmouth Jetty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16658565" start="2493" end="2506" title="Salon of 1824" label="Salon of 1824"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="2510" end="2515" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758" start="2750" end="2769" title="Charles X of France" label="Charles X of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33477" start="2931" end="2947" title="Eugène Delacroix" label="Eugène Delacroix"/>
<link wikidata="Q502" start="2967" end="2975" title="Stendhal" label="Stendhal"/>
<link wikidata="Q776556" start="3753" end="3757" title="Ryde" label="Ryde"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="3765" end="3778" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q18917189" start="3850" end="3863" title="Henry Vaughan (art collector)" label="Henry Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="Q325633" start="3880" end="3901" title="Charles Robert Leslie" label="Charles Robert Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17176801" start="4188" end="4201" title="palette knife" label="palette knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q213322" start="4243" end="4269" title="Victoria and Albert Museum" label="Victoria and Albert Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q159758" start="4380" end="4386" title="J. M. W. Turner" label="Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q257580" start="4400" end="4418" title="The Fighting Temeraire" label="Fighting Temeraire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601457" start="4431" end="4440" title="Greatest Painting in Britain Vote" label="2005 poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="4454" end="4465" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353208" start="4479" end="4484" title="Today (BBC Radio 4)" label="Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q833418" start="4676" end="4696" title="Wheelwright" label="waggon&amp;#x27;s wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398039" start="5071" end="5088" title="Fathers 4 Justice" label="Fathers 4 Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q111950188" start="5247" end="5260" title="Just Stop Oil" label="Just Stop Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q81683" start="5458" end="5465" title="varnish" label="varnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q104370169" start="5535" end="5570" title="List of paintings by John Constable" label="List of paintings by John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q160236" start="5728" end="5754" title="Metropolitan Museum of Art" label="Metropolitan Museum of Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019925" wikidata="Q6535097" url="?curid=1019925" title="Level structure">
<text>In the mathematical subfield of graph theory a level structure of a rooted graph is a partition of the vertices into subsets that have the same distance from a given root vertex.

==Definition and construction==
Given a connected graph &quot;G&quot; = (&quot;V&quot;, &quot;E&quot;) with &quot;V&quot; the set of vertices and &quot;E&quot; the set of edges, and with a root vertex &quot;r&quot;, the level structure is a partition of the vertices into subsets &quot;Li&quot; called levels, consisting of the vertices at distance &quot;i&quot; from &quot;r&quot;. Equivalently, this set may be defined by setting &quot;L&quot;0 = {&quot;r&quot;}, and then, for &quot;i&quot; &gt; 0, defining &quot;Li&quot; to be the set of vertices that are neighbors to vertices in &quot;L&quot;&quot;i&quot; − 1 but are not themselves in any earlier level.

The level structure of a graph can be computed by a variant of breadth-first search:

 algorithm level-BFS(G, r):
 Q ← {r}
 for ℓ from 0 to ∞:
 process(Q, ℓ) &quot;// the set Q holds all vertices at level ℓ&quot;
 mark all vertices in Q as discovered
 Q&#x27; ← {}
 for u in Q:
 for each edge (u, v):
 if v is not yet marked:
 add v to Q&#x27;
 if Q&#x27; is empty:
 return
 Q ← Q&#x27;

==Properties==
In a level structure, each edge of &quot;G&quot; either has both of its endpoints within the same level, or its two endpoints are in consecutive levels.

==Applications==
The partition of a graph into its level structure may be used as a heuristic for graph layout problems such as graph bandwidth. The Cuthill–McKee algorithm is a refinement of this idea, based on an additional sorting step within each level.

Level structures are also used in algorithms for sparse matrices, and for constructing separators of planar graphs.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="7" end="19" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="32" end="44" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535097" start="47" end="62" title="Level structure" label="level structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366593" start="68" end="80" title="rooted graph" label="rooted graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="86" end="95" title="Partition of a set" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="103" end="111" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742711" start="144" end="152" title="distance (graph theory)" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897900" start="220" end="235" title="connected graph" label="connected graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="313" end="321" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q166507" start="351" end="356" title="edge (graph theory)" label="edges"/>
<link wikidata="Q325904" start="906" end="926" title="breadth-first search" label="breadth-first search"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597073" start="1528" end="1543" title="graph bandwidth" label="graph bandwidth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146458" start="1549" end="1572" title="Cuthill–McKee algorithm" label="Cuthill–McKee algorithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050404" start="1708" end="1723" title="sparse matrix" label="sparse matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q7200963" start="1746" end="1773" title="planar separator theorem" label="separators of planar graphs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019932" wikidata="Q37883" url="?curid=1019932" title=".es">
<text>.es (españa) is the country code top-level domain (ccTLD) for Spain administered by the Network Information Centre of Spain.

== Server ==
The .es domain does not have a conventional WHOIS server operating on port 43, but WHOIS queries can be made using a page on ESNIC&#x27;s website.

== Registration ==
Registrations are permitted at the second level or at the third level beneath various generic second level categories. 

Some qualifications and restrictions apply to third-level registrations depending on which second-level domain they are within. 

Second-level registrations have had some limitations including requiring registrants to have a connection with Spain, but these restrictions were lifted in a multi-stage process completed by the end of 2005, at which point registrations at the second level of .es were open to anybody worldwide.

Until the liberalization in November 2005, registering in .es was expensive and encumbered compared to other ccTLDs. 

The second-level word had to be either a trade mark valid in Spain, the exact name of the registering business or association, or the first name and at least the first surname of the registering individual. 

Common words and placenames were unregisterable. 

There was also a requirement of a minimum of three characters in the name, though some exceptions like hp.es (Hewlett-Packard Spain) and pp.es (People&#x27;s Party) were allowed. 

==Second-level domains==
There are a number of second-level domains:
=== Alternatives ===
As an alternative, many Spanish organizations registered under .com, .org or .net. While being generic top-level domains, organisations may also use one or more other regional variants below: 
==Domain hacks==
Although very popular in Spain for its intended use, .es has been used for domain hacks such as geociti.es, a website mirroring Geocities; adspac.es, a mobile-based advertising firm; thelettervsixtim.es, for the game VVVVVV; and iTun.es for iTunes Ping URL shortening.

== References ==
==External links==
* IANA .es whois information
* ESNIC website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q37883" start="0" end="3" title=".es" label=".es"/>
<link wikidata="Q37883" start="5" end="7" title=".es" label="es"/>
<link wikidata="Q42032" start="20" end="49" title="country code top-level domain" label="country code top-level domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="62" end="67" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q590967" start="183" end="195" title="Whois" label="WHOIS server"/>
<link wikidata="Q167270" start="1014" end="1024" title="trade mark" label="trade mark"/>
<link wikidata="Q259614" start="1122" end="1148" title="Spanish naming customs" label="at least the first surname"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="1343" end="1358" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="1377" end="1396" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q159371" start="1567" end="1571" title=".com" label=".com"/>
<link wikidata="Q32131" start="1573" end="1577" title=".org" label=".org"/>
<link wikidata="Q31835" start="1581" end="1585" title=".net" label=".net"/>
<link wikidata="Q29469" start="1599" end="1624" title="Generic top-level domain" label="generic top-level domains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349433" start="1789" end="1800" title="domain hack" label="domain hack"/>
<link wikidata="Q968598" start="1842" end="1851" title="Geocities" label="Geocities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766" start="1931" end="1937" title="VVVVVV" label="VVVVVV"/>
<link wikidata="Q300911" start="1955" end="1966" title="iTunes Ping" label="iTunes Ping"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019935" wikidata="Q1122103" url="?curid=1019935" title="Holalkere">
<text>Holalkere is a town and taluk headquarters located near Chitradurga in the Indian state of Karnataka.

==Places of worship==
The town has a temple to the deity Ganesha and was established in 1475 CE by Guthyappa Nayaka. The temple contains Ganesha&#x27;s monolithic statue, which is about tall. According to local legends, if one worships Ganesha&#x27;s statue with true devotion, their wishes will be fulfilled. Leela Visranti Dhama, the burial site of late Sri Mallikarjuna Murugharajendra Swamiji at Holalkere is developing into a tourist spot due to the efforts of the present Seer Sri Shivamurthy Sharanaru of Chitradurga.

==Ontikallu matha==

Senior Muruga Rajendra Swami, who died on 8 August 1994, requested that his remains be buried beside the Ontikallu Matha near Holalkere. Today, a sprawling park exists here with blooming plants and trees covering 15 acres (61,000 m2), along with a fruit garden on a 40-acre (162,000 m2) plot beside the &quot;Leela Visranti Vana&quot; (at a cost of Rs 5 crores). The burial, designed in the Sharana style, was built at the cost of Rs 3 crores. A &quot;Sharana Smaranotsava&quot; is arranged in January every year to pay tribute to the late Swamiji, and to recall the silent revolution that changed ordinary people&#x27;s lives by the twelfth-century humanists led by Basavanna.

==Regional==

There are 4 hobli headquarters in the taluk called Bharmannaikanadurga, Kasaba, Talya and Ramgiri.

Talikatte is a village of Ramgiri hobli which has a locally famous temple called &quot;Kariyamma Devi Temple&quot;, it is a popular hotspot for devotees, with many of them coming from the state of Karnataka.Talikatte, is one of the villages of this taluk. It has a major population of nearly more than 10,000.

Spandana Global Foundation is situated at Kalkere Lambani Hatti Shivamoga-Chitradurga road, from the city 15 kilometers. NGOs&#x27; activities are to give education, Health, Employment, Training to Society through Karnataka State.

Murada is situated at Holalkere, Davanagere road, from the city 2 kilometers. NGOs&#x27; activities are building the poor people institutions like self-help groups and watershed activities like World bank assisted Sujala watershed project implementation and giving training on different activities. Talikatte is the biggest village in the taluk. According to the 2011 census, it had a population of 5829 people.

==Geography==
Holalkere is located at . It has an average elevation of 711 metres (2332 feet).

Chikkandavadi village is 4  km from Chikjajur. It is famous for progressive Arecanut crop growers and large areas covered by Arecanut plantation. It also had access to the train.

&quot;The major part of taluk falls under semi malnad(Aree Malenadu) with Arecanut and coconut plantations and semi-arid forest with bushy trees widely spread around Madikeri Pura, Mincheri, Bhemasamudra, holalkere kavalu, HD Pura&quot;, making it as trans malnad and link to dry land.

==Demographics==
 India census, Holalkere had a population of 14,571. Males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. Holalkere has an average literacy rate of 73%, which is lower than the national average of 77.7%: male literacy is 79%, and female literacy is 66%. In Holalkere, 11% of the population is under 6 years of age.

==Public attractions==

Holalkere: 32 km from Chitradurga and taluk headquarters, this was an important Jain settlement in the 10th century A.D. It is also famous for its nine-foot-high statue of the child-god Baal Antipathy, built by Gallops NAACO.

Malladihalli: 45 km from Chitradurga, and 6 km from Holalkere, towards Shimoga. This new village is well known for the Raghavendra Swamy Seva Ashram that runs an orphanage, Yoga education, and Ayurvedic Centre.

Ramagiri: This place is known for the Veerabhadraswamy temple and the Karisiddeshwara Mutt, built on a hillock.

Doddahotterangappa&#x27;s hill: The Ranganathaswamy temple is situated on top of a hill.

==See also==
*Hagalavadi.
*Bukkapatna
*Hosadurga
*Tumkur
*Gubbi.
*Huliyar

==References==
http://www.chitradurga.nic.in/tourspot.html 
http://www.chitradurga.nic.in/images/Hlk_gp_map.jpg</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1122103" start="0" end="9" title="Holalkere" label="Holalkere"/>
<link wikidata="Q817477" start="24" end="29" title="taluk" label="taluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q46415" start="56" end="67" title="Chitradurga" label="Chitradurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="75" end="80" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="91" end="100" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="160" end="167" title="Ganesha" label="Ganesha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="202" end="218" title="Guthyappa Nayaka" label="Guthyappa Nayaka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="413" end="433" title="Leela Visranti Dhama" label="Leela Visranti Dhama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="459" end="499" title="Sri Mallikarjuna Murugharajendra Swamiji" label="Sri Mallikarjuna Murugharajendra Swamiji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="590" end="611" title="Shivamurthy Sharanaru" label="Shivamurthy Sharanaru"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="755" end="770" title="Ontikallu Matha" label="Ontikallu Matha"/>
<link wikidata="Q771686" start="1317" end="1326" title="Basava" label="Basavanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055196" start="1355" end="1360" title="hobli" label="hobli"/>
<link wikidata="Q24912898" start="1394" end="1413" title="Bharmannaikanadurga" label="Bharmannaikanadurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122103" start="1423" end="1428" title="Talya" label="Talya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185" start="1640" end="1649" title="Karnataka" label="Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679511" start="1650" end="1659" title="Talikatte" label="Talikatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679511" start="2285" end="2294" title="Talikatte" label="Talikatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="2986" end="2992" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q10764667" start="3978" end="3988" title="Hagalavadi" label="Hagalavadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4986983" start="3991" end="4001" title="Bukkapatna" label="Bukkapatna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708080" start="4003" end="4012" title="Hosadurga" label="Hosadurga"/>
<link wikidata="Q911310" start="4014" end="4020" title="Tumkur" label="Tumkur"/>
<link wikidata="Q559413" start="4022" end="4027" title="Gubbi" label="Gubbi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5935710" start="4030" end="4037" title="Huliyar" label="Huliyar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019937" wikidata="Q1784618" url="?curid=1019937" title="Korolev (lunar crater)">
<text>Korolev is a large lunar impact crater of the walled plain or basin type. It is a basin of Nectarian age.

Korolev is named for Soviet rocket engineer Sergei Korolev. It lies on the far side of the Moon, and the northern part of its floor crosses the lunar equator. Notable nearby craters include Galois just to the southeast, Das to the south-southeast, Doppler attached to the southern rim, and Kibal&#x27;chich to the northeast. Rays of the crater Crookes (to the southwest) cover parts of the basin.

The outer rim of Korolev is heavily worn and eroded, with a multitude of small craters lying across the wide rim and the low inner wall. The interior floor is relatively flat compared to the surrounding terrain, but is pock-marked with many craters of varying sizes. The most notable of these interior craters are Korolev M in the southern part of the floor, and Korolev D next to the northeast rim.

Within the interior of Korolev is the remains of a second, inner ring. This is roughly half the diameter of the outer wall, and is the most intact in the eastern half. Here it forms a curving arc of ridges across the floor. At the midpoint of the formation, there is nothing resembling a central peak. However the craters Korolev B, Korolev T, and Korolev L lie within the diameter of the inner ring.

A small crater to the southwest of Korolev L was a designated control point, &quot;CP-1&quot;, during the Apollo 8 mission. Measurements taken from orbit on this point improved the accuracy of mapping of the lunar far side, although they were likely surpassed by subsequent Apollo missions.

Until formal naming in 1970 by the IAU, the crater was known as &quot;Basin XV&quot;.

Korolev lies to the south of the similar-sized Dirichlet-Jackson Basin.

==Views==

==Satellite craters==
By convention these features are identified on lunar maps by placing the letter on the side of the crater midpoint that is closest to Korolev.

== See also ==
* 1855 Korolev, minor planet
* Korolev (Martian crater)

== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1784618" start="0" end="7" title="Korolev (lunar crater)" label="Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348589" start="19" end="24" title="Lunar craters" label="lunar"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="25" end="38" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030016" start="91" end="100" title="Nectarian" label="Nectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170842" start="151" end="165" title="Sergei Korolev" label="Sergei Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q816838" start="182" end="190" title="Far side (Moon)" label="far side"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="198" end="202" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q391502" start="297" end="303" title="Galois (crater)" label="Galois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649767" start="327" end="330" title="Das (crater)" label="Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993915" start="355" end="362" title="Doppler (crater)" label="Doppler"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403943" start="397" end="413" title="Kibal&amp;#x27;chich (crater)" label="Kibal&amp;#x27;chich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478661" start="432" end="436" title="Ray system" label="Rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085651" start="451" end="458" title="Crookes (crater)" label="Crookes"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="1414" end="1422" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867" start="1635" end="1638" title="International Astronomical Union" label="IAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q24192867" start="1734" end="1757" title="Dirichlet-Jackson Basin" label="Dirichlet-Jackson Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q144789" start="1954" end="1966" title="1855 Korolev" label="1855 Korolev"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298524" start="1983" end="2007" title="Korolev (Martian crater)" label="Korolev (Martian crater)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019940" wikidata="Q416893" url="?curid=1019940" title="Assist">
<text>Assist or ASSIST may refer to:

==Sports==
*Assist (association football), a pass by a player or players that helps set up a goal
*Assist (Australian rules football), the last pass by a player that directly helps set up a goal
*Assist (baseball), any touching of the ball by a defensive player after it has been hit by the batter and prior to the recording of a putout
*Assist (basketball), a pass by a player that facilitates a basket by another
*Assist (ice hockey), a pass by a player or players that helps set up a goal
*Assist (ultimate), a pass by a player on which a goal is scored
*Assist (water polo), the last pass by a player that directly helps set up a goal

==Other uses==
* ASSIST (computing), Assembler System for Student Instruction and Systems Teaching
* Assist (Scientology), Scientology practices
* ASSIST (student exchange organization), American Secondary Schools for International Students and Teachers
* Seoul Business School at aSSIST University, a Korean business schools with several international campuses

==See also==
* 
* Assistance (disambiguation)
* Assistant (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q416893" start="0" end="6" title="Assist" label="Assist"/>
<link wikidata="Q416893" start="10" end="16" title="Assist" label="ASSIST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141428" start="44" end="73" title="Assist (association football)" label="Assist (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571664" start="131" end="165" title="Assist (Australian rules football)" label="Assist (Australian rules football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045147" start="228" end="245" title="Assist (baseball)" label="Assist (baseball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510817" start="370" end="389" title="Assist (basketball)" label="Assist (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q742407" start="448" end="467" title="Assist (ice hockey)" label="Assist (ice hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q244700" start="525" end="542" title="Assist (ultimate)" label="Assist (ultimate)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="590" end="609" title="Glossary of Water Polo#A" label="Assist (water polo)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654347" start="689" end="707" title="ASSIST (computing)" label="ASSIST (computing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155179" start="773" end="793" title="Assist (Scientology)" label="Assist (Scientology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q298000" start="819" end="857" title="ASSIST (student exchange organization)" label="ASSIST (student exchange organization)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16170884" start="928" end="970" title="Seoul Business School at aSSIST University" label="Seoul Business School at aSSIST University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1179505" start="1053" end="1080" title="Assistance (disambiguation)" label="Assistance (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q361991" start="1083" end="1109" title="Assistant (disambiguation)" label="Assistant (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019959" wikidata="Q2865836" url="?curid=1019959" title="Artivism">
<text>Artivism is a portmanteau word combining art and activism, and is sometimes also referred to as Social Artivism.

==History==


The term artivism in US English has its roots in a 1997 gathering of Chicano artists from East Los Angeles and the Zapatistas in Chiapas, Mexico. The words &quot;Artivist&quot; and &quot;Artivism&quot; were then popularized through a variety of events, actions and artworks via artists and musicians such as Quetzal, Ozomatli, and Mujeres de Maiz, among other East Los Angeles artists, and at spaces such as Self Help Graphics &amp; Art.

Artivism further developed as antiwar and anti-globalization protests emerged and proliferated. In many cases artivists attempt to push political agendas by the means of art, but a focus on raising awareness of social, environmental, and technological problems is also common.

Besides using traditional mediums like film and music to raise awareness or push for change, an artivist can also be involved in culture jamming, subvertising, street art, spoken word, protesting, and activism. Since 2013, Cromoactivismo, a Brazilian group of women artists, works with collectives, groups and schools in direct actions using color for social change. 

Artivist Eve Ensler stated:
&quot;... This passion has all the ingredients of activism, but is charged with the wild creations of art. Artivism—where edges are pushed, imagination is freed, and a new language emerges altogether.&quot; Bruce Lyons has written: &quot;... artivism ... promotes the essential understanding that ... [humans] ... can, through courageous creative expression, experience the unifying power of love when courage harnesses itself to the task of art + social responsibility.&quot;

By 2005, the term had made its way into academic writing when Slovenian theatre scholar Aldo Milohnic used the term to discuss &quot;autonomous (&#x27;alter-globalist&#x27;, social) movements in Slovenia that attracted wide attention. In carrying out their political activity they made use of protests and direct actions, thereby introducing the &#x27;aesthetic&#x27;, willingly or not&quot;. In 2008, Chela Sandoval and Guisela Latorre published a piece on Chicano/a artivism and M. K. Asante using the term in reference to Black artists.

There is a chapter on artivism in the book &quot;It&#x27;s Bigger Than Hip Hop&quot; by M. K. Asante. Asante writes of the artivist:
&quot;The artivist (artist + activist) uses their artistic talents to fight and struggle against injustice and oppression—by any medium necessary. The artivist merges commitment to freedom and justice with the pen, the lens, the brush, the voice, the body, and the imagination. The artivist knows that to make an observation is to have an obligation.&quot;

The impact of artivism vs. conventional activism was tested in a public scientific experiment in Copenhagen, Denmark, in 2018. The results, reported in the journal of &quot;Social Movement Studies&quot;, suggest that artivism may be more effective than conventional activism.

The Inaugural Global Artivism Conference took place in Tshwane, South Africa, from September 5-8, 2024.

==Artivists==
Notable artivists and self-identified artist-activists include:
*Above
*Ai Weiwei
*Aja Monet
*Alfredo Meschi
*Aloe Blacc
*Annie Sprinkle
*Anomie Belle
*Banksy
*Bleepsgr
*Bordalo II
*Daniel Arzola
*David Wojnarowicz
*Deborah De Robertis
*Deeyah Khan
*Donald &quot;C-Note&quot; Hooker
*Ernest Zacharevic
*Favianna Rodriguez
*Fredericka Foster
*Gianluca Costantini
*Guillermo Gómez-Peña
*JoFF Rae
*JR
*Jeanmarie Simpson
*Judy Baca
*Julio Salgado
*Kwame Akoto-Bamfo
*Las Cafeteras
*Lila Downs
*Lost Children of Babylon
*Lynnette Haozous
*Martha Gonzalez
*Marina DeBris
*Martin Aveling 
*Maya Jupiter
*Michel Platnic
*Milo Moiré
*Norm Magnusson
*Pavel 183
*Peter Joseph
*Quetzal (band)
*Qween Jean
*Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping
*Sabo_(street_artist)
*Saul Williams
*Self Help Graphics &amp; Art
*Tania Bruguera
*Tinkebell
*Valie Export
*Walela Nehanda
*Parimah Avani
*Weapons of Mass Creation
*Will St Leger
==Collectives and organizations==
Artivists often work in interdisciplinary collectives that are stand-alone&#x27; or operate as a creative part of the greater activist groups, such as Gran Fury of AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP). 
Other groups include:
*Artivist Film Festival
*Crass
*Da! collective
*The Fearless Collective
*Gran Fury 
*Guerrilla Girls
*Riky Rick Foundation for the Promotion of Artivism
*Sol Collective
*The Yes Men

==See also==
*The arts and politics
*Graffiti
*Hacktivism
*Invisible theater
*Satire
*Social center
*Timeline of Extinction Rebellion actions
*Whirl-Mart
* Brooklyn Immersionists

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2865836" start="0" end="8" title="Artivism" label="Artivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q208674" start="14" end="30" title="portmanteau" label="portmanteau word"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976" start="149" end="159" title="US English" label="US English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307911" start="197" end="204" title="Chicano" label="Chicano"/>
<link wikidata="Q690991" start="218" end="234" title="East Los Angeles, California" label="East Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865323" start="243" end="253" title="Liberation Army of the South" label="Zapatistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="257" end="264" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271571" start="436" end="443" title="Quetzal (band)" label="Quetzal"/>
<link wikidata="Q678338" start="445" end="453" title="Ozomatli" label="Ozomatli"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243036" start="536" end="564" title="Self Help Graphics &amp;amp; Art" label="Self Help Graphics &amp;amp; Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q794691" start="597" end="604" title="antiwar" label="antiwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q191442" start="609" end="627" title="anti-globalization" label="anti-globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855609" start="786" end="799" title="Environmentalism" label="environmental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143564" start="974" end="989" title="culture jamming" label="culture jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q643190" start="991" end="1003" title="subvertising" label="subvertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q17516" start="1005" end="1015" title="street art" label="street art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="1017" end="1028" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q273120" start="1030" end="1040" title="protesting" label="protesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q203764" start="1046" end="1054" title="activism" label="activism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086841" start="1223" end="1233" title="Eve Ensler" label="Eve Ensler"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387068" start="2122" end="2136" title="Chela Sandoval" label="Chela Sandoval"/>
<link wikidata="Q6712734" start="2201" end="2213" title="M. K. Asante" label="M. K. Asante"/>
<link wikidata="Q6089966" start="2310" end="2339" title="It&amp;#x27;s Bigger Than Hip Hop" label="It&amp;#x27;s Bigger Than Hip Hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="2849" end="2859" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821787" start="3213" end="3218" title="Above (artist)" label="Above"/>
<link wikidata="Q160115" start="3220" end="3229" title="Ai Weiwei" label="Ai Weiwei"/>
<link wikidata="Q16157106" start="3231" end="3240" title="Aja Monet" label="Aja Monet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3242" end="3256" title="Alfredo Meschi" label="Alfredo Meschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49319" start="3258" end="3268" title="Aloe Blacc" label="Aloe Blacc"/>
<link wikidata="Q433576" start="3270" end="3284" title="Annie Sprinkle" label="Annie Sprinkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563726" start="3286" end="3298" title="Anomie Belle" label="Anomie Belle"/>
<link wikidata="Q133600" start="3300" end="3306" title="Banksy" label="Banksy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4925943" start="3308" end="3316" title="Bleepsgr" label="Bleepsgr"/>
<link wikidata="Q31283131" start="3318" end="3328" title="Bordalo II" label="Bordalo II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16298657" start="3330" end="3343" title="Daniel Arzola" label="Daniel Arzola"/>
<link wikidata="Q952233" start="3345" end="3362" title="David Wojnarowicz" label="David Wojnarowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q17625628" start="3364" end="3383" title="Deborah De Robertis" label="Deborah De Robertis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741760" start="3385" end="3396" title="Deeyah Khan" label="Deeyah Khan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3398" end="3430" title="Donald &amp;quot;C-Note&amp;quot; Hooker" label="Donald &amp;quot;C-Note&amp;quot; Hooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q20640738" start="3432" end="3449" title="Ernest Zacharevic" label="Ernest Zacharevic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438583" start="3451" end="3469" title="Favianna Rodriguez" label="Favianna Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q41621075" start="3471" end="3488" title="Fredericka Foster" label="Fredericka Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q22121085" start="3490" end="3509" title="Gianluca Costantini" label="Gianluca Costantini"/>
<link wikidata="Q5616163" start="3511" end="3531" title="Guillermo Gómez-Peña" label="Guillermo Gómez-Peña"/>
<link wikidata="Q6204051" start="3533" end="3541" title="JoFF Rae" label="JoFF Rae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312565" start="3543" end="3545" title="JR (artist)" label="JR"/>
<link wikidata="Q13560278" start="3547" end="3564" title="Jeanmarie Simpson" label="Jeanmarie Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6304327" start="3566" end="3575" title="Judy Baca" label="Judy Baca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309525" start="3577" end="3590" title="Julio Salgado" label="Julio Salgado"/>
<link wikidata="Q52203720" start="3592" end="3609" title="Kwame Akoto-Bamfo" label="Kwame Akoto-Bamfo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6492092" start="3611" end="3624" title="Las Cafeteras" label="Las Cafeteras"/>
<link wikidata="Q23880" start="3626" end="3636" title="Lila Downs" label="Lila Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748591" start="3638" end="3662" title="Lost Children of Babylon" label="Lost Children of Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q110962757" start="3664" end="3680" title="Lynnette Haozous" label="Lynnette Haozous"/>
<link wikidata="Q27886644" start="3682" end="3697" title="Martha Gonzalez (musician)" label="Martha Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6763807" start="3699" end="3712" title="Marina DeBris" label="Marina DeBris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6774912" start="3714" end="3728" title="Martin Aveling" label="Martin Aveling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796703" start="3731" end="3743" title="Maya Jupiter" label="Maya Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q55293773" start="3745" end="3759" title="Michel Platnic" label="Michel Platnic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16664555" start="3761" end="3771" title="Milo Moiré" label="Milo Moiré"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051532" start="3773" end="3787" title="Norm Magnusson" label="Norm Magnusson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7155556" start="3789" end="3798" title="Pavel 183" label="Pavel 183"/>
<link wikidata="Q513726" start="3800" end="3812" title="Peter Joseph" label="Peter Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271571" start="3814" end="3828" title="Quetzal (band)" label="Quetzal (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q119459098" start="3830" end="3840" title="Qween Jean" label="Qween Jean"/>
<link wikidata="Q464486" start="3842" end="3888" title="Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping" label="Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping"/>
<link wikidata="Q20800186" start="3890" end="3910" title="Sabo_(street_artist)" label="Sabo_(street_artist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q533369" start="3912" end="3925" title="Saul Williams" label="Saul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243036" start="3927" end="3955" title="Self Help Graphics &amp;amp; Art" label="Self Help Graphics &amp;amp; Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q547372" start="3957" end="3971" title="Tania Bruguera" label="Tania Bruguera"/>
<link wikidata="Q277104" start="3973" end="3982" title="Tinkebell" label="Tinkebell"/>
<link wikidata="Q459681" start="3984" end="3996" title="Valie Export" label="Valie Export"/>
<link wikidata="Q116756792" start="3998" end="4012" title="Walela Nehanda" label="Walela Nehanda"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4014" end="4027" title="Parimah Avani" label="Parimah Avani"/>
<link wikidata="Q117806083" start="4029" end="4053" title="Weapons of Mass Creation" label="Weapons of Mass Creation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003115" start="4055" end="4068" title="Will St Leger" label="Will St Leger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594001" start="4254" end="4263" title="Gran Fury" label="Gran Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q343047" start="4267" end="4307" title="ACT UP" label="AIDS Coalition to Unleash Power (ACT UP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8205823" start="4333" end="4355" title="Artivist Film Festival" label="Artivist Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q842336" start="4357" end="4362" title="Crass" label="Crass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207134" start="4364" end="4378" title="Da! collective" label="Da! collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q24455670" start="4380" end="4403" title="The Fearless Collective" label="The Fearless Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594001" start="4405" end="4414" title="Gran Fury" label="Gran Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q515658" start="4417" end="4432" title="Guerrilla Girls" label="Guerrilla Girls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4434" end="4484" title="Riky Rick Foundation for the Promotion of Artivism" label="Riky Rick Foundation for the Promotion of Artivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q27987128" start="4486" end="4500" title="Sol Collective" label="Sol Collective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547127" start="4502" end="4513" title="The Yes Men" label="The Yes Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776936" start="4529" end="4550" title="The arts and politics" label="The arts and politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17514" start="4552" end="4560" title="Graffiti" label="Graffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q22685" start="4562" end="4572" title="Hacktivism" label="Hacktivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241670" start="4574" end="4591" title="Invisible theater" label="Invisible theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="4593" end="4599" title="Satire" label="Satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q77115" start="4601" end="4614" title="Social center" label="Social center"/>
<link wikidata="Q85852103" start="4616" end="4656" title="Timeline of Extinction Rebellion actions" label="Timeline of Extinction Rebellion actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7993783" start="4658" end="4668" title="Whirl-Mart" label="Whirl-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q123883324" start="4671" end="4693" title="Brooklyn Immersionists" label="Brooklyn Immersionists"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019963" wikidata="Q7147771" url="?curid=1019963" title="Patrick V, Earl of March">
<text>Patrick de Dunbar, 9th Earl of March, (c. 1285–1369) was a prominent Scottish magnate during the reigns of Robert the Bruce and David II.

==Early years==
The earldom, located in East Lothian, and known interchangeably by the names Dunbar and March (so-called Northumbrian or Scottish March), was one of the successor fiefs of Northumbria, an Anglo-Saxon Kingdom and later Earldom. The Dunbar family descended from one branch of ancient Earls of Northumbria, specifically from a branch which also had Scottish royal blood.

He is said to have been aged 24 in 1309 at the death of his father, Patrick, 8th Earl of March, who had been one of the Competitors for the Crown of Scotland in 1291. The 8th Earl&#x27;s wife, Marjory, daughter of Alexander Comyn, Earl of Buchan, was also descended from King Donald III.

==Bannockburn to Durham==

After the Battle of Bannockburn, Patrick de Dunbar gave sanctuary and quarter to the English King Edward II at the fortress of Dunbar Castle, on the east coast of Scotland between Edinburgh and Berwick-upon-Tweed, and managed to effect the king&#x27;s escape by means of a fishing boat whereby that monarch was transported back to England. The earl afterwards made his peace with his cousin Robert the Bruce, and was present at the parliament held at Ayr on 26 April 1315, when the succession to the Crown of Scotland was settled.

In 1318 he assisted in retaking Berwick-upon-Tweed from the English, at which time he is noted as Sheriff of Lothian. In 1320 he was one of those nobles who signed the Declaration of Arbroath sent to Pope John XXII asserting the independence of Scotland.

Laing relates a charter of a Precept originally written in Norman-French by Patrick de Dunbar, Earl of March, to Sir Robert Lauder of Quarrelwood, for heritable sasine of the reversion of the lands of Whitelaw within the Earldom of Dunbar, plus 10 livres yearly from the mill of Dunbar, and the farms and issues of the granter&#x27;s said town (&quot;ville&quot;) of Dunbar, according to the terms of charters to the grantee. Dated at Berwick-upon-Tweed, 20 October 1324.

Sometime after 1331 the Bishop of Durham complained to the Regency in Scotland that the village of Upsettlington, on the Scottish side of the River Tweed west of Norham, belonged to the See of Durham and not the Earl of Dunbar, who had seized it. The King of England now became involved also and it appears the lands were restored to the Bishop.

In 1332 the Earl of Dunbar was appointed by the assembly of the estates (Parliament) at Perth, joint Guardian of the Crown, upon the death of the Regent, Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray. He opposed Edward Balliol in several battles and skirmishes following the Battle of Dupplin Moor. In January 1333 he was appointed Governor of Berwick Castle but was forced to surrender it following the Battle of Halidon Hill in July 1333. The Earl of Dunbar and several others of the nobility paid fealty to King Edward. The Earl attended Edward Balliol at the parliament held at Edinburgh in February 1334 when they ceded to England Berwick, Dunbar, Roxburgh, and Edinburgh, as well as all the southern counties of Scotland. Earl Patrick had had his castle levelled to the ground, but Edward III of England now compelled him to rebuild the fortress at his own expense and garrisoned it with English troops. Dunbar castle was not restored to the Earl until 1338.

In 1335 when King Edward III and Baliol had made another attack upon the Scots, the Earl cut off a body of archers on their return southward, and afterwards assisted John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray in defeating the Count of Namur at the Battle of Boroughmuir close to Edinburgh.

In 1339 the Earl of Dunbar assisted the High Steward of Scotland, in the reduction of Perth, where he led the second division of the army. In 1340 he and the Earl of Sutherland were routed by Sir Thomas Grey and Sir Robert Manners, assisted by John Copeland and the English garrison of Roxburgh Castle, during border skirmishes. Patrick, Earl of Dunbar, had a Safe-Conduct dated 24 March 1342, from Westminster, in order to travel to England.

Patrick, Earl of Dunbar, commanded the right of the Scottish army in the Battle of Neville&#x27;s Cross, near Durham. From this disaster the Earl escaped, with considerable losses, which included his wife&#x27;s brother, John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray. However, other accounts including that of The Chronicle of Lanercost and Bower&#x27;s Scotichronicon relate that Dunbar retreated without engaging the English and with no losses. It is unlikely that Dunbar remained to fight after the first arrows reached them.

In 1355 with William, Lord of Douglas and Sir William Ramsay of Dalhousie, the Earl of Dunbar again invaded Northumberland, and subsequently recovered Berwick-upon-Tweed, although not the castle. In 1357 he was one of the Scottish ambassadors who met at Berwick to discuss the liberation of King David, who had been taken prisoner at Neville&#x27;s Cross. He was subsequently one of the hostages for David until the ransom was paid, although it would appear from Safe-Conducts that he was out and about thereafter. Following this his town of Dunbar was erected into a Royal Burgh.

In 1366 he made a pilgrimage to the shrine of St. Thomas Becket at Canterbury. In May 1367 he confirmed to the monks of Coldingham Priory by charter to the Prior and Convent of Durham, the church and manor of Edrom, and Nisbet, with the agreement of his wife.

In June 1368 the King was advised by parliament at Scone to consult with the Earls of Dunbar and Douglas on the security of the Eastern marches. He was not present at the Coronation of King Robert II in 1371 so it is assumed that he died before then. Brown gives a year of death as 1368. If that is so it would probably be 1368/9.

==Marriage==
Patrick Dunbar is not as well remembered as his second wife Agnes Randolph, also known as Black Agnes of Dunbar who died just a few months before him. From her brothers she obtained by inheritance the Isle of Man, the Lordship of Annandale (which she brought to her marriage), and the feudal baronies of Morton and Tibbers in Nithsdale, Mordington (where she is buried), Longformacus, and Duns, in Berwickshire; Mochrum in Galloway, Cumnock in Ayrshire, and Blantyre in Clydesdale. 

==Notes==
==References==
* Bain, Joseph, &quot;Calendar of Documents relating to Scotland&quot;, 1357–1509, Edinburgh, 1888, vol.iv, pps: xx – xxiv (&quot;Introduction&quot;) for further mention of her and relationships in the Dunbar family (with other references in the main sections of the volume).
* Burke, Sir Bernard, Ulster King of Arms, &quot;Burke&#x27;s Dormant, Abeyant, Forfeited, and Extinct Peerages&quot;, London, 1883, p. 606.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7147771" start="0" end="36" title="Patrick V, Earl of March" label="Patrick de Dunbar, 9th Earl of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="107" end="123" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="128" end="136" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II"/>
<link wikidata="Q207257" start="179" end="191" title="East Lothian" label="East Lothian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261195" start="276" end="290" title="Scottish March" label="Scottish March"/>
<link wikidata="Q107299" start="327" end="338" title="Northumbria" label="Northumbria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7146786" start="592" end="618" title="Patrick IV, Earl of March" label="Patrick, 8th Earl of March"/>
<link wikidata="Q613650" start="644" end="681" title="Competitors for the Crown of Scotland" label="Competitors for the Crown of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577038" start="738" end="769" title="Alexander Comyn, Earl of Buchan" label="Alexander Comyn, Earl of Buchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q356602" start="800" end="810" title="Donald III of Scotland" label="Donald III"/>
<link wikidata="Q222520" start="850" end="871" title="Battle of Bannockburn" label="Battle of Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236" start="938" end="947" title="Edward II of England" label="Edward II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2969165" start="967" end="980" title="Dunbar Castle" label="Dunbar Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="1020" end="1029" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="1034" end="1052" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q187312" start="1231" end="1247" title="Robert the Bruce" label="Robert the Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q654216" start="1291" end="1294" title="Ayr" label="Ayr"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="1404" end="1422" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q598496" start="1540" end="1563" title="Declaration of Arbroath" label="Declaration of Arbroath"/>
<link wikidata="Q165568" start="1572" end="1586" title="Pope John XXII" label="Pope John XXII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346733" start="1741" end="1773" title="Sir Robert Lauder of Quarrelwood" label="Sir Robert Lauder of Quarrelwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="1907" end="1913" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080277" start="2125" end="2141" title="Bishop of Durham" label="Bishop of Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2160" end="2167" title="Regent" label="Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6470772" start="2200" end="2213" title="Ladykirk, Scottish Borders" label="Upsettlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q503262" start="2243" end="2254" title="River Tweed" label="River Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q993658" start="2263" end="2269" title="Norham" label="Norham"/>
<link wikidata="Q203000" start="2536" end="2541" title="Perth, Scotland" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="2594" end="2600" title="Regent" label="Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685918" start="2602" end="2636" title="Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray" label="Thomas Randolph, 1st Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q471796" start="2649" end="2663" title="Edward Balliol" label="Edward Balliol"/>
<link wikidata="Q281648" start="2712" end="2734" title="Battle of Dupplin Moor" label="Battle of Dupplin Moor"/>
<link wikidata="Q678714" start="2781" end="2795" title="Berwick Castle" label="Berwick Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887057" start="2841" end="2863" title="Battle of Halidon Hill" label="Battle of Halidon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3019" end="3028" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="3225" end="3246" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q164925" start="3569" end="3601" title="John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray" label="John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934858" start="3619" end="3633" title="Guy II, Marquis of Namur" label="Count of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870526" start="3641" end="3662" title="Battle of Boroughmuir" label="Battle of Boroughmuir"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="3724" end="3748" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="High Steward of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q127698630" start="3757" end="3775" title="Siege of Perth (1339)" label="reduction of Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991046" start="3842" end="3860" title="Earl of Sutherland" label="Earl of Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q17846423" start="3970" end="3985" title="Roxburgh Castle" label="Roxburgh Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q189960" start="4083" end="4094" title="Westminster" label="Westminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204399" start="4201" end="4231" title="Battle of Neville&amp;#x27;s Cross" label="Battle of Neville&amp;#x27;s Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q179815" start="4238" end="4244" title="Durham, England" label="Durham"/>
<link wikidata="Q164925" start="4349" end="4381" title="John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray" label="John Randolph, 3rd Earl of Moray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033364" start="4658" end="4682" title="William Douglas, 1st Earl of Douglas" label="William, Lord of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q504678" start="4796" end="4814" title="Berwick-upon-Tweed" label="Berwick-upon-Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002133" start="5187" end="5193" title="Dunbar" label="Dunbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928458" start="5213" end="5224" title="Royal Burgh" label="Royal Burgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="5277" end="5290" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="5294" end="5304" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142535" start="5347" end="5364" title="Coldingham Priory" label="Coldingham Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5340265" start="5436" end="5441" title="Edrom" label="Edrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q852883" start="5539" end="5544" title="Scone, Scotland" label="Scone"/>
<link wikidata="Q312592" start="5678" end="5687" title="Robert II of Scotland" label="Robert II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4693105" start="5893" end="5907" title="Agnes Randolph" label="Agnes Randolph"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="6034" end="6045" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565766" start="6051" end="6072" title="Lordship of Annandale" label="Lordship of Annandale"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059221" start="6170" end="6180" title="Mordington" label="Mordington"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778589" start="6204" end="6216" title="Longformacus" label="Longformacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q425611" start="6222" end="6226" title="Duns, Scottish Borders" label="Duns"/>
<link wikidata="Q786649" start="6231" end="6243" title="Berwickshire" label="Berwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="6256" end="6264" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010019" start="6266" end="6273" title="Cumnock" label="Cumnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q793283" start="6277" end="6285" title="Ayrshire" label="Ayrshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q881708" start="6291" end="6299" title="Blantyre, South Lanarkshire" label="Blantyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q953355" start="6640" end="6659" title="Ulster King of Arms" label="Ulster King of Arms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019966" wikidata="Q3403407" url="?curid=1019966" title="Sully, Vale of Glamorgan">
<text>Sully () is a village in the community of Sully and Lavernock, in the Vale of Glamorgan, Wales, lying on the northern coast of the Bristol Channel, midway between the towns of Penarth and Barry and southwest of the Welsh capital city of Cardiff.

==Origins of the name==
The origins of the name &quot;Sully&quot; / &quot;Sili&quot; are unclear, but the most likely explanation is that it is a Norman name, taken from the de Sully family who were in possession of the manor in the twelfth century. If so, it may be that neither the Welsh or English forms are based on the other, but that both are derived from the Norman name. There is strong documentary evidence for the Welsh form over several centuries, and in the local dialect of Welsh that was spoken in the area into the twentieth century, the name was pronounced or , which corresponds to the modern Welsh form &quot;Sili&quot;. If the name is Norman, it is likely that the Welsh form is closer to the original pronunciation than its English equivalent.

Bilingual road signs at either end of the village announce &quot;Sully&quot; and &quot;Sili&quot;. Although both forms could be considered to have unfavourable connotations, only the Welsh name has been controversial, as some residents have expressed the view that it belittles the village.

It has been suggested that &quot;Abersili&quot; would be a more appropriate Welsh name, and an unofficial referendum has shown significant support for that view amongst residents. But it is unclear whether the name &quot;Abersili&quot; has ever been in common use; the earliest known example is by Iolo Morganwg, a notoriously untrustworthy source. Furthermore, &quot;Abersili&quot; means &#x27;the mouth of the river Sili&#x27;, but Sully Brook (assuming that that is the watercourse in question) does not reach the sea at Sully, but joins the Cadoxton River farther west near what is now Barry Docks. As such, the name has been considered inappropriate for Sully itself.

The Welsh Language Board has stated that &quot;Sili&quot; is found in the standard reference works and that it is &#x27;well-established in Welsh writing and is used widely both locally and nationally&#x27;.

==History==
===Medieval Sully===

The village could be named as an abbreviation of &quot;south lea&quot; meaning &quot;southern pasture&quot; but it is more commonly understood to be named after the noble Norman family of Baron Reginald de Sully, one of the &#x27;Twelve Knights of Glamorgan&#x27; who was awarded the Manor around 1093 by the conqueror of Glamorgan Sir Robert Fitzhamon, probably under charter by William II of England. In 1591 Sir Edward Mansel of Margam wrote his historical document recording &#x27;The winning of Glamorgan&#x27; and recorded:

De Sully also had extensive estates in Devon but he is recorded as having built a small fortified castle in Sully, the remains of which have mostly vanished, except for a short length of wall, located to the east of the Norman parish church in the village. The site of a 13th-century moated manor house can still be observed on Sully Moors.

The castle at Sully was the smallest in Glamorgan by a very long way. It covered a site of only about half an acre and stood in a location that was, until only recently, called Castle Wood. Occupation of the castle lasted less than three hundred years till around the mid 14th century, probably as a result of the extinction of the de Sully family line. The present church dates from around the same time as the castle and is dedicated to St. John the Baptist. The resident Sully clergyman has always been referred to as the Rector which indicates the tithes that produced his annual income were never appropriated by a monastery and he was therefore probably supported by the Lord of the Manor directly, although appointed by the Bishop.

There is a mostly complete late medieval lime kiln on Ashby Road, Sully. Composed of stone and brick it is 40 feet long and 18 feet high by 13 feet wide. Buttressed with three brick on edge archways and draught holes on the south elevation. Five iron pegs are inserted into the face of the kiln. &quot;Briarside and Middleton Cottage&quot; on Cog Road is a yeoman&#x27;s cottage built in the mid 16th century with later 18th century additions. The cottage contains a Tudor-style archway and an original circular stone staircase. The remains of the village mill can be found at Hayes Farm on Hayes Road.

===Changes in the manor===
The Manor of Sully reverted to Crown ownership and is recorded as being sold in its entirety to Sir Thomas Stradling in 1538. It remained in the Stradling family for exactly two hundred years after which it was administered first by Christopher Mansel and later by Bussy Mansel until his death in 1780.

There followed a number of lawsuits with several landowners claiming rights to the manor until a private act of Parliament granted the manors of both St. Donats and Sully to Sir John de la Fountaine Tyrwhit. It stayed in his family until 1811 although the family had changed their name to Drake by then. When the last of the Drake family died without heirs the estate was sold by public auction to a Mr Evan Thomas who resided in Old Sully House until he died in 1832. Thomas built Cog Farm between 1816 and 1817. The rickstands at Cog Farm are probably contemporary. The eight circular rickstands are approximately 3 metres high, stone built and lipped at the top. In plan they form a right angle at the edge of the former rickyard. The rickstands kept unthreshed corn above the moist ground and the lips provided protection against rodents.
There was a six-year gap while ownership was disputed until in 1838 the estate was finally taken by Sir Josiah John Guest of Dowlais and Merthyr Tydfil, whose eldest son would later become the first Lord Wimborne of Ashby. In 1889 Lord Wimborne purchased the rights to use the Sully foreshore for the manor estate purposes.

By the early 20th century Lord Wimborne&#x27;s estate began to sell off various lands within the parish, and during 1914 the last of the Sully estate interests were sold at public auction to a number of individual private landowners, the main purchaser being Lieutenant-Commander Charles E. Evans, RNVR, who in 1917 split his overall Sully holding into a number of rented properties. These various properties then formed part of Evans&#x27; estate, which in 1956 was established as a private limited letting company (Evans&#x27; Estate (1956) Ltd), based in Newton Abbott, Devon.

===Village growth===
In the 19th century Sully was almost entirely agricultural in nature and the population fluctuated between only 150 to 200 individuals. By 1920 this had still only increased to 550 despite the explosive growths of nearby Penarth and Barry. However, in just the past forty years Sully has grown steadily along the various commercial plastics factory developments and with the wider spread of private car ownership. Sully is now mainly a middle income dormitory suburb of Cardiff with a still expanding population of just over 5,000.

From 1890 until the end of the 1960s Sully was connected eastwards to Penarth and Cardiff and westwards to Barry and the South Wales Valleys by an extension of the Taff Vale Railway line. The coastal spur fell victim to the sweeping Beeching Axe in 1968. Sully station, on Cog Road opposite the Sully Inn and Swanbridge Halt were closed. The redundant rail track bed and station buildings have mostly been sold into private ownership and built on, with any unsold stretches being overgrown and impassable as far as the Fort Road bridge at Lavernock. Between Lavernock and Penarth the track bed is a rural greenway and cycle track.

In the 1960s the local plastics factory and principal employers in the immediate area, a subsidiary of Distillers Company, built a new sports and social club at the east end of the village, opposite Swanbridge Halt railway station. In 1966 members of the club formed a rugby team initially known as &#x27;Barry Plastics RFC&#x27; but now renamed as &#x27;Sully View RFC&#x27;. Today Sully Sports &amp; Social Club fields three teams in the Cardiff and District Rugby Union and the sides are regular competitors in the Welsh Brewers Cup, the Mallett Cup and the Ninian Stuart Cup. Touring venues have included Holland, Spain, Germany and Belgium, as well as many within the U.K.

===SS &quot;Pilton&quot;===
 was a ship that ran aground on Sully Beach in 1924. Owned by William J. Tatem of Cardiff, &quot;Pilton&quot; ran aground during gale-force winds in December 1924. She was aground for three months, and provided a steady source of income for Sully caterers from the large number visitors arriving by train to view the spectacle.

==Governance==
===Community council===
Sully is represented by nine community councillors of Sully and Lavernock Community Council, elected from the community wards of Lavernock (2) and Sully (7).

===County council===
Sully is also a county ward which has representatives on the Vale of Glamorgan County Council. The ward elected two Independent councillors to sit on the County Council in the May 2017 election.




Cllr Mahoney had been elected for UKIP at the previous elections in 2012. He &#x27;re-designated&#x27; himself as an Independent in February 2016 over disagreements with UKIP&#x27;s approach to the Welsh Government.

Prior to the May 2004 Vale of Glamorgan Council elections the ward elected only one councillor to the county council, increasing to two following &quot;The County Borough of The Vale of Glamorgan (Electoral Changes) Order 2002&quot;.

===National government===
The ward falls within the Cardiff South and Penarth constituency for the Westminster Parliament, and within the Cardiff South and Penarth constituency in the National Assembly for Wales.

==Landmarks==

The St John Baptist Church, known as Sully Church, is a Grade II listed building. The hamlet of Swanbridge includes a caravan park and holiday camp and &quot;The Captain&#x27;s Wife&quot; public house, which opened in 1977 after a conversion of several quayside cottages. There is foot access at low tide from the pub car park to Sully Island but tides are high and fast - and therefore dangerous. There is an access time of only three hours each side of low tides and extreme care is advised. The Atlantic Trading Estate is between Sully and Barry, and The Bendricks is a major site of interest for paleontologists due to its extensive fossils. Sully Island is situated off the coast.

Sully School moved to its present site in 1936. It is a primary school with a twenty-six place nursery unit. There are over 400 pupils and seventeen teachers. There are no secondary schools in the village. Most children attend Stanwell School in nearby Penarth. Sully School is a main feeder school for Stanwell School and other schools are selected by parental choice. Free school bus services are provided.

Sully Hospital is described in the Glamorgan section of Nikolaus Pevsner’s ‘The Buildings of Wales’ as “An outstanding example of inter-war architecture, which has survived almost unaltered” and is considered to be the finest representation of Modernist sanatoriums in Britain and one of the last great Modernist landmarks remaining in the whole of Wales.

==Transport==
The main road going through Sully is South Road. It is one of three roads which form part of the B4267, running from near Cog Road up to Swanbridge Road on the border with Lavernock. The other two parts of the B4267 are Sully Moors Road, leading up to roundabout just into the border of Barry and Lavernock Road, leading up to Penarth near Stanwell School.

Sully railway station was opened by the Taff Valley Railway in 1865. It ran on the Penarth line through: Alberta Halt (by the Archer Road bridge), Lower Penarth (Cosmeston) Halt, Lavernock Halt, Swanbridge Halt and Sully. However, rail services from Penarth ceased to operate in 1968 as a result of the Beeching Axe, which affected many branch lines all over the country. As a result, Sully no longer has a railway service. At present, the nearest station is Cadoxton, on the Barry branch of the Vale of Glamorgan Line operated by Transport for Wales, approximately 2.1 miles away, roughly about a forty-minute walk.

Bus services are provided by Cardiff Bus, who operate route 94 between Cardiff and Barry via Penarth half-hourly on weekdays and hourly on evenings and Sundays. Journey times to Barry are approximately twenty minutes, journey times into Penarth are approximately fifteen minutes and journey times into Cardiff are just over half an hour. A second service, route 88, is run by Easyway runs between Lower Penarth and Barry with journey times to both places being approximately 15 minutes.

==In popular culture==
Sully is featured in the third series of the BBC One/BBC Three hit sitcom Gavin &amp; Stacey, when the character of Ness, played by Ruth Jones, moves into a caravan in the village with fiancé Dave Coaches.

In the Big Finish &quot;Torchwood&quot; audio episode &quot;Flight 405&quot;, Yvonne Hartman says that a crashing plane will cause a dent in the house prices of Sully, as well as in Sully itself.

==Notable people==
* Hana Lili, pop singer
* Thomas Frederick Worrall, Watercolour artist

==References==
==External links==

* The Old School Community Hall
* Sully and Lavernock Residents&#x27; Association
* Swanbridge photos from the 1950s
* Sully Village photos from the 1950s
* Sully Sports &amp; Social Club
* Sully - A history
*Photos of Sully and surrounding area on geograph.org.uk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3403407" start="0" end="5" title="Sully, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Sully"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630741" start="29" end="38" title="Community (Wales)" label="community"/>
<link wikidata="Q24664276" start="42" end="61" title="Sully and Lavernock" label="Sully and Lavernock"/>
<link wikidata="Q844784" start="70" end="87" title="Vale of Glamorgan" label="Vale of Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188203" start="131" end="146" title="Bristol Channel" label="Bristol Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q427792" start="176" end="183" title="Penarth" label="Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="188" end="193" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="215" end="220" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="221" end="233" title="capital city" label="capital city"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="237" end="244" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q547716" start="1602" end="1615" title="Iolo Morganwg" label="Iolo Morganwg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016595" start="1849" end="1863" title="Cadoxton River" label="Cadoxton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985748" start="1894" end="1905" title="Barry Docks" label="Barry Docks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400384" start="1982" end="2002" title="Welsh Language Board" label="Welsh Language Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="2392" end="2398" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857616" start="2451" end="2478" title="Twelve Knights of Glamorgan" label="Twelve Knights of Glamorgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="2505" end="2510" title="Manorialism" label="Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255756" start="2557" end="2573" title="Robert Fitzhamon" label="Robert Fitzhamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q102005" start="2601" end="2622" title="William II of England" label="William II of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q317557" start="2979" end="2992" title="parish church" label="parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q88480" start="3036" end="3040" title="moat" label="moat"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="3043" end="3054" title="manor house" label="manor house"/>
<link wikidata="Q59772" start="3875" end="3884" title="lime kiln" label="lime kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q862823" start="4191" end="4197" title="yeoman" label="yeoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620911" start="4610" end="4626" title="Stradling Baronets" label="Stradling family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862603" start="4698" end="4716" title="Baron Mansel" label="Christopher Mansel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002048" start="4730" end="4742" title="Bussy Mansel, 4th Baron Mansel" label="Bussy Mansel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7861732" start="4990" end="5000" title="Tyrwhitt Baronets" label="his family"/>
<link wikidata="Q25041901" start="5149" end="5163" title="public auction" label="public auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242277" start="5716" end="5733" title="Josiah John Guest" label="Josiah John Guest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302695" start="5737" end="5744" title="Dowlais" label="Dowlais"/>
<link wikidata="Q752762" start="5749" end="5763" title="Merthyr Tydfil" label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935867" start="5811" end="5833" title="Viscount Wimborne" label="Lord Wimborne of Ashby"/>
<link wikidata="Q25041901" start="6110" end="6124" title="public auction" label="public auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="6235" end="6239" title="RNVR" label="RNVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="6989" end="7005" title="dormitory suburb" label="dormitory suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q427792" start="7142" end="7149" title="Penarth" label="Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="7154" end="7161" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="7179" end="7184" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400474" start="7193" end="7212" title="South Wales Valleys" label="South Wales Valleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674943" start="7236" end="7253" title="Taff Vale Railway" label="Taff Vale Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="7305" end="7317" title="Beeching Axe" label="Beeching Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282955" start="7807" end="7825" title="Distillers Company" label="Distillers Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639297" start="8418" end="8439" title="List of shipwrecks in the Bristol Channel" label="ship that ran aground"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019187" start="8473" end="8489" title="William Tatem, 1st Baron Glanely" label="William J. Tatem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770484" start="8908" end="8917" title="Lavernock" label="Lavernock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="8982" end="8986" title="electoral ward" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="9075" end="9086" title="Independent politician" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48797877" start="9135" end="9152" title="2017 Vale of Glamorgan Council election" label="May 2017 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112646" start="9356" end="9372" title="Welsh Government" label="Welsh Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238926" start="9662" end="9687" title="Cardiff South and Penarth (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cardiff South and Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038472" start="9748" end="9773" title="Cardiff South and Penarth (Assembly constituency)" label="Cardiff South and Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636467" start="9935" end="9945" title="Swanbridge" label="Swanbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q17006838" start="9974" end="9986" title="holiday camp" label="holiday camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721277" start="9997" end="10020" title="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="The Captain&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="10027" end="10039" title="pub" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985643" start="10337" end="10360" title="Atlantic Trading Estate" label="Atlantic Trading Estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716509" start="10393" end="10406" title="The Bendricks" label="The Bendricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636467" start="10485" end="10497" title="Sully Island" label="Sully Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600311" start="10753" end="10768" title="Stanwell School" label="Stanwell School"/>
<link wikidata="Q427792" start="10779" end="10786" title="Penarth" label="Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q17744462" start="10936" end="10950" title="Sully Hospital" label="Sully Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="10992" end="11008" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="11180" end="11189" title="Modernist" label="Modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="11190" end="11200" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770484" start="11479" end="11488" title="Lavernock" label="Lavernock"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="11594" end="11599" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q427792" start="11634" end="11641" title="Penarth" label="Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q29379330" start="11665" end="11686" title="Sully railway station" label="Sully railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q814018" start="11968" end="11980" title="Beeching Axe" label="Beeching Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1917677" start="12124" end="12132" title="Cadoxton railway station" label="Cadoxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3207683" start="12161" end="12183" title="Vale of Glamorgan Line" label="Vale of Glamorgan Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878180" start="12196" end="12215" title="Transport for Wales Rail" label="Transport for Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038379" start="12312" end="12323" title="Cardiff Bus" label="Cardiff Bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="12354" end="12361" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="12366" end="12371" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q427792" start="12376" end="12383" title="Penarth" label="Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046637" start="12659" end="12666" title="Easyway" label="Easyway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12680" end="12693" title="Lower Penarth" label="Lower Penarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q809009" start="12698" end="12703" title="Barry, Vale of Glamorgan" label="Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="12839" end="12846" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q107011665" start="12847" end="12856" title="BBC Three" label="BBC Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395368" start="12868" end="12886" title="Gavin &amp;amp; Stacey" label="Gavin &amp;amp; Stacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383058" start="12926" end="12936" title="Ruth Jones (actress)" label="Ruth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905688" start="13008" end="13018" title="Big Finish Productions" label="Big Finish"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713693" start="13019" end="13046" title="Torchwood (audio drama series)" label="&amp;quot;Torchwood&amp;quot; audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151816" start="13079" end="13093" title="Yvonne Hartman" label="Yvonne Hartman"/>
<link wikidata="Q119175309" start="13219" end="13228" title="Hana Lili" label="Hana Lili"/>
<link wikidata="Q58892217" start="13243" end="13267" title="Thomas Frederick Worrall" label="Thomas Frederick Worrall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019967" wikidata="Q3499130" url="?curid=1019967" title="Steve Stone (baseball)">
<text>Steven Michael Stone (born July 14, 1947) is an American former Major League Baseball (MLB) player and current sportscaster and author.

Stone pitched for four MLB teams between 1971 and 1981. In 1980, he was the AL Cy Young Award winner and an American League All Star, finishing the season with a record of 25–7 for the Baltimore Orioles. He was WGN-TV&#x27;s color commentator for Chicago Cubs broadcasts between 1983 and 2004, missing a couple of seasons late in his tenure due to health problems. He worked in radio until 2009, when he became the color commentator for Chicago White Sox television broadcasts.

==Early life==
Stone is Jewish, and was born in South Euclid, Ohio, a Cleveland suburb, to Dorothy (a waitress) and Paul Stone (who changed records in juke boxes, and later became an insurance salesman), who were Orthodox Jews. His maternal grandfather, Edward Manheim, lived to see Stone celebrate his bar mitzvah in September 1960. Stone played high school ball at Charles F. Brush High School for baseball Coach Jim Humpall. He also won several tennis championships, was a ping pong champion, and was a proficient golfer.

At Kent State University, Stone was an outstanding pitcher and his catcher was Thurman Munson. He was selected to the All Mid-American Conference team, and was named team captain as a junior. He had a 2.00 ERA for the Chatham Anglers in the Cape Cod League in 1968. He also starred on the bowling, volleyball, and tennis teams. He joined Alpha Epsilon Pi fraternity. He graduated in 1970 with a teaching degree in history and government.

==Draft and minor leagues==
In 1968, he was drafted by the Cleveland Indians in the 16th round of the draft, but did not sign. In February 1969, he was drafted by the San Francisco Giants in the fourth round of the draft (secondary phase).

From 1969–1971, Stone pitched in the minor leagues. In 1969, he pitched for the Fresno Giants, in 1970 for the Phoenix Giants and Amarillo Giants, and in 1971 again for Phoenix. He compiled a 32–24 record, and struck out nearly a batter per inning.

==Major league career==

===San Francisco Giants (1971–72)===
Breaking the stereotype of ballplayers in his era, Stone said: Charlie Fox (manager of the Giants in 1971) felt the only way a ballplayer could perform was to chew tobacco, wear a sloppy uniform and, as he put it, not be afraid to get a bloody nose, and eat, drink and sleep baseball. I never thought a bloody nose was all that comfortable, and tobacco upsets my stomach. I like to eat – but not baseball – and I never thought sleeping with the game would be all that enjoyable. I think he thought reading hurt your eyes. Ron Fimrite mused in &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; in May 1971 that Stone was &quot;a Jewish intellectual … who just might be a right-handed (Sandy) Koufax.&quot;

In 1972 he was 6–8 with a 2.98 ERA. After suffering a sore arm, Stone was traded by the Giants with Ken Henderson to the Chicago White Sox for Tom Bradley on November 29, 1972.

===Chicago White Sox (1973)===
In 1973, he was 6-11 with a 4.24 ERA, and was fourth in the AL in strikeouts per 9 innings pitched (7.04), and 8th in hit batsmen (7).

===Chicago Cubs (1974–1976)===
Stone was acquired along with Steve Swisher and Ken Frailing by the Chicago Cubs from the crosstown White Sox for Ron Santo on December 11, 1973. Jim Kremmel was also sent to the Cubs to complete the transaction one week later on December 18. In 1974 he was 8–5 with a 4.14 ERA. In 1975 he was 12–8 with a 3.95 ERA, and pitched 214.3 innings.

===Chicago White Sox (1977–78)===
In November 1976, after suffering a torn rotator cuff and undertaking cryotherapy after refusing surgery and cortisone injections, he signed as a free agent with the Chicago White Sox for $60,000 ($ today), turning down offers from four other teams.

In 1977, he was 15–12 with a 4.51 ERA in 207.1 innings. During that year on August 29, Stone gave up a home run to Cleveland Indians second baseman Duane Kuiper – Kuiper&#x27;s only career home run in 3,379 at bats. In 1978, when he was paid $125,000 ($ today), he was 12–12 with a 4.37 ERA in 212 innings.

===Baltimore Orioles (1979–1981)===
In November 1978, he signed a 4-year, $760,000 ($ today) deal as a free agent with the Baltimore Orioles, again turning down four other offers. In 1979 Stone was 11–7 with a 3.77 ERA in 186 innings, and was 7th in the league in fewest hits allowed per 9 innings pitched (8.37).

His best year was 1980, when he went 25–7 (.781) for the Orioles, won the Cy Young Award and &quot;The Sporting News&quot; Pitcher of the Year Award, and came in 9th in the AL MVP voting. Stone&#x27;s relief pitchers did not blow a save for him all season until his last start of the year. He led the league in wins (his 25 wins set a team record) and won-lost percentage, and was second in games started (37), seventh in ERA (3.23), strikeouts (149), hits allowed/9 IP (8.04), and hit batsmen (6), and ninth in innings pitched (250.7). He also won the American League June 1980 Pitcher of the Month Award. He also started and pitched three perfect innings in the All-Star Game that year.

Stone threw as many as 73 curveballs in a game at least twice that season, even though he knew he might damage his pitching arm.

&quot;I used to try not to lose before&quot;, Stone said in 1980. &quot;Now, when I go out, I go out to win every time, and I&#x27;m certain I am. I try to envision myself literally walking off the mound a winner. I allow no negatives in my thinking. When certain ones start creeping in, I erase them and make it like a blank blackboard waiting to be filled in with things like, &#x27;The team is going to play well, is going to score some runs, I&#x27;m going to throw strikes, I&#x27;m going to win.&#x27; &quot;

After his Cy Young season, the pitcher who was listed as 5&#x27; 10&quot; commented: All my life, because of my size, people have been telling me what I couldn&#x27;t do. They said I was too small and not durable enough. First they said I&#x27;d never pitch in high school. Then they said I&#x27;d never pitch in college. Then they said okay, but you&#x27;ll never pitch professionally. Then they said well, maybe you&#x27;re pitching professionally but you&#x27;ll never make it out of the minors. When I got to the majors, they said well, you may be in the majors but you&#x27;ll never be good. Now those same people are saying I won&#x27;t have a good year this year. That kind of thing is reiterated by people who&#x27;ve never achieved a great deal themselves.

Stone suffered from shoulder tendinitis in 1981, going 4–7 with a 4.60 ERA. He appeared in a pair of spring training contests before going on the disabled list on March 21, 1982. He announced his retirement as an active player months later on June 2 due to recurring arm problems. His MLB career record was 107–93, 40–21 with the Orioles for a .656 winning percentage which was the best ever by a Baltimore pitcher over a three-year span.

He is considered one of the best Jewish pitchers in major league history. Through July 2011, Stone was third among Jewish pitchers in career wins (107) and strikeouts (1,065), behind Ken Holtzman and Sandy Koufax and directly ahead of Jason Marquis, and ninth in games pitched (320), behind Barry Latman. Reminiscing about Sandy Koufax&#x27;s influence on him and others when he was a child, he said, &quot;He gave little Jewish boys some hope.&quot;

==Sportscasting career (1982–present)==
===Monday Night Baseball / ABC Sports (1982)===
Following his retirement, Stone was hired by ABC to serve as a color commentator for their &quot;Monday Night Baseball&quot; telecasts. Stone was normally paired with Al Michaels and Bob Uecker in the booth.

===Chicago Cubs / WGN (1983–2004)===
In 1983, Stone became a color commentator for the WGN television broadcasts of the Chicago Cubs, teaming for 14 years with Hall of Fame announcer Harry Caray. In 1985, he posed for &quot;Playgirl&quot;. After Harry Caray&#x27;s death in February 1998, Stone was paired with Caray&#x27;s grandson Chip Caray. Stone left the booth for health reasons in 2000, including a case of coccidioidomycosis (Valley fever) and kidney stones, and returned to the Cubs booth in 2003 and 2004.

Stone temporally took over play-by-play duties from Caray while the latter was recovering from a stroke at the start of the 1987 season. WGN announced that until Caray was well enough to return, guest announcers would fill in and sit alongside Stone.

On August 7, 1993, Stone provided commentary alongside Jim Kaat for a Cubs game against the St. Louis Cardinals for CBS.

===Leaving the Cubs booth===
Stone refused a contract extension as the Cubs color-man after the 2004 season amid a controversy involving Cubs players who felt he was being overly critical of their performance. Even so, he was a fan favorite. One reason he was so well-liked was his ability to accurately predict what might happen in various game situations, explaining to the audience why the strategy or pitch would be successful prior to the play. A famous example of this was him expressing &quot;I wouldn&#x27;t pitch to this guy&quot; in a 2004 game, seconds before the batter (Adam Dunn) hit a home run off Cubs pitcher Mike Remlinger to give the Cincinnati Reds the lead.

Stone expressed frustration with Cubs manager Dusty Baker for not controlling his players. At one point during the 2004 season, Kent Mercker called the broadcast booth from the bullpen during a game to complain about comments made, also confronting Stone in a hotel lobby. Among the comments that reportedly irked Mercker were Chip Caray&#x27;s praise of Houston Astros pitcher Roy Oswalt. It was also reported that Mercker and left fielder Moisés Alou shouted at Stone on a team charter plane to a road game in 2004, and that Alou tried to have Stone and Caray banned from the team charter flights.

On September 30, 2004, in the wake of a 12-inning loss to the Cincinnati Reds that all but eliminated the Cubs, Stone strongly criticized the team. &quot;The truth of this situation is [this is] an extremely talented bunch of guys who want to look at all directions except where they should really look, and kind of make excuses for what happened. ... This team should have won the wild-card [playoff berth] by six, seven games. No doubt about it.&quot; The comments stunned manager Baker and were a factor in Stone&#x27;s resignation as a Cub broadcaster the following month.

===Chicago White Sox (2005–present)===
In early 2005 Stone was hired by Chicago radio station WSCR to provide commentary and host a weekly talk show, hosted on Mondays by Terry Boers and Dan Bernstein, on Tuesdays by Mike North, and on Thursdays by Brian Hanley and Mike Mulligan. He was also hired by ESPN to work some of that network&#x27;s baseball telecasts.

In early August 2007, Stone filled in for Chicago White Sox color commentator Darrin Jackson, while Jackson took leave for the birth of his child, during which he successfully predicted a walk-off home run by Juan Uribe in extra innings. In October 2007, Stone called postseason games between the Boston Red Sox and Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim for TBS, partnered with play-by-play announcer Ted Robinson. On March 4, 2008, Stone was named the color commentator for White Sox radio broadcasts for the 2008 season on WSCR AM670 The Score, replacing Chris Singleton, who moved to ESPN&#x27;s &quot;Baseball Tonight&quot;.

On September 13, 2008, Stone accepted the job as the color commentator for White Sox television broadcasts for six years beginning with the 2009 season. He said he enjoyed being in the booth with Hawk Harrelson, stating that he liked his nickname &quot;Stone Pony.&quot; Stone also acted as a fill-in play-by-play announcer when Harrelson wasn&#x27;t available. He worked with either analysts Tom Paciorek or Tony Graffanino.

After Harrelson&#x27;s retirement in 2018, Stone was paired with Jason Benetti (who filled in for Harrelson from 2016-2018) on White Sox telecasts from 2019-2023. In 2020, Stone and Benetti were ranked as the 8th best broadcast duo by The Athletic, and they were consistently ranked as an outstanding duo throughout their 5 years together. Benetti, widely recognized as one of the best play-by-play announcers in the MLB, left the White Sox booth after the 2023 season to become the Tigers play-by-play announcer, citing a disrespectful remark from the team&#x27;s chief revenue and marketing officer Brooks Boyer as an example of his strained relationship with the team&#x27;s front office.

Since 2024, Stone has been paired with John Schriffen in the White Sox booth. In their first year together, Stone and Schriffen were ranked as the 30th best broadcast duo in the MLB, a sharp fall from the 6th place ranking Stone and Benetti achieved the year prior.

Though some suspected Stone would retire after an abysmal 2024 season for the White Sox, Stone announced during the last week of the regular season that he had agreed on a long-term multi-year deal to remain the color analyst for the White Sox, starting in 2025. In his words, &quot;They signed me to a contract that will pretty much ensure when I do decide to retire, it will be as a member of the Chicago White Sox organization.&quot;

==Writing==
In 1999, Stone, along with Barry Rozner of the Chicago suburban area &quot;Daily Herald&quot;, authored &quot;Where&#x27;s Harry?&quot;, a memoir of his experiences with Harry Caray in the WGN booth.

==See also==

* List of Jewish Major League Baseball players
* List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders

==Books==
*&quot;Where&#x27;s Harry?&quot; (1999) (with Barry Rozner) Taylor Publishing; 
*&quot;Said In Stone: Your Game, My Way&quot; (2011) Triumph Books; 

==References==
==External links==

*Jewish Major League career leaders
*Twitter page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3499130" start="0" end="20" title="Steve Stone (baseball)" label="Steven Michael Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="64" end="85" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="111" end="123" title="sportscaster" label="sportscaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="216" end="230" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654577" start="261" end="269" title="All Star" label="All Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="322" end="339" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="348" end="354" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="384" end="396" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="552" end="569" title="color commentator" label="color commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="574" end="591" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1909193" start="664" end="682" title="South Euclid, Ohio" label="South Euclid, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q80970" start="829" end="841" title="Orthodox Jew" label="Orthodox Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q75673" start="919" end="930" title="bar mitzvah" label="bar mitzvah"/>
<link wikidata="Q5077498" start="983" end="1011" title="Charles F. Brush High School" label="Charles F. Brush High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="1145" end="1166" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q921807" start="1221" end="1235" title="Thurman Munson" label="Thurman Munson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373755" start="1264" end="1287" title="Mid-American Conference" label="Mid-American Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087629" start="1360" end="1375" title="Chatham Anglers" label="Chatham Anglers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034674" start="1383" end="1398" title="Cape Cod League" label="Cape Cod League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839501" start="1480" end="1496" title="Alpha Epsilon Pi" label="Alpha Epsilon Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="1497" end="1507" title="Fraternities and sororities" label="fraternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="1640" end="1657" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="1748" end="1768" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370066" start="1859" end="1872" title="minor leagues" label="minor leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503164" start="1902" end="1915" title="Fresno Giants" label="Fresno Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186877" start="1933" end="1947" title="Phoenix Giants" label="Phoenix Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740267" start="1952" end="1967" title="Amarillo Giants" label="Amarillo Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q176903" start="2063" end="2069" title="inning" label="inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084866" start="2197" end="2208" title="Charlie Fox (baseball)" label="Charlie Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="2683" end="2701" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="2798" end="2812" title="Sandy Koufax" label="(Sandy) Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387777" start="2921" end="2934" title="Ken Henderson" label="Ken Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="2942" end="2959" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815036" start="2964" end="2975" title="Tom Bradley (baseball)" label="Tom Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575513" start="3033" end="3037" title="1973 Chicago White Sox season" label="1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326574" start="3148" end="3159" title="hit batsmen" label="hit batsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16150637" start="3227" end="3240" title="Steve Swisher" label="Steve Swisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387634" start="3245" end="3257" title="Ken Frailing" label="Ken Frailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="3265" end="3277" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q934446" start="3311" end="3320" title="Ron Santo" label="Ron Santo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6196210" start="3343" end="3354" title="Jim Kremmel" label="Jim Kremmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764136" start="3616" end="3628" title="rotator cuff" label="rotator cuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q863803" start="3645" end="3656" title="cryotherapy" label="cryotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q423185" start="3684" end="3693" title="cortisone" label="cortisone"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="3721" end="3731" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="3741" end="3758" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577609" start="3829" end="3833" title="1977 Chicago White Sox season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577614" start="3941" end="3958" title="1977 Cleveland Indians season" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3040463" start="3974" end="3986" title="Duane Kuiper" label="Duane Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578102" start="4045" end="4049" title="1978 Chicago White Sox season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="4257" end="4274" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="4523" end="4537" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="4548" end="4565" title="The Sporting News" label="The Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q652965" start="4625" end="4628" title="Most valuable player" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11331502" start="5028" end="5054" title="Pitcher of the Month Award" label="Pitcher of the Month Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2647651" start="5113" end="5126" title="All-Star Game" label="All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710733" start="5165" end="5174" title="curveball" label="curveball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="6581" end="6591" title="tendinitis" label="tendinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="6653" end="6668" title="spring training" label="spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="6698" end="6711" title="injured list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387818" start="7175" end="7187" title="Ken Holtzman" label="Ken Holtzman"/>
<link wikidata="Q440256" start="7192" end="7204" title="Sandy Koufax" label="Sandy Koufax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060777" start="7227" end="7240" title="Jason Marquis" label="Jason Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864406" start="7283" end="7295" title="Barry Latman" label="Barry Latman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738160" start="7577" end="7580" title="Major League Baseball on ABC" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276037" start="7595" end="7612" title="color commentator" label="color commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6898640" start="7629" end="7650" title="Monday Night Baseball" label="Monday Night Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7687" end="7693" title="List of Major League Baseball prime time television broadcasters#1980s" label="paired"/>
<link wikidata="Q978633" start="7699" end="7710" title="Al Michaels" label="Al Michaels"/>
<link wikidata="Q888295" start="7715" end="7725" title="Bob Uecker" label="Bob Uecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="7828" end="7831" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="7861" end="7873" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="7901" end="7913" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667783" start="7924" end="7935" title="Harry Caray" label="Harry Caray"/>
<link wikidata="Q580633" start="7965" end="7973" title="Playgirl" label="Playgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101483" start="8074" end="8084" title="Chip Caray" label="Chip Caray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597264" start="8129" end="8133" title="2000 Chicago Cubs season" label="2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q868137" start="8155" end="8173" title="coccidioidomycosis" label="coccidioidomycosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q178623" start="8193" end="8206" title="kidney stones" label="kidney stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601219" start="8242" end="8246" title="2003 Chicago Cubs season" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q4515820" start="8251" end="8255" title="2004 Chicago Cubs season" label="2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q10681911" start="8337" end="8347" title="Stroke recovery" label="recovering"/>
<link wikidata="Q12202" start="8355" end="8361" title="stroke" label="stroke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583615" start="8382" end="8393" title="1987 Chicago Cubs season" label="1987 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195984" start="8565" end="8573" title="Jim Kaat" label="Jim Kaat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588400" start="8580" end="8584" title="1993 Chicago Cubs season" label="Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588790" start="8602" end="8621" title="1993 St. Louis Cardinals season" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738164" start="8626" end="8629" title="Major League Baseball on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q349202" start="9215" end="9224" title="Adam Dunn" label="Adam Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848543" start="9258" end="9272" title="Mike Remlinger" label="Mike Remlinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505783" start="9285" end="9300" title="2004 Cincinnati Reds season" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041697" start="9358" end="9369" title="Dusty Baker" label="Dusty Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391831" start="9440" end="9452" title="Kent Mercker" label="Kent Mercker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4502709" start="9667" end="9681" title="2004 Houston Astros season" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330721" start="9690" end="9700" title="Roy Oswalt" label="Roy Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098666" start="9753" end="9764" title="Moisés Alou" label="Moisés Alou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955545" start="10585" end="10589" title="WSCR" label="WSCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q622812" start="10630" end="10639" title="talk show" label="talk show"/>
<link wikidata="Q4937225" start="10662" end="10691" title="Boers and Bernstein" label="Terry Boers and Dan Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848209" start="10708" end="10718" title="Mike North" label="Mike North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5324256" start="10793" end="10797" title="MLB on ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608203" start="10897" end="10914" title="2007 Chicago White Sox season" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225288" start="10933" end="10947" title="Darrin Jackson" label="Darrin Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710659" start="11064" end="11074" title="Juan Uribe" label="Juan Uribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089411" start="11078" end="11090" title="extra inning" label="extra inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607887" start="11123" end="11139" title="2007 American League Division Series" label="postseason games"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608086" start="11152" end="11166" title="2007 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608799" start="11171" end="11200" title="2007 Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim season" label="Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738177" start="11205" end="11208" title="Major League Baseball on TBS" label="TBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693673" start="11248" end="11260" title="Ted Robinson (sportscaster)" label="Ted Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3466350" start="11357" end="11368" title="2008 Chicago White Sox season" label="2008 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7955545" start="11372" end="11376" title="WSCR" label="WSCR"/>
<link wikidata="Q5108072" start="11404" end="11419" title="Chris Singleton (baseball)" label="Chris Singleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="11434" end="11438" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886690" start="11452" end="11468" title="Baseball Tonight" label="Baseball Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467813" start="11617" end="11628" title="2009 Chicago White Sox season" label="2009 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814472" start="11673" end="11687" title="Hawk Harrelson" label="Hawk Harrelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817143" start="11870" end="11882" title="Tom Paciorek" label="Tom Paciorek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531780" start="11886" end="11901" title="Tony Graffanino" label="Tony Graffanino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205962" start="11969" end="11982" title="Jason Benetti" label="Jason Benetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6256960" start="12636" end="12650" title="John Schriffen" label="John Schriffen"/>
<link wikidata="Q122898140" start="12922" end="12933" title="2024_Chicago_White_Sox_season" label="2024 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209265" start="13389" end="13401" title="Daily Herald (Arlington Heights)" label="Daily Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q125935468" start="13531" end="13575" title="List of Jewish Major League Baseball players" label="List of Jewish Major League Baseball players"/>
<link wikidata="Q987859" start="13578" end="13627" title="List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019974" wikidata="Q7026474" url="?curid=1019974" title="Nicholas de Moels">
<text>Nicholas de Moels or Nicholas Molis (c. 1195 – 1268 or 1269) was an AngloNorman royal administrator and household knight of King Henry III of England. In this capacity he was assigned many and varied offices and duties, often of a temporary nature. He married a wealthy heiress from North Cadbury in Somerset which transformed him into a major landholder and feudal baron. In 1244 whilst serving as Seneschal of Gascony, he inflicted a defeat on the King of Navarre, whom he took prisoner in the field.

==Origins==
His parentage is unknown. His surname appears to derive from the Norman manor of Meulles in Calvados, southwest of Orbec, in the Diocese of Lisieux. Devonshire historian Tristram Risdon (d. 1640) stated that he &quot;descended of an ancient lineage in this shire&quot; but provided no further detail. One of the many tenants of Devonshire baron Baldwin de Meulles (d. 1090), a Domesday Book tenant in chief, was a certain &quot;Roger de Moles&quot;, who held from him at least the two manors or estates of Lew Trenchard and Waddlescot / Warson. His successor in 1066 was a Joel de Moels. In 1242, as recorded in the &quot;Book of Fees&quot;, Lew Trenchard and Waddlescot were held by a certain &quot;John de Molis&quot; from John de Courtenay, feudal baron of Okehampton, who had inherited much of the land formerly held by Baldwin de Meulles. This John de Molis, perhaps a brother of Nicholas, would also hold Lashbrook, Dornaford, Exbourn and Highampton, which had been held by a Roger de Molis in 1086.

Nicholas was born about 1195 and appears to have spent some of his early life in the court of King John of England (11991216), whose son King Henry III (12161272) he would later serve.

==Career==
During the reign of Henry III, Nicholas served as Sheriff of Hampshire (1228–1232), Sheriff of Devon (1234), and Sheriff of Yorkshire (1239–1242), and also as Constable of Winchester Castle, Pembroke Castle, Haverfordwest Castle, Cilgerran Castle, Tenby Castle, Rochester Castle (1247), Canterbury Castle (1247) and Corfe Castle. He was also Governor of the Channel Islands.

===Seneschal of Gascony===

The contemporary Benedictine monk Matthew Paris wrote as follows concerning events in 1243:
:&quot;Unde cito post contigit quod cum rex a Burdegali recessurus custodemque quem senescallum vocant, ei idoneum, videlicet Nicholaum de Molis, providisset, jam jamque omnia ad custodiam terrae provide pro curasset, et ascensa nave, alta freti velificando versus Angliam jam sulcasset orta excogitati scismatis inter ipsos Wasconienses occasione rex missis galeis festinanter revocaretur et redire cogeretur ut exortus gravissimus conflictus ibidem sedaretur&quot;.

Which may be translated as follows:
:&quot;And it happened soon after, that when the king was about to leave Bordeaux, and had appointed Nicholas de Molis as a fit person to act as governor, whom they call seneschal, and had taken all precautions for the safety of the land, and had embarked, and was even ploughing the depths of the sea, sailing towards England, a furious quarrel having arisen among those Gascons, the king was hastily recalled by galleys sent after him, and compelled to return, that he might quell the great disturbance which had arisen&quot;.
In September 1243, Henry III left Gascony to return to England, having on 17 June 1243 appointed Nicholas de Moels as Seneschal of Gascony, as related by Matthew Paris in his &quot;Chronica Majora&quot;, with a marginal illustration of the King and Queen on board a ship with a man in a small boat alongside, apparently de Moels seeing him off. The Latin text following the illustration is as follows:
:&quot;De reditu regis in Angliam de Pictavia et Wasconia. Eisdem quoque temporibus, scilicet circa festum Sancti Remigii, rex Angliae, dispositis in Wasconia disponendis commissaque custodia terrae Nicholao de Molis, militi strenuissimo et circumspecto, quem praefecit Wasconiae senescallum, naves ascendens, prospere velificando redeundo in Angliam, transfretavit et septimo kalendas octobris apud Portesmues applicuit&quot;.

Translated as:
:&quot;At that time also, namely about the feast of StRemy, the King of England, having settled what was to be settled in Gascony, and having intrusted the government of the land to Nicholas de Molis, a very brave and prudent soldier, whom he created seneschal of Gascony, and taking ship, had a most pleasant voyage across the Channel, and returned into England; he landed at Portsmouth on the 25th of September&quot;.

In 1244, de Moels inflicted a defeat on Theobald I, King of Navarre, capturing him in person on a battlefield in Gascony, according to the Devonshire historian Tristram Risdon (d. 1640). He was relieved of that office, with commendation for his service, in July 1245.

The event is related as follows by Matthew Paris:
:&quot;Nicholaus de Moles senescallus Wasconiae contra regem Navariae dimicans ad votum triumphavit: Anni ipsius eodem tempore Nicholaus de Molis Wasconiae senescallus quem rex a Wasconia ibidem terrae suae custodem constituerat contra regem Navariae guerram viriliter continuans ad votum in quodam casu inito certamine triumphavit&quot;.

Which may be translated:
:&quot;Of the victory gained by Nicholas de Molis, seneschal of Gascony. About this time of the year, Nicholas de Molis, seneschal of Gascony, whom the king, on leaving that country, had appointed governor of that province, and who had been carrying on a fierce war against the king of Navarre, was favoured by fortune in one engagement, and gained a victory over him&quot;.

===Return to England===
Nicholas returned to England to fight in the Welsh wars and was made governor of Caernarvon Castle and Cardigan Castle. He was made Constable of Dover Castle in 1246, Sheriff of Kent in 1247 and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in 1258.

==Landholdings==
Many of the gifts of land he received from the king were temporary in nature, comprising lands forfeited by other landholders but later restored to them. In 1217 he was granted a lease of the manor of Watlington in Oxfordshire &quot;for his sustenance in the king&#x27;s service&quot;. In 1226 he was granted Little Berkhamstead, which was later confirmed to him in fee. After his marriage in 1230 to Hawise de Newmarch, heiress of North Cadbury and many other manors, he became a major landholder in his own right. He continued to receive royal grants. In 1230 he was granted the royal demesne manors of King&#x27;s Carswell and Diptford in Devon. In 1250 or 1251 he was granted free warren in his manors of Cadbury and nearby Mapperton in Dorset.

==Personal life==
In or after 1230, Nicholas married Hawise de Newmarch (as her second husband), widow of John de Botreaux (whom she had married in 1218) and younger daughter and coheiress of James de Newmarch (d. 1216), feudal baron of North Cadbury in Somerset. Hawise&#x27;s sister, Isabel de Newmarch, married Ralph Russell (died c. 1250), son of her guardian Sir John Russell (died c. 1224) of Kingston Russell in Dorset, who was also a household knight of King John and of the young King Henry III to whom he also acted as steward.

Nicholas and Hawise had several children, including:
* James de Moels (d. March 1252 or 1253), eldest son and heir apparent who predeceased his father. In 1243 he was assigned to be educated with Prince Edward, son of King Henry III.
* Roger de Moels (c. 1233 or 12371294), second but eldest surviving son and heir, Marshal of the Army and Governor of Lampsdervour Castle in Ceredigion. His second son was John de Moels, 1st Baron Moels (d. 1310).
* Agnes de Moels (born 1230), born at Cadbury, the second wife of William de Braose, 1st Baron Braose, feudal baron of Bramber and Gower.
* Maud de Moels (born c. 1258), married Richard de L&#x27;Orti, or de Urtiaco, heir to the barony of Stoke Trister, Somerset.

Nicholas de Moels died between November 1268 and 24 June 1269.

==Footnotes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===&quot;Books and journals&quot;===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


===&quot;Web&quot;===
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7026474" start="0" end="17" title="Nicholas de Moels" label="Nicholas de Moels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026474" start="21" end="35" title="Nicholas de Moels" label="Nicholas Molis"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="68" end="79" title="Anglo-Normans" label="AngloNorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="129" end="149" title="Henry III of England" label="Henry III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646350" start="283" end="296" title="North Cadbury" label="North Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378545" start="359" end="371" title="English feudal barony" label="feudal baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952653" start="399" end="419" title="Seneschal of Gascony" label="Seneschal of Gascony"/>
<link wikidata="Q275045" start="450" end="465" title="King of Navarre" label="King of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="588" end="593" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q328304" start="631" end="636" title="Orbec" label="Orbec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332597" start="645" end="663" title="Diocese of Lisieux" label="Diocese of Lisieux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844215" start="686" end="701" title="Tristram Risdon" label="Tristram Risdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q811187" start="861" end="879" title="Baldwin FitzGilbert" label="Baldwin de Meulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="893" end="906" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027040" start="1022" end="1035" title="Lew Trenchard" label="Lew Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943027" start="1138" end="1150" title="Book of Fees" label="Book of Fees"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="1617" end="1637" title="King John of England" label="King John of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756811" start="1770" end="1790" title="High Sheriff of Hampshire" label="Sheriff of Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797842" start="1804" end="1820" title="Sheriff of Devon" label="Sheriff of Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613305" start="1833" end="1853" title="High Sheriff of Yorkshire" label="Sheriff of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1704670" start="1892" end="1909" title="Winchester Castle" label="Winchester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422235" start="1911" end="1926" title="Pembroke Castle" label="Pembroke Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683760" start="1928" end="1948" title="Haverfordwest Castle" label="Haverfordwest Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774870" start="1950" end="1966" title="Cilgerran Castle" label="Cilgerran Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699534" start="1968" end="1980" title="Tenby Castle" label="Tenby Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125527" start="1982" end="1998" title="Rochester Castle" label="Rochester Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2968772" start="2007" end="2024" title="Canterbury Castle" label="Canterbury Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236511" start="2036" end="2048" title="Corfe Castle" label="Corfe Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="2078" end="2093" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q369366" start="2158" end="2171" title="Matthew Paris" label="Matthew Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q314562" start="4557" end="4567" title="Theobald I the Posthumous" label="Theobald I"/>
<link wikidata="Q275045" start="4569" end="4584" title="King of Navarre" label="King of Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844215" start="4677" end="4692" title="Tristram Risdon" label="Tristram Risdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q275128" start="5682" end="5699" title="Caernarvon Castle" label="Caernarvon Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395294" start="5704" end="5719" title="Cardigan Castle" label="Cardigan Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q950970" start="5746" end="5758" title="Dover Castle" label="Dover Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617843" start="5768" end="5783" title="High Sheriff of Kent" label="Sheriff of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809853" start="5796" end="5827" title="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports" label="Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334989" start="6056" end="6066" title="Watlington, Oxfordshire" label="Watlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2340823" start="6164" end="6183" title="Little Berkhamstead" label="Little Berkhamstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q155231" start="6442" end="6449" title="demesne" label="demesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868076" start="6460" end="6480" title="Kingskerswell" label="King&amp;#x27;s Carswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2199817" start="6485" end="6493" title="Diptford" label="Diptford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="6497" end="6502" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970003" start="6535" end="6546" title="free warren" label="free warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973131" start="6583" end="6592" title="Mapperton" label="Mapperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378545" start="6826" end="6838" title="English feudal barony" label="feudal baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646350" start="6842" end="6855" title="North Cadbury" label="North Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255994" start="6973" end="6985" title="John Russell (knight)" label="John Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976349" start="7004" end="7020" title="Kingston Russell" label="Kingston Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="7067" end="7076" title="John, King of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="7094" end="7108" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q217829" start="7519" end="7529" title="Ceredigion" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791337" start="7550" end="7580" title="John de Moels, 1st Baron Moels" label="John de Moels, 1st Baron Moels"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020769" start="7658" end="7693" title="William de Braose, 1st Baron Braose" label="William de Braose, 1st Baron Braose"/>
<link wikidata="Q5378545" start="7695" end="7707" title="English feudal barony" label="feudal baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181928" start="7831" end="7844" title="Stoke Trister" label="Stoke Trister"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019982" wikidata="Q7605362" url="?curid=1019982" title="Steam dummy">
<text>A steam dummy or dummy engine, in the United States and Canada, was a steam locomotive enclosed in a wooden box structure made to resemble a passenger railroad car. Steam dummies had some popularity in the first decades of railroading in the U.S., from the 1830s but passed from favor after the American Civil War.

==Overview==
It was thought that the more familiar appearance of a coach presented by a steam dummy, as compared to a conventional steam locomotive, would be less likely to frighten horses when these trains had to operate in city streets. Later it was realized that it was actually the noise and motion of the operating gear of a steam engine that frightened horses, rather than the unfamiliar outlines of a steam engine.

==Production==

Baldwin Locomotive Works manufactured steam dummies or steam motors for many American tramways. Baldwin exported to places such as Australia where they were known as &#x27;steam tram motors&#x27; – and New Zealand, where two, both built in 1891, survive at museums today. Four were imported for the 1879 Sydney International Exhibition and tracks were laid from the Redfern railway station to the Exhibition site. Intended as a temporary transport installation, this became the genesis of a larger tram network and probably the exhibition&#x27;s most lasting legacy.

H. K. Porter, Inc. preferred the term &quot;noiseless steam street motor&quot; in their 20th-century catalog, although they used the term &quot;dummy&quot; (in quotes) in the 19th century. In the 20th century, they offered 0-4-0 and 0-4-2 wheel arrangements. In the 19th century, they also offered a double-ended dummy with a 2-4-2 wheel arrangement. Porter recommended using anthracite or coke as a fuel in order to avoid smoke. Side flaps to hide the mechanism were optional. Operating speeds between were reported by 19th-century users.

In the UK, the Great Western Railway equipped two engines each from the 2021 and 517 classes with coach bodywork between 1906 and 1911.

==See also==
*Doodlebug
*Multiple unit
*Steam railmotor
*Tram engine

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7605362" start="2" end="13" title="Steam dummy" label="steam dummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605362" start="17" end="29" title="Steam dummy" label="dummy engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q171043" start="70" end="86" title="steam locomotive" label="steam locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="101" end="105" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q753779" start="141" end="163" title="passenger railroad car" label="passenger railroad car"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="295" end="313" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="498" end="503" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="755" end="779" title="Baldwin_Locomotive_Works#Street_Railways_.2F_Tramway_Steam_Motors" label="Baldwin Locomotive Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927482" start="927" end="944" title="Sydney Steam Motor Tram" label="steam tram motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q15055634" start="1059" end="1090" title="Sydney International Exhibition" label="Sydney International Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1253" end="1265" title="Trams in Sydney#Early tramways" label="tram network"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136281" start="1323" end="1341" title="H. K. Porter, Inc." label="H. K. Porter, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q64134" start="1546" end="1551" title="0-4-0" label="0-4-0"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806492" start="1556" end="1561" title="0-4-2" label="0-4-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036539" start="1649" end="1654" title="2-4-2" label="2-4-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q182458" start="1699" end="1709" title="anthracite" label="anthracite"/>
<link wikidata="Q192795" start="1713" end="1717" title="coke (fuel)" label="coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="1879" end="1900" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987362" start="1936" end="1940" title="GWR 2021 Class" label="2021"/>
<link wikidata="Q5514986" start="1945" end="1948" title="GWR 517 Class" label="517"/>
<link wikidata="Q5296992" start="2015" end="2024" title="Doodlebug (rail car)" label="Doodlebug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3959904" start="2026" end="2039" title="Multiple unit" label="Multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284034" start="2047" end="2056" title="railmotor" label="railmotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974601" start="2058" end="2069" title="Tram engine" label="Tram engine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019984" wikidata="Q731833" url="?curid=1019984" title="Burn (Deep Purple album)">
<text>Burn is the eighth studio album by English rock band Deep Purple, released on 15 February 1974, by Purple Records internationally, and Warner Bros. Records in North America. The album first features then-unknown lead singer David Coverdale. The group&#x27;s Mark III line-up for their recording debut included Coverdale, Glenn Hughes (joining from Trapeze) on bass and vocals, Ritchie Blackmore on guitar, Jon Lord on keyboards, and Ian Paice on drums.

&quot;Burn&quot; mostly consists of hard rock and blues in a similar vein to that of the group&#x27;s preceding albums, particularly &quot;Machine Head&quot;, but there was an additional element of funk rock, which would become more prominent in the later albums of the Mark III–IV era. The album has received favorable reviews and accolades but others gave mixed reactions shortly after its release. &quot;Burn&quot; charted in 13 countries, including reaching number three in the UK and number nine in the US. Followed by a successful tour, internal tensions would start to abrupt during the recording of their follow-up album would result in Blackmore&#x27;s departure in early 1975. &quot;Burn&quot; received a reissue in 2004, featuring remastered and remixed versions along with a previously unreleased track.

==Background==
In the early 1970s, Deep Purple was the best-selling group in the world, particularly in North America. Their 1973 album &quot;Who Do We Think We Are&quot; was commercially successful, though the tour supporting it was cut short. Tensions between then-lead singer Ian Gillan and guitarist Ritchie Blackmore escalated, resulting in Gillan leaving the group on 29 June 1973 in Osaka, Japan, after their tour had concluded. Gillan described the &quot;Who Do We Think We Are&quot; recording sessions as elusive, prompting by leaving the band. At the time, they were able to dissuade him from quitting. However, in early December 1972, he wrote management a letter declaring that he wanted to leave on 30 June 1973; the decision was made &quot;not impulsive[ly] but [after] at least six months of thought&quot;. Gillan also predicted in his letter that the group would eventually disband after his departure. Bassist Roger Glover had also planned to leave the band due to the band&#x27;s refusal to consider his ideas for songs. Blackmore insisted that Glover go at the same time Gillan departed. Glover recalled his talk with the band&#x27;s manager shortly about his departure, writing:

Glover&#x27;s departure was announced the second week of July. Later, he took over as head of A&amp;R at Purple Records and focused mostly on production.

Lord had called the end of Mark II while the band was at their peak: &quot;the biggest shame in rock and roll; God knows what we would have done over the next three or four years. We were writing so well.&quot; With Gillan and Glover out of the group, the rest of the members took a five-month hiatus to start searching for a new vocalist. A misleading headlining article came up into the picture about their split, which was confirmed false when Hughes replaced Glover at that time. Blackmore took the lead in instructing the personnel line-up during the search.

===Hughes &amp; Coverdale introduction and &quot;Mark III&quot; line-up===
According to Paice, Glover told him and Lord a few months before his official termination that he wanted to leave the band, so they had started to drop in on Trapeze shows. During their promotional tour in April 1973, Ritchie, Lord, and Paice went on to see Trapeze at the Whisky a Go Go in Los Angeles. There, they complimented then-bassist, Glenn Hughes about his style. Hughes, mistakenly, thought the Deep Purple musicians were expressing their admiration for Trapeze but not for Hughes himself. Hughes was offered the job but declined at first. By the end of the following month, Paice was frustrated at the instability due to Glover&#x27;s upcoming departure, so he approached Hughes in New York and persuaded Hughes to join the band as vocalist and bassist. He was introduced as a new bassist and vocalist at the same time Gillan and Glover departed.

It was decided that Hughes would sing on the upcoming album. However, Blackmore wanted a vocal soloist in the band with a more masculine voice, and Lord and Paice also agreed to Blackmore&#x27;s proposal to add more vocal elements to the band&#x27;s music. Eventually, an agreement was made that Hughes would sing more on later tracks, gradually increasing on proceeding albums &quot;Stormbringer&quot; and &quot;Come Taste the Band&quot;.&lt;ref name=&quot;Bloom/207&quot;&gt;Bloom: p. 207.&lt;/ref&gt;

However, despite disagreement about Hughes&#x27; exact singing role, they considered themselves working as a four-piece group but settled on the idea of having a solo lead singer. They needed a new lead vocalist with a more mature tone, to replace Gillan. Lord affirmed that they had a &quot;golden&quot; opportunity to have two singers in the band. However, as time continued, there was no official word on the replacement, except Paul Rodgers, from Free, who was the only person approached for the job. Although having good relations with the band, Paice affirmed that Rodgers would sometimes turn down offers from &quot;people he respects and admires&quot;. At that same time, Rodgers had just formed Bad Company, so he mutually declined on that offer. &quot;They did ask&quot;, Rodgers recalled, &quot;and I spoke to all of them at length about the possibility. Purple had toured Australia with Free&#x27;s final lineup. I didn&#x27;t do it because I was very much into the idea of forming Bad Company.&quot; Blackmore was disappointed as he wanted to take the band&#x27;s music in a blues direction. John Lawton (who would later become the singer of Uriah Heep) was also a candidate but refused, due to a press leak that talked about getting the job offer from the band.

With no upcoming candidates for a lead single role, the band was desperate to find Gillan&#x27;s successor. Promotional audition posters for a replacement singer were produced and the band found themselves buried in demo tapes from aspiring singers at the band&#x27;s management offices in London. Some later well-known singers who auditioned included Jess Roden, Graham Bell, Gary Pickford-Hopkins, and Steve Parsons (Snips).

Twenty-one-year-old David Coverdale from Saltburn saw an advert in &quot;Melody Maker&quot; that said the band was hiring auditions for a lead singer, considering unknowns. Coverdale, who fronted his band &quot;The Government&quot;, had opened up for Deep Purple in 1969 at Bradford University after Gillan and Glover had just joined. Coverdale and Lord met together on the road and became good friends but haven&#x27;t gotten any contact recently later on until Gillan&#x27;s departure. Coverdale was asked to send a demo and a photo of himself. During the recording of the demo tapes, Coverdale said that he was &quot;very drunk&quot; at that time while singing tunes from Harry Nilsson and Bill Withers (&quot;Everybody&#x27;s Talkin&#x27;&quot; and &quot;Lonely Town, Lonely Street&quot;) and Joe Cocker; he later referenced it as the worst demo tape he had recorded. (The demo tape could be heard decades later on the 2023 reissue of Whitesnake&#x27;s &quot;The Purple Album&quot;.) For the photo, Coverdale obtained a younger version of himself as a Boy Scout.

Paice received Coverdale&#x27;s demo tape from the management office and was impressed with his vocal technique and told Lord and Blackmore he found the lead singer the band had envisioned. In mid-August 1973, Coverdale auditioned for the band at Scorpio Sound Studios. He then received a call a week later from Tony Edwards that he was welcomed into the band. On 23 September, a day after his 22nd birthday, the band held a press conference to announce Coverdale&#x27;s recruitment as the next official lead singer of Deep Purple.

Before the new line-up was announced, however, the band&#x27;s management, John Coletta told Coverdale to correct his strabismus, resulting in him wearing contact lenses instead of glasses. He was then also prescribed a course of amphetamine-based weight-loss drugs that exhausted him while recording sessions of &quot;Burn&quot;. Coverdale was also asked to shave his mustache and groom his Edgar Broughton hairstyle to a certain length. Lastly, Coletta insisted Coverdale on changing his name but lightly refused. In his experience, Coverdale told &quot;Classic Rock&quot; that he looked just fine as a rockstar, but referred to those changes as Coletta&#x27;s &quot;paranoid&quot; opinion.

Blackmore was very excited about the new line-up, taking it as a &quot;blues-commercial pop&quot; approach. On the way that he envisioned the &#x27;Mark III&#x27; Deep Purple sound, he commented:

==Production and composition==
At the beginning of 9 September 1973, the yet-incomplete &#x27;Mark III&#x27; line-up commenced two weeks of writing material and rehearsal in Clearwell Castle at Gloucestershire. Blackmore was very satisfied with the rehearsals and found most of the songs playable live. &quot;Smoke On The Water&quot; was also rehearsed as the band&#x27;s &quot;national anthem&quot;, which Lord recalled, found &quot;a new way of doing it&quot;. At the end of the two-week period, around half an hour&#x27;s worth of new music was ready to be recorded. At that same time, Coverdale&#x27;s introduction was made to the press.

Blackmore and Paice flew to Europe to search for a new recording location for the upcoming album but were unsuccessful. Ultimately, they settled on recording entirely at the Rolling Stones Mobile Studio in Montreux, Switzerland, where the group previously recorded &quot;Machine Head&quot;.

On 3 November 1973, the Mark III line-up flew to Montreux to commence the official recording. The band worked with producer and engineer Martin Birch, who had worked with the group since the recording of &quot;Deep Purple in Rock&quot; four years earlier. &quot;Burn&quot; features performances from Blackmore, Coverdale, Hughes, Paice and Lord. However, this time they were recording on the top floor of the new Convention Centre, giving them the advantage of recording in a soundproof room. Recordings began on 8 November. Despite Coverdale&#x27;s limited experience in the studio, the recording went on smoothly, laying down the tracks at about one song per day. Five of the multi-track versions of the song &quot;Lay Down, Stay Down&quot;, &quot;Sail Away&quot;, &quot;Might Just Take Your Life&quot;, and &quot;A&#x27; 200&quot; (collectively titled &quot;Racing Cloth&quot;) were dated 8 November, then proceeded with two multi-tracks, &quot;Mistreated&quot; and &quot;What&#x27;s Going On Here&quot;, recorded on 12 November, and the final two tracks, &quot;You Fool No One&quot; and &quot;Burn&quot;, recorded on 14 November.

The band members agreed that Coverdale was very confident despite the lack of experience in the studio. &quot;We had a good time recording that album,&quot; Lord claimed, &quot;David had always been a very self-confident man and if he was overawed to be working with us, it only showed when we were talking between ourselves over a beer later, never during the actual recording.&quot; Birch agreed, saying &quot;It was a much happier recording session than &quot;Who Do We Think We Are&quot;, everybody wanted to get down and work together. David was very nervous because he&#x27;d never recorded before.&quot;

When the recording for the album concluded, the band flew back to London to have Birch mix the record at Gillan&#x27;s studio, Kingsway Recorders. Birch made certain Paice&#x27;s drums levels were normalized, while Blackmore made sure his own guitar was audible in the mix while being aided by assistant engineer Tapani Tapanainen. However, during the mixing of &quot;Mistreated&quot;, Coverdale and Hughes recorded a dozen vocal tracks for the final chorus towards the end of the song. In Blackmore&#x27;s view, the backing vocals overlapped the guitar solo, so the vocal stems were muted throughout the process. Coverdale was upset about the change and felt that the drama created by overlapping vocal tracks had been almost completely lost.

After the album had been mixed and was ready to be mastered, the band started to perform as a warm-up set in Europe. They set out rehearsals in early December 1973 to start doing a six-show setlist their debut originally being planned in Aarhus, Denmark. However, when the plane carrying the group and some of their equipment unknowingly arrived late in Denmark, the Aarhus show was cancelled; around 4,000 were in attendance. Their next gig, at K.B. Hallen arena in Copenhagen on 9 December 1973, marked the actual first Mark III live debut. Coverdale recalled the event, describing it as &quot;nervous&quot; and challenging for the new line-up, given that the band had not toured for six months.

After their first gig concluded, the band celebrated at a local club until 4 in the morning. They were booked to Rosenberg Studios but arrived late as Coverdale stayed back at his hotel room sleeping from the previous night. Lord reportedly led the session to lay out the tracks, while Coverdale prepared a set of lyrics. The sessions got off to a slow start, according to Lord, there was nonsense among with the previous night the band had attended a local club. On the contrary, Coverdale was still exhausted from the other night, so he preferred not to sing on that track except doing chorus lines with Glenn. There, the sessions resulted in a composition that was later named, &quot;Coronarias Redig&quot;. The band later left the studio by 6:30 in the evening as it had already been booked for someone else.

At that following day, the group went en-route to Sweden, where they received a gold certification disc from EMI. On that same day, they played at the Scandinavium. After the concert, they returned to Copenhagen to sign records and autographs.

On 13 December 1973, a press conference was held to announce the final shows of the promotional warm-up tour. The latter went on to Brussels (Belgium), Festhalle Frankfurt, Frankfurt (Germany), then concluded with the show on 17 December at Innsbruck (Austria). Later that month, the band toured only five concerts across France and Germany. The second promotional tour was abruptly cut short when Lord was hospitalized with acute appendicitis. He later recovered within three weeks from the surgery he received. The tour was originally planned to begin in the United States in February but was pushed back until March.

===Music and lyrics===
Purple&#x27;s hard-rock sound incorporated elements of soul and funk, which would become much more prominent on the follow-up album, &quot;Stormbringer&quot;. There was a huge influence of boogie-oriented rock sound which is made in the same way it follows suit with soul and funk. For the first time, it features a more mainstream blues tone approach to their albums since Coverdale&#x27;s introduction, although Blackmore wanted to give a new sound with different methods of genres. Lord said that the biggest difference between &quot;Burn&quot; and the previous albums is in the vocal parts, which the band did &quot;in a completely different way&quot;. According to Lord, the song sounds much more liberated on the album than before:
In previous albums, all members of the band were automatically entered in the composer information of the songs, but now the practice was changed under Blackmore&#x27;s initiative. He was tired of dividing the royalties into five parts, even if the others had little involvement in the composition. &quot;Everyone should get what they do,&quot; Blackmore stated. However, the new practice was followed only in the songs &quot;Sail Away&quot;, &quot;Mistreated&quot; (credited to Blackmore and Coverdale) and &quot;&#x27;A&#x27; 200&quot; (credited to Blackmore, Lord, and Paice). Hughes participated in songwriting but was cheated out of his credits due to unexpired contractual obligations from Blackmore. However, the 30th-anniversary edition of the album included Hughes in the credits for all the tracks except &quot;Sail Away&quot;, &quot;Mistreated&quot;, &quot;A&#x27; 200&quot; and bonus track &quot;Coronarias Redig&quot;.

The opening track &quot;Burn&quot; is one of the highlights of the album. Allmusic critic Eduardo Rivadavia says that it was one of the band&#x27;s best opening tracks along with “Highway Star” from &quot;Machine Head&quot;. Paice&#x27;s drumming is strongly featured in the song. The riff is borrowed from George Gershwin&#x27;s song &quot;Fascinating Rhythm&quot;, and the song has some influences from classical music. Paul Stanley of KISS was inspired by &quot;Burn&quot; to write &quot;I Stole Your Love&quot; (the opening track of &quot;Love Gun&quot;). Lord took the solos on the Hammond organ, closing in with more classical-influenced synthesizers. David Coverdale wrote four different lyrics for the song, as he sometimes had trouble writing lyrics that pleased Blackmore. Blackmore wanted the songs to deal with things like demonology and mythology. He also wanted to avoid traditional rock themes such as bands, hotels, and touring life. He equated his opinion to the fact that no one is interested in listening to plumbers&#x27; stories about installation work or bankers talking about the financial world. According to Coverdale, during the album recording in Montreux, he spent all night writing four-to-six different lyrics, and Blackmore would choose which finally ended up on the official recording. To add in his writing style, Coverdale viewed them as &quot;science fiction&quot; poems.

&quot;Might Just Take Your Life&quot; starts as a mid-paced song with a funky-blues tone approach with an organ chord progression Lord had played, inserted as a solo intro. Coverdale explained that the track was influenced by The Band&#x27;s &quot;Chest Fever&quot; based on a blues-oriented sound. From its lyrical context, according to Coverdale, it was meant for a group of people who have laughed at him and Hughes at their backs when they first thought of joining the group in 1973. The arrangement sets off without a guitar solo, alongside a key change, and a tambourine was added to the percussion mix. Lord finishes it off with the Hammond organ solo arrangement nearly at the end of the track. Blackmore&#x27;s guitar solo was in the mix but sounded inaudible due to an overlay of the organ solo and other instruments.

&quot;Lay Down, Stay Down&quot;, the third track of the album, was the first to be finished in the studio. It contains influences from funk and rock and roll and features Paice&#x27;s drums, cowbell, and tambourine in a prominent role. At first, the song had a slightly different arrangement and its working title was &quot;That&#x27;s Alright&quot;. Coverdale claimed that the composition had the alternate working title of &quot;Shit Fuck Cack Wank&quot;; according to him, &quot;Glenn Hughes and I would wrap our golden tonsils around those swear-words throughout rehearsals until I came up with &#x27;Lay Down, Stay Down&#x27; – wherever the fuck that came from. I suppose it was like all those Elvis lyrics, looking for trouble and stuff – that was a cracker.&quot; Paice affirmed that this was his favorite track on this album.

&quot;Sail Away&quot; is written with a funk-bluesier sound that is even compared with Led Zeppelin&#x27;s &quot;Trampled Under Foot&quot; (released one year later). At first, Coverdale sang the parts so low that he wasn&#x27;t satisfied with the results, but when the finished song was later listened to in the studio, with Coverdale&#x27;s re-recorded vocal tracks, it sounded exceptional, getting what he wanted. It was first played on a tape of a cymbal played in reverse, in order to achieve an effect. Blackmore also uses the Synthi Hi-Fli guitar synthesizer in the song to play its &quot;lyrical and haunting fade-out solo&quot; with a slide guitar. Lord also plays the song with the synthesizer which is also replicated to the tone of Stevie Wonder, which the band was originally inspired on that track by its rhythm from Wonder&#x27;s song, &quot;Superstition&quot;.

&quot;You Fool No One&quot; was inspired by Paice&#x27;s drumming pattern, initiating a compromised rhythm sequence, whereas this is the only track Coverdale and Hughes sang together, to create an effect. After Paice took about four tries to create drumming stems in the studio, he dosed off entirely in sweat and angrily told other recording members that they were apparently not able to keep up with the rhythm, threatening to walk out if the latter continued. According to Hughes, Paice&#x27;s drumming pattern was partially inspired from John Bonham from Led Zeppelin.

&quot;What&#x27;s Goin&#x27; On Here&quot; starts off with a 28-bar verse, later 32-bar in the final verse, with Lord playing piano and Blackmore playing slide guitar in the chorus. Coverdale and Hughes again sang mostly in parts equally. According to Coverdale, he affirmed that the song was merely based from Jimi Hendrix&#x27;s Highway Chile.

&quot;Mistreated&quot; is a slow-rolling blues tone, that Coverdale sings alone, featured as the longest track in the album. According to the 30th-anniversary linear booklet, the song was written by Blackmore a few years ago and was even considered one of the tracks for the &quot;Who Do We Think We Are&quot; album, but was scrapped until Coverdale brought the lyrics up for its composition.

During the studio recording for &quot;Mistreated&quot;, most of the instrumental tracks were recorded from 11 p.m. to 7:30 a.m. When it was time for Coverdale to hear his own vocal parts after the first playback, he found it to be very mediocre which upset him, demanding it to be perfect for the next take. &quot;It was so bad I just sat down and cried because I wanted it to be so good,&quot; Coverdale remembered the following night. The next night followed another session and Coverdale took a second try to attempt to get the perfect voice he wanted on the record. Coverdale admitted the pressure he was going through during the recording, although he was very timid at that time. Blackmore’s solo near the end of the song was at first layered heavily by Coverdale and Hughes’ chorus vocals, making it extremely hard to hear the solo. As a result, the stems that aided the vocals were deleted, which again upset Coverdale. Although Coverdale took the chorus vocals as nearly fantastic as it was, he admitted on Blackmore&#x27;s argument that he can&#x27;t have too many vocal recordings, otherwise it would disorient the guitar&#x27;s sound.

&quot;A&#x27; 200&quot; is an instrumental composition that was played to a &#x27;Bolero&#x27; rhythm. Originally composed by Lord, Paice, and Blackmore, this was the only instrumental without vocals, with the exception of &quot;Coronarias Redig&quot;, to be performed by the &#x27;Mark III&#x27; line-up. The multi-tracked synthesizers were all performed by Lord as the lead keyboardist. Blackmore, feeling that he was not required to be on the track chimed in on a guitar solo right before the song ended with the synths works panned across the audio channels. It was not clear where the &quot;&#x27;A&#x27;&quot; on the track was conceived, but fans speculated it as a work of science fiction, which Coverdale denied. However, a lice treatment shampoo product that had the name &quot;A-200&quot; was conceived by Lord and used as a song title, according to the 30th-anniversary booklet notes.

&quot;Coronarias Redig&quot; previously appeared as the non-album single B-Side of &quot;Burn&quot;. Originally recorded on 10 December 1973 at Rosenborg Studios in Copenhagen, right after their first &#x27;Mark III&#x27; line-up touring appearance had been concluded, it was the only track to be left out of the album. It follows as another instrumental track incorporating Lord’s organ whereabouts and vibrancy of its similar funk-tone approach. Coverdale fell asleep in the studio and lost his voice, forcing it to commend without a vocal track. So Blackmore played a long guitar solo over the melody line as the only highlight noted in its composition. Coverdale and Glenn Hughes only sang a few chorus lines that ended up as stems on the track. While in the studio, the band was unable to come up with a title, but engineer Freddy Hanssen gave them a working title, named &quot;Skideflud&quot;, meaning pissed off, which later re-worded to &quot;Drunk At The Revolution&quot;. The song was remixed and featured on the 30th-anniversary edition of the album.

==Release and promotion==
&quot;Burn&quot; was released on 15 February 1974 by EMIPurple in Europe and Warner Bros. in North America. It debuted at number seventeen on 2 March, then peaked at number three the following week on their UK native, holding its spot for twenty-three weeks, and by July 1974, it had been certified gold by the BPI for sales of over 100,000 copies in the UK. In the US, the album reached number three on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200, marking its appearance for 30 weeks, and was eventually certified gold by the RIAA in 20 March for sales of 500,000 units in the country, later would be certified platnium. Overall, the album charted in 13 countries, cracking the top spot in Austria, Denmark, Germany, and Norway, while receiving gold certification levels in France, Germany, and Sweden.

Some record pressings have the translated album title in some countries; in Argentina, it was named &quot;Quemar&quot;, while in Uruguay, it was named &quot;Arde&quot;.

Two singles were released, all of which charted. &quot;Might Just Take Your Life&quot; charted at number 95 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 singles chart, number 84 in Canada, and number 55 in the UK. &quot;Burn&quot; did not reach the US singles chart but charted at number five on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart, and in 1978, charted at number 45 in the UK. In many interviews, the band wanted to put out the appropriate tracks as singles, but in this case, took word from the record label&#x27;s advice. Coverdale explained that &quot;Sail Away&quot; was originally envisioned to be a single but Warner Bros. said that &quot;Might Just Take Your Life&quot; was more commercial.

==Touring==

Mark III embarked on a US spring tour that started in Detroit on 3 March 1974. Although the tour was sold out in record time, due to the new line-up and playing style, the audience at the first concerts received mixed reactions. Hughes&#x27; cocaine usage started to affect his performance throughout the tour.&lt;ref name=&quot;Ekblad/45&quot;&gt;Ekblad: p. 45.&lt;/ref&gt; The group later continue on to include shows at Madison Square Garden, New York, on 13 March, and Nassau Coliseum four days later. The band co-headlined (with Emerson, Lake &amp; Palmer) the California Jam festival at Ontario Motor Speedway in Ontario, southern California, on 6 April 1974. Attracting over 250,000 fans, the festival also included 1970s rock giants Black Sabbath, Eagles and Earth, Wind &amp; Fire. Portions of the show were telecast on ABC Television in the US, exposing the band to a wider audience. During the show, Blackmore struck one of the cameras five times with a guitar and set off a pyrotechnic device in one of his amplifiers, creating a large fireball that was quickly extinguished. The band quickly exited the venue by helicopter, avoiding fire marshals, police officers, and ABC executives. In the end, Deep Purple only had to replace a $5,000 camera. California Jam has even been considered the highlight of Deep Purple&#x27;s career, as the band has not performed for such a large audience since then. A month later, the band&#x27;s 22 May performance at the Gaumont State Cinema in Kilburn, London, was recorded and later released in 1982 as &quot;Live in London&quot;. The tour ended at Coventry on 29 May 1974.

==Cover art==
The album cover features burning candles that resemble the faces of the band members photographed by Fin Costello. He took the photo quickly, as it was just to give the band an idea of his idea, but unbeknownst to him, it ended up being the album cover. Years later, Costello reshot the cover for &quot;Kerrang!&quot; for an article in the magazine.

On the back cover, the same candles are extinguished and partially melted, and the band members&#x27; faces are in the background. The tracklist and technical data of the disc are also marked on the cover.

The original candles have not been for sale, but another, unused set of candles has been up for auction. At the turn of the millennium, there were copies graded as low quality on the market, which were also advertised on the internet.

==Reception==
In 2004, &quot;Burn&quot; was remastered and released with bonus tracks. &quot;Coronarias Redig&quot; was recorded during the &quot;Burn&quot; recording sessions, used only as a B-side for the &quot;Might Just Take Your Life&quot; single in 1974. It appears as a bonus track (in remixed form) on the anniversary edition re-release. The 2004 remix version of &quot;Burn&quot; was later used in &quot;Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock&quot;.

In 2005, an unauthorised documentary about the album was produced as part of &quot;The Ultimate Critical Review&quot; series. It featured a brand new interview with Glenn Hughes.

===Legacy===
In a retrospective review for AllMusic, Eduardo Rivadavia said: 

== Track listings ==


== Personnel ==
Credits are adapted from the album&#x27;s liner notes.

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==


==Release history==
== Accolades ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="53" end="64" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410979" start="99" end="113" title="Purple Records" label="Purple Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="135" end="155" title="Warner Bros. Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q115962" start="224" end="239" title="David Coverdale" label="David Coverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661183" start="258" end="266" title="List of Deep Purple members" label="Mark III"/>
<link wikidata="Q310749" start="321" end="333" title="Glenn Hughes (musician)" label="Glenn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q691001" start="348" end="355" title="Trapeze (band)" label="Trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q192183" start="377" end="394" title="Ritchie Blackmore" label="Ritchie Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192114" start="406" end="414" title="Jon Lord" label="Jon Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q213609" start="433" end="442" title="Ian Paice" label="Ian Paice"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="490" end="499" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="504" end="509" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q211742" start="593" end="605" title="Machine Head (album)" label="Machine Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q835891" start="652" end="661" title="funk rock" label="funk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q614833" start="1413" end="1435" title="Who Do We Think We Are" label="Who Do We Think We Are"/>
<link wikidata="Q205230" start="1550" end="1560" title="Ian Gillan" label="Ian Gillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192183" start="1575" end="1592" title="Ritchie Blackmore" label="Ritchie Blackmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q216700" start="2198" end="2210" title="Roger Glover" label="Roger Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q610225" start="2565" end="2572" title="Artists and repertoire" label="A&amp;amp;R"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410979" start="2576" end="2590" title="Purple Records" label="Purple Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200918" start="3424" end="3431" title="Trapeze" label="Trapeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277567" start="3539" end="3553" title="Whisky a Go Go" label="Whisky a Go Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q310749" start="3609" end="3621" title="Glenn Hughes (musician)" label="Glenn Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3959" end="3967" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595538" start="4509" end="4521" title="Stormbringer" label="Stormbringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q745834" start="4538" end="4557" title="Come Taste the Band" label="Come Taste the Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q313098" start="5062" end="5074" title="Paul Rodgers" label="Paul Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q45650" start="5081" end="5085" title="Free (band)" label="Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q745517" start="5334" end="5345" title="Bad Company" label="Bad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q637654" start="5735" end="5746" title="John Lawton (singer)" label="John Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q108666" start="5785" end="5795" title="Uriah Heep (band)" label="Uriah Heep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479818" start="6259" end="6269" title="Jess Roden" label="Jess Roden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592660" start="6271" end="6282" title="Graham Bell (singer)" label="Graham Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q47458804" start="6284" end="6305" title="Gary Pickford-Hopkins" label="Gary Pickford-Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458222" start="6311" end="6332" title="Stephen W. Parsons" label="Steve Parsons (Snips)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115962" start="6355" end="6370" title="David Coverdale" label="David Coverdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2332298" start="6376" end="6384" title="Saltburn-by-the-Sea" label="Saltburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="6408" end="6420" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q954035" start="6609" end="6628" title="University of Bradford" label="Bradford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q281034" start="7010" end="7023" title="Harry Nilsson" label="Harry Nilsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q346565" start="7028" end="7040" title="Bill Withers" label="Bill Withers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754576" start="7048" end="7077" title="Everybody&amp;#x27;s Talkin&amp;#x27;" label="Everybody&amp;#x27;s Talkin&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190076" start="7132" end="7142" title="Joe Cocker" label="Joe Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q189965" start="7274" end="7284" title="Whitesnake" label="Whitesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q19844698" start="7298" end="7314" title="The Purple Album (Whitesnake album)" label="The Purple Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q56277293" start="7650" end="7671" title="Scorpio Sound Studios" label="Scorpio Sound Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q125912905" start="7715" end="7727" title="Tony Edwards (manager)" label="Tony Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6226665" start="8011" end="8023" title="John Coletta" label="John Coletta"/>
<link wikidata="Q179951" start="8054" end="8064" title="strabismus" label="strabismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q179452" start="8166" end="8183" title="Amphetamine" label="amphetamine-based"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639834" start="8328" end="8343" title="Edgar Broughton Band" label="Edgar Broughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q509854" start="8492" end="8504" title="Classic Rock (magazine)" label="Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5130970" start="9001" end="9017" title="Clearwell Castle" label="Clearwell Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q23165" start="9021" end="9036" title="Gloucestershire" label="Gloucestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q636399" start="9136" end="9154" title="Smoke On The Water" label="Smoke On The Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179576" start="9644" end="9672" title="Rolling Stones Mobile Studio" label="Rolling Stones Mobile Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q69354" start="9676" end="9684" title="Montreux" label="Montreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="9686" end="9697" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q349057" start="9899" end="9911" title="Martin Birch" label="Martin Birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q211193" start="9972" end="9991" title="Deep Purple in Rock" label="Deep Purple in Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016721" start="10859" end="10863" title="Burn (Deep Purple song)" label="Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q55394062" start="11822" end="11839" title="Tapani Tapanainen" label="Tapani Tapanainen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25319" start="12492" end="12498" title="Aarhus" label="Aarhus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="12500" end="12507" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496201" start="12700" end="12711" title="K.B. Hallen" label="K.B. Hallen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="12721" end="12731" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="13817" end="13823" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="13876" end="13879" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138447" start="13918" end="13930" title="Scandinavium" label="Scandinavium"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="14144" end="14152" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="14154" end="14161" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q59518" start="14164" end="14183" title="Festhalle Frankfurt" label="Festhalle Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="14185" end="14194" title="Frankfurt" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="14196" end="14203" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="14253" end="14262" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="14264" end="14271" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="14334" end="14340" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q121041" start="14443" end="14455" title="appendicitis" label="appendicitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="14573" end="14586" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="14711" end="14715" title="Soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="14720" end="14724" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q677290" start="14795" end="14807" title="Stormbringer (album)" label="Stormbringer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3263753" start="14845" end="14851" title="boogie" label="boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134621" start="16238" end="16248" title="Mistreated (song)" label="Mistreated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016721" start="16351" end="16355" title="Burn (Deep Purple song)" label="Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417325" start="16507" end="16519" title="Highway Star (song)" label="Highway Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q123829" start="16634" end="16649" title="George Gershwin" label="George Gershwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436654" start="16668" end="16686" title="Fascinating Rhythm" label="Fascinating Rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q295542" start="16749" end="16761" title="Paul Stanley" label="Paul Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="16765" end="16769" title="Kiss (band)" label="KISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q755019" start="16870" end="16878" title="Love Gun" label="Love Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="16914" end="16927" title="Hammond organ" label="Hammond organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q323996" start="17162" end="17172" title="demonology" label="demonology"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="17177" end="17186" title="mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q600344" start="17961" end="17976" title="The Band" label="The Band&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439151" start="18283" end="18286" title="Major and minor" label="key"/>
<link wikidata="Q7749" start="18708" end="18721" title="rock and roll" label="rock and roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="19263" end="19268" title="Elvis" label="Elvis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="19486" end="19498" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q523149" start="19512" end="19531" title="Trampled Under Foot" label="Trampled Under Foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q428152" start="20042" end="20054" title="slide guitar" label="slide guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="20142" end="20155" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q727067" start="20255" end="20267" title="Superstition (song)" label="Superstition"/>
<link wikidata="Q485490" start="20818" end="20829" title="John Bonham" label="John Bonham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="21161" end="21173" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3135453" start="21181" end="21194" title="Highway Chile" label="Highway Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="23063" end="23075" title="synthesizers" label="synthesizers"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="24778" end="24781" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410979" start="24781" end="24787" title="Purple Records" label="Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="24932" end="24941" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK native"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="25036" end="25039" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="BPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="25133" end="25158" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="25238" end="25242" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="25804" end="25833" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016721" start="25901" end="25905" title="Burn (Deep Purple song)" label="Burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q570827" start="25981" end="26003" title="Bubbling Under Hot 100" label="Bubbling Under Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q186125" start="26814" end="26835" title="Madison Square Garden" label="Madison Square Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048921" start="26864" end="26879" title="Nassau Coliseum" label="Nassau Coliseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q273171" start="26925" end="26951" title="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer" label="Emerson, Lake &amp;amp; Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933988" start="26957" end="26971" title="California Jam" label="California Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663312" start="26984" end="27006" title="Ontario Motor Speedway" label="Ontario Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q488134" start="27010" end="27017" title="Ontario, California" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="27132" end="27145" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="27147" end="27153" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q28974" start="27158" end="27180" title="Earth, Wind &amp;amp; Fire" label="Earth, Wind &amp;amp; Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="27220" end="27223" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527683" start="27859" end="27879" title="Gaumont State Cinema" label="Gaumont State Cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q150214" start="27883" end="27890" title="Kilburn, London" label="Kilburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072132" start="27949" end="27963" title="Live in London (Deep Purple album)" label="Live in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225" start="27989" end="27997" title="Coventry" label="Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="28332" end="28340" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q215233" start="29015" end="29021" title="B-side" label="B-side"/>
<link wikidata="" start="29236" end="29265" title="Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock" label="Guitar Hero: Warriors of Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="29497" end="29505" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019985" wikidata="Q1502448" url="?curid=1019985" title="Geno Washington">
<text>Geno Washington (born William Francis Washington; December 21, 1943, in Evansville, Indiana) is an American R&amp;B singer who released five albums with the Ram Jam Band between 1966 and 1969, and eight solo albums beginning in 1976.

==Background==

Washington was stationed in England with the United States Air Force during the early 1960s. While stationed in East Anglia, Washington became known as a frequent stand-in at gigs around London. When guitarist Pete Gage saw him at a nightclub in 1965, he asked Washington to join his new group, that was to become Geno Washington &amp; the Ram Jam Band. Gage later formed Vinegar Joe with Elkie Brooks and Robert Palmer. The band&#x27;s name came from the Ram Jam Inn, an old coaching inn on the A1 (Great North Road) at Stretton, near Oakham, Rutland.

The group had two of the biggest selling UK albums of the 1960s, both of which were live albums. Their most commercially successful album, &quot;Hand Clappin, Foot Stompin, Funky-Butt ... Live!&quot;, was in the UK Albums Chart for 38 weeks in 1966 and 1967, peaking at number 5 on the chart. The other album was &quot;Hipster Flipsters Finger Poppin&#x27; Daddies&quot;, which reached number 8 on the UK album chart. The group had a number of moderate UK Singles Chart hits during 1966–67 on the Pye label: &quot;Water&quot; (which reached no. 39), &quot;Hi Hi Hazel&quot; (no. 45), &quot;Que Sera Sera&quot; (no. 43) and &quot;Michael (The Lover)&quot; (no. 39). They managed to build up a strong following with the crowds due to their energetic tour performances. Like their Pye label mates and rivals Jimmy James and the Vagabonds, they became popular with the mod scene. The band broke up in the autumn of 1969, with the band members going their own ways while Geno Washington continued as a solo artist, prior to returning to the United States. Keyboard player Geoff Pullum became an academic linguist, and is today emeritus professor at the University of Edinburgh.
==Career==
===1960s===
It was reported by &quot;Record Mirror&quot; in the magazine&#x27;s July 13, 1968 issue that Washington was writing and looking to direct a documentary about racism. With the majority of the filming to be done in London, there was to be added clips that showed racial violence in South Africa. With a budget of UK 12,000 the planned release was to be some time after January 1969. It was also announced that Washington was writing a book, &quot;One Way Ticket to the White House&quot; which was to be released in paperback form in the UK and US sometime in 1968.

===1970s===
Washington left the UK to return to the United States and disappeared from the music industry for a length of time. He studied hypnosis and meditation, made acquaintance with The Beach Boys and recorded some music with them that was never released. He would later record three albums for the DJM label, &quot;Geno&#x27;s Back&quot; (1976), &quot;Live&quot; (1976), and &quot;That&#x27;s Why Hollywood Loves Me&quot; (1979).

In May 1976, he released a single, &quot;You Lovely Witch&quot;. Washington co-produced it with Kaplan Kaye. It was released on DJM 1011. A Single Pick for May 29, 1976, &quot;Record World&quot; predicted that a lot of plays would pick up R&amp;B action.

===1980s===
He was encouraged to make a comeback in 1980 due to the rekindled interest in him resulting from the Dexys Midnight Runners hit single &quot;Geno&quot;, but he initially declined, as he was completing his degree in hypnotism. But soon he was back in the UK touring extensively and playing many gigs, particularly in south-east London.

Washington was appearing at the Triad Leisure Centre at Bishop&#x27;s Stortford on December 5, 1980.

===1990s to present===
Washington has been active on stage, recording and releasing new music on various labels, with titles such as &quot;Change Your Thoughts You Change Your Life&quot;, &quot;Live Sideways&quot;, &quot;Loose Lips&quot;, &quot;Put Out the Cat&quot;, &quot;The Return of the G&quot;, &quot;Take This Job and Stuff It&quot; and &quot;What&#x27;s in the Pot?&quot;.

As of 2021, Washington and his band could be regularly seen touring in the UK. In January 2009 he released a single &quot;I&#x27;m Doing 99 Years&quot; and the proceeds from the single&#x27;s sales will go to the victims of crime and child abuse. In July 2009 he headlined the Kelvedon Free Music Festival. In August 2010, Geno Washington &amp; the Ram Jam Band were one of the headline acts at Rhythm Festival, and appeared at the Gulbenkian Theatre, Canterbury in October 2010. More recently, in October 2014, they performed in the Spiegeltent at the Canterbury Festival of Arts.

==Television and film career==
Washington has appeared on television since the 1960s. In 1966 he appeared in Episode 11 of &quot;Ready Steady Go!&quot; This episode also featured other stars such as Françoise Hardy, Cilla Black, Wayne Fontana and the Spencer Davis Group. In 1967, along with the Ram Jam Band, he appeared on &quot;The Record Star Show&quot; and doubtless others in the 1960s. Since then he has appeared on &quot;Top Ten&quot; (1980) in 2000 and the mini series &quot;S.O.U.L.—Sounds of Underground London&quot; in 2003.

Geno appears in the movie &quot;A Bit of Tom Jones?&quot;, which had its London premiere in 2009. The film, which was made by Tred Films in Tredegar in South Wales, stars Jonny Owen and Roger Evans, with a cast including Matt Berry, John Henshaw and Denise Welch. The film won the BAFTA Cymru &quot;Best Film&quot; award in 2010.

He has embraced acting, taking a role in &quot;Paparazzo&quot;, a 1995 film starring Nick Berry and Fay Masterson. In 2007 he appeared as himself in an episode of &quot;Midsomer Murders&quot;, entitled &quot;The Axeman Cometh&quot;, that also featured Suzi Quatro and Mike Read.

==Writing and public speaking==
He is the author of &quot;The Blood Brothers&quot;, a war exploitation story. Washington has also written children&#x27;s stories. He has appeared as a motivational speaker.

==Hypnotism==
Washington is a member of the Guild of Hypnotists. He has also included hypnotism as part of his act. In the past his show has consisted of some demonstrations of hypnotism in the first half and some &quot;Get down soul music&quot; in the second half.

==Current and recent activities==
He recently collaborated with comedian and musician Matt Berry for the track &quot;Get Here in Time&quot;. Also in other activities involving Matt Berry, Geno is featured on a 2012 song by Berry called &quot;Theme From Snuff Box&quot;.

==Personal life==
Geno met his wife Frenchie at The Bag O&#x27;Nails club in London, which is also where her sister met Peter Noone of Herman&#x27;s Hermits, whom she married. This is also the same club where Paul McCartney met Linda Eastman.

==Solo discography==
===Albums===
*&quot;Geno&#x27;s Back&quot; – DJM DJF 20457 – 1976
*&quot;Geno Live&quot; – DJM DJF 20486 – 1976
*&quot;That&#x27;s Why Hollywood Loves Me&quot; – DJM DJF 20561 – 1979
*&quot;Put Out the Cat&quot; – Teldec AP 624665 – 1981
*&quot;Live Sideways&quot; – Ammunition GENO LP1 – 1986
*&quot;Take That Job and Stuff It&quot; – Konnexion KOMO 788027 – 1987

====CD album====
*&quot;Change Your Thoughts You Change Your Life (With the Purple Aces)&quot; – Thunderbird CSA 114 – 1998

===Singles===
====7&quot; singles====
*&quot;Alison Please&quot;/&quot;Each and Every Part of Me&quot; – PYE 7N 45019 – 1971
*&quot;Feeling So Good (Skooby Doo)&quot;/&quot;My Little Chickadee&quot; – PYE 7N 45085 – 1971
*&quot;Dirty, Dirty&quot;/&quot;Give &#x27;Em a Hand&quot; – PYE 7N 45121
*&quot;End of the World&quot;/&quot;Tell Me Tell Me Please&quot; – DJM DJS 10365 – 1975
*&quot;Hold on Momma&quot;/&quot;Help I&#x27;m in Love Again&quot; – DJM DJS 10392 – 1975
*&quot;Love Me Love Me&quot;/&quot;Hold On&quot; – DJM DJS 10642 – 1976
*&quot;Oh Pretty Woman&quot;/&quot;B.S.E. Love&quot; – DJM DJS 10669 – 1976
*&quot;Your Love Keeps on Haunting Me&quot;/&quot;La La La&quot; – DJM DJS 10712 – 1976
*&quot;Soothe Me&quot;/&quot;My Kind of Love&quot; – DJM DJS 10761 – 1977
*&quot;Boogie Queen&quot;/&quot;Why Did You Go Away?&quot; – DJM DJS 10803 – 1977
*&quot;Proud Mary&quot;/&quot;Stir It Up&quot; – DJM DJS 10825 – 1978
*&quot;My Money Your Money&quot;/&quot;Get Some Bad Tonight&quot; – DJM DJS 10919 – 1979
*&quot;Baby Come Back&quot;/&quot;Caught in the Middle&quot; – DJM DJS 10926 – 1979
*&quot;Michael (The Lover)&quot;/&quot;Accept My Invitation&quot; – Soul Supply 7SS101 – 1984
*&quot;Rock the Car&quot;/&quot;Catch Me&quot; – Mil MILS 1 – 1988
*&quot;Jingle Bells&quot;/&quot;Rock the Car&quot; – G Kap GKA 001 – 1988

====12&quot; singles====
*&quot;Baby Come Back&quot;/&quot;Caught in the Middle&quot; – DJM DJR 10926 – 1979
*&quot;My Money Your Money&quot;/&quot;Get Some Bad Tonight&quot; – DJR 18005 – 1979
*&quot;Michael (The Lover)&quot;/&quot;Accept My Invitation&quot; / &quot;Emergency 999&quot; – Soul Supply 12SS101 – 1984
*&quot;Rock the Car&quot;/&quot;Catch Me&quot; – Mil MILST 1 – 1988

====CD single====
*&quot;The Blues Walks with Me&quot;/&quot;Wake Me When the Morning Comes&quot; – Thunderbird CSA 007 – 1998

==References==
==External links==
*Geno Washington Official Facebook</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1502448" start="0" end="15" title="Geno Washington" label="Geno Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502448" start="22" end="48" title="Geno Washington" label="William Francis Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q486459" start="72" end="91" title="Evansville, Indiana" label="Evansville, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="108" end="115" title="Rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533414" start="153" end="169" title="Geno Washington &amp;amp; the Ram Jam Band" label="the Ram Jam Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="296" end="319" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="363" end="374" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q182832" start="426" end="430" title="concert" label="gigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171972" start="461" end="470" title="Pete Gage (guitarist)" label="Pete Gage"/>
<link wikidata="Q622425" start="484" end="493" title="nightclub" label="nightclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533414" start="565" end="603" title="Geno Washington &amp;amp; the Ram Jam Band" label="Geno Washington &amp;amp; the Ram Jam Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q385733" start="623" end="634" title="Vinegar Joe (band)" label="Vinegar Joe"/>
<link wikidata="Q438651" start="640" end="652" title="Elkie Brooks" label="Elkie Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q325412" start="657" end="670" title="Robert Palmer (singer)" label="Robert Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899109" start="707" end="718" title="Ram Jam Inn" label="Ram Jam Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q966002" start="727" end="739" title="coaching inn" label="coaching inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q279859" start="747" end="749" title="A1 road (Great Britain)" label="A1"/>
<link wikidata="Q821932" start="772" end="780" title="Stretton, Rutland" label="Stretton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001942" start="787" end="793" title="Oakham" label="Oakham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23107" start="795" end="802" title="Rutland" label="Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="1017" end="1032" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="1258" end="1274" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997853" start="1275" end="1279" title="hit record" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117397" start="1302" end="1305" title="Pye Records" label="Pye"/>
<link wikidata="Q961116" start="1610" end="1639" title="Jimmy James (singer)" label="Jimmy James and the Vagabonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q503685" start="1670" end="1673" title="Mod (subculture)" label="mod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503035" start="1872" end="1884" title="Geoffrey K. Pullum" label="Geoff Pullum"/>
<link wikidata="Q746359" start="2656" end="2670" title="music industry" label="music industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="2704" end="2712" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="2717" end="2727" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183048" start="2752" end="2766" title="The Beach Boys" label="The Beach Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q20077126" start="2771" end="2779" title="sound recording and reproduction" label="recorded"/>
<link wikidata="Q247259" start="3371" end="3393" title="Dexys Midnight Runners" label="Dexys Midnight Runners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533404" start="3411" end="3415" title="Geno (song)" label="Geno"/>
<link wikidata="Q19797" start="3662" end="3685" title="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Stortford" label="Bishop&amp;#x27;s Stortford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573906" start="4150" end="4157" title="concert tour" label="touring"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321908" start="4485" end="4500" title="Rhythm Festival" label="Rhythm Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516684" start="4522" end="4540" title="Gulbenkian Theatre" label="Gulbenkian Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033748" start="4643" end="4670" title="Canterbury Festival" label="Canterbury Festival of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284282" start="4802" end="4818" title="Ready Steady Go!" label="Ready Steady Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q53939" start="4872" end="4887" title="Françoise Hardy" label="Françoise Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q286525" start="4889" end="4900" title="Cilla Black" label="Cilla Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q474579" start="4902" end="4915" title="Wayne Fontana" label="Wayne Fontana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049145" start="4920" end="4943" title="the Spencer Davis Group" label="the Spencer Davis Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533414" start="4969" end="4981" title="Geno Washington &amp;amp; the Ram Jam Band" label="Ram Jam Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4655491" start="5243" end="5262" title="A Bit of Tom Jones?" label="A Bit of Tom Jones?"/>
<link wikidata="Q6275805" start="5382" end="5392" title="Jonny Owen" label="Jonny Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190397" start="5432" end="5442" title="Matt Berry" label="Matt Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181741" start="5444" end="5456" title="John Henshaw" label="John Henshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257787" start="5461" end="5473" title="Denise Welch" label="Denise Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q156624" start="5589" end="5598" title="Paparazzo" label="Paparazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814311" start="5627" end="5637" title="Nick Berry" label="Nick Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438927" start="5642" end="5655" title="Fay Masterson" label="Fay Masterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q751917" start="5711" end="5727" title="Midsomer Murders" label="Midsomer Murders"/>
<link wikidata="Q234750" start="5794" end="5805" title="Suzi Quatro" label="Suzi Quatro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6848513" start="5810" end="5819" title="Mike Read" label="Mike Read"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="5908" end="5911" title="Vietnam War" label="war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190397" start="6382" end="6392" title="Matt Berry" label="Matt Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715328" start="6615" end="6635" title="The Bag O&amp;#x27;Nails" label="The Bag O&amp;#x27;Nails"/>
<link wikidata="Q516522" start="6687" end="6698" title="Peter Noone" label="Peter Noone"/>
<link wikidata="Q693597" start="6702" end="6723" title="Herman&amp;#x27;s Hermits" label="Herman&amp;#x27;s Hermits"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1019993" wikidata="Q7783265" url="?curid=1019993" title="Thermus">
<text>Thermus is a genus of thermophilic bacteria. It is one of several bacteria belonging to the &quot;Deinococcota&quot; phylum. According to comparative analysis of 16S rRNA, this is one the most ancient group of bacteria. &quot;Thermus&quot; species can be distinguished from other genera in the family &quot;Thermaceae&quot; as well as all other bacteria by the presence of eight conserved signature indels found in proteins such as adenylate kinase and replicative DNA helicase as well as 14 conserved signature proteins that are exclusively shared by members of this genus.

==Phylogeny==

The currently accepted taxonomy is based on the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) and the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI).

Between all its species, &quot;T. thermophilus&quot; has a special importance as a model organism for basic and applied research.

Species incertae sedis:
* &quot;&quot;T. anatoliensis&quot; 
* &quot;T. caldophilus&quot; 
* &quot;T. eggertssonii&quot; 
* &quot;T. murrieta&quot; 
* &quot;T. nonproteolyticus&quot; 
* &quot;T. rehai&quot; 
* &quot;T. yunnanensis&quot;&quot; 

== Habitats ==
The strains of the genus &quot;Thermus&quot; are generally isolated from hydrothermal areas where the range of water temperature is 55–70 °C and that of pH is 5.0–10.5.

The first isolate of the genus Thermus was isolated from hydrothermal areas in Yellowstone National Park. Later on more isolates were obtained from several hydrothermal areas worldwide, such as in Japan, Iceland, New Zealand, New Mexico or the Australian Artesian Basin.

==See also==
* Bacteria
* Biotechnology
* Thermophiles
* Geyser
* List of bacteria genera
* List of bacterial orders

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="13" end="18" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q834023" start="22" end="34" title="thermophilic" label="thermophilic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="35" end="43" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q88926185" start="98" end="110" title="Deinococcota" label="Deinococcota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209205" start="162" end="170" title="16S ribosomal RNA" label="16S rRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163163" start="379" end="405" title="conserved signature indels" label="conserved signature indels"/>
<link wikidata="Q356240" start="432" end="448" title="adenylate kinase" label="adenylate kinase"/>
<link wikidata="Q138864" start="453" end="477" title="Helicase" label="replicative DNA helicase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595107" start="639" end="694" title="List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature" label="List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature"/>
<link wikidata="Q82494" start="710" end="755" title="National Center for Biotechnology Information" label="National Center for Biotechnology Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q139470" start="796" end="811" title="Thermus thermophilus" label="T. thermophilus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="1613" end="1621" title="Bacteria" label="Bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="1624" end="1637" title="Biotechnology" label="Biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q834023" start="1640" end="1652" title="Thermophiles" label="Thermophiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q83471" start="1655" end="1661" title="Geyser" label="Geyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607050" start="1664" end="1687" title="List of bacteria genera" label="List of bacteria genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625318" start="1690" end="1714" title="List of bacterial orders" label="List of bacterial orders"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020001" wikidata="Q2806205" url="?curid=1020001" title="Evelyn Pierrepont">
<text>Evelyn Pierrepont may refer to:
*Evelyn Pierrepont, 1st Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull (c.1655–1726)
*Evelyn Pierrepont, 2nd Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull (1711–1773)
*Evelyn Pierrepont (MP) (1775–1801)
*Evelyn Pierrepont, 5th Earl Manvers (1888–1940)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5416411" start="33" end="82" title="Evelyn Pierrepont, 1st Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull" label="Evelyn Pierrepont, 1st Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416407" start="98" end="147" title="Evelyn Pierrepont, 2nd Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull" label="Evelyn Pierrepont, 2nd Duke of Kingston-upon-Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845296" start="161" end="183" title="Evelyn Pierrepont (MP)" label="Evelyn Pierrepont (MP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325992" start="197" end="232" title="Evelyn Pierrepont, 5th Earl Manvers" label="Evelyn Pierrepont, 5th Earl Manvers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020009" wikidata="Q5419874" url="?curid=1020009" title="Executive Order 12958">
<text>Executive Order 12958 created new standards for the process of identifying and protecting classified information, and led to an unprecedented effort to declassify millions of pages from the U.S. diplomatic and national security history. In 1995, United States President Bill Clinton signed this Executive Order.

EO 12958 was amended and effectively replaced by President George W. Bush on March 25, 2003, in Executive Order 13292 (text). EO 13292 has itself since been revoked and replaced. The current EO in effect for classified information is Executive Order 13526 (text).

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5419874" start="0" end="21" title="Executive Order 12958" label="Executive Order 12958"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223055" start="90" end="112" title="Classified information in the United States" label="classified information"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="246" end="259" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="260" end="269" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="270" end="282" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="295" end="310" title="Executive order (United States)" label="Executive Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="372" end="386" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419886" start="409" end="430" title="Executive Order 13292" label="Executive Order 13292"/>
<link wikidata="" start="431" end="437" title=":wikisource:Executive Order 13292" label="(text)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419899" start="547" end="568" title="Executive Order 13526" label="Executive Order 13526"/>
<link wikidata="" start="569" end="575" title=":wikisource:Executive Order 13526" label="(text)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020014" wikidata="Q11775675" url="?curid=1020014" title="George Lyttelton">
<text>George Lyttelton may be:

*George Lyttelton (MP), member of parliament for Droitwich in 1586
*George Lyttelton, 1st Baron Lyttelton (1709–1773), English politician
*George Lyttelton, 2nd Baron Lyttelton (1763–1828), Anglo-Irish peer and politician
*George Lyttelton, 4th Baron Lyttelton (1817–1876), founder of Canterbury, New Zealand
*George Lyttelton (teacher) (1883–1962), English teacher and littérateur
*George William Spencer Lyttelton (1847–1913), English civil servant and cricketer</text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="27" end="48" title="George Lyttelton (MP)" label="George Lyttelton (MP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308237" start="75" end="84" title="Droitwich (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Droitwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q336899" start="94" end="131" title="George Lyttelton, 1st Baron Lyttelton" label="George Lyttelton, 1st Baron Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541910" start="165" end="202" title="George Lyttelton, 2nd Baron Lyttelton" label="George Lyttelton, 2nd Baron Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401295" start="249" end="286" title="George Lyttelton, 4th Baron Lyttelton" label="George Lyttelton, 4th Baron Lyttelton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546336" start="336" end="362" title="George Lyttelton (teacher)" label="George Lyttelton (teacher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546348" start="409" end="441" title="George William Spencer Lyttelton" label="George William Spencer Lyttelton"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020018" wikidata="Q4908499" url="?curid=1020018" title="Bill Clinton pardon controversy">
<text>Bill Clinton was criticized for some of his presidential pardons and acts of executive clemency. Pardoning or commuting sentences is a power granted by the Constitution to sitting U.S. presidents. Scholars describe two different models of the pardons process. In the &#x27;agency model&#x27; of pardons the process is driven by nonpolitical legal experts in the Department of Justice. In contrast, Clinton followed the &#x27;presidential model&#x27;, viewing the pardon power as a convenient resource that could be used to advance specific policy goals.

While Clinton pardoned a far greater number (450) of people than his immediate one-term predecessor, Republican George H. W. Bush, who pardoned only 75, the number of people pardoned by Clinton was comparable to that pardoned by two-term Republican Ronald Reagan and one-term Democrat Jimmy Carter, who pardoned 393 and 534 respectively. However, Clinton chose to make nearly a third of his pardons on January 20, 2001, his last day in office. This was ridiculed as &quot;Pardongate&quot;.

In particular, Clinton&#x27;s pardon of Marc Rich, a fugitive from justice whose ex-wife made substantial donations to the Clinton Presidential Center and Hillary Clinton&#x27;s campaign for the U.S. Senate, was investigated by federal prosecutor Mary Jo White. She was later replaced by Republican James Comey, who found no illegality on Clinton&#x27;s part.

==FALN Commutation of 1999==
On August 11, 1999, Clinton commuted the sentences of 16 members of FALN, a Puerto Rican paramilitary organization that set off 120 bombs in the United States, mostly in New York City and Chicago. There were convictions for conspiracy to commit robbery, bomb-making, and sedition, as well as firearms and explosives violations. The 16 were convicted of conspiracy and sedition and sentenced with terms ranging from 35 to 105 years in prison. Clinton offered clemency on the condition that the prisoners renounce violence, seeing as none of the 16 had been convicted of harming anyone and they had already served 19 years in prison. This action was lobbied for by ten Nobel Laureates and the Archbishop of Puerto Rico. The commutation was opposed by the U.S. Attorney&#x27;s Office, the FBI, and the Federal Bureau of Prisons and was criticized by many, including former victims of FALN terrorist activities and the Fraternal Order of Police. Hillary Clinton, then campaigning for her first term in the Senate, initially supported the commutation, but withdrew her support three days later.

Congress condemned this action by President Clinton, with votes of 95–2 in the Senate and 311–41 in the House. The U.S. House Committee on Government Reform held an investigation on the matter, but the Justice Department prevented FBI officials from testifying. President Clinton cited executive privilege for his refusal to turn over some documents to Congress related to his decision to offer clemency to members of the FALN terrorist group.

Among those who accepted clemency are:
*Edwin Cortes, sentenced to 35 years in prison.
*Elizam Escobar, sentenced to 60 years in prison.
*Ricardo Jimenez, sentenced to 90 years in prison.
*Adolfo Matos, sentenced to 70 years in prison.
*Dylcia Noemi Pagan, sentenced to 55 years in prison.
*Alicia Rodríguez, sentenced to 55 years in prison.
*Ida Luz Rodriguez, sentenced to 75 years in prison.
*Luis Rosa, sentenced to 75 years in prison.
*Carmen Valentin, sentenced to 90 years in prison.
*Alberto Rodriguez, sentenced to 35 years in prison.
*Alejandrina Torres, sentenced to 35 years in prison.
*Juan Enrique Segarra-Palmer, sentenced to 55 years in prison; released on 25 January 2004.

Those who rejected clemency include:
*Antonio Camacho-Negron, sentenced to 15 years in prison; released in 2006.
*Oscar López Rivera, sentenced to 70 years in prison, released in 2017 after sentence was commuted by President Barack Obama

==Edgar and Vonna Jo Gregory pardons==
In March 2000, Bill Clinton pardoned Edgar and Vonna Jo Gregory, owners of the carnival company United Shows International, for charges of bank fraud from a 1982 conviction. Although the couple had already been released from prison, the prior conviction prevented them from doing business in certain American states. First Lady Hillary Clinton&#x27;s youngest brother, Tony Rodham, was an acquaintance of the Gregorys, and had lobbied Clinton on their behalf. In October 2006, the group Judicial Watch filed a request with the U.S. Justice Department for an investigation, alleging that Rodham had received $107,000 from the Gregorys for the pardons in the form of loans that were never repaid, as part of a quid pro quo scheme.

==Pardons and commutations signed on President Clinton&#x27;s final day in office==
Clinton issued 140 pardons as well as several commutations on his last day of office, January 20, 2001. When a sentence is commuted, the conviction remains intact; however, the sentence can be altered in a number of ways.
* Peter MacDonald had been sentenced to 14 years at a federal prison in Texas for fraud, extortion, inciting riots, bribery, and corruption stemming from the Navajo purchase of the Big Boquillas Ranch in Northwestern Arizona. On the day before President Clinton left office, U.S. Rep. Patrick J. Kennedy lobbied the White House to commute the sentence of the former leader of the Navajo Nation. MacDonald&#x27;s sentence was commuted after he served 10 years.
*Carlos Vignali had his sentence for cocaine trafficking commuted, after serving 6 of 15 years in federal prison.
*Almon Glenn Braswell was pardoned of his 1983 mail fraud and perjury convictions. In 1998 he was under federal investigation for money laundering and tax evasion charges. Braswell and Carlos Vignali each paid approximately $200,000 to Hillary Clinton&#x27;s brother, Hugh Rodham, to represent their respective cases for clemency. Hugh Rodham returned the payments after they were disclosed to the public. Braswell would later invoke the Fifth Amendment at a Senate Committee hearing in 2001, when questioned about allegations of his having systematically defrauded senior citizens of millions of dollars.
*Linda Evans and Susan Rosenberg, members of the radical Weather Underground organization, both had sentences for weapons and explosives charges commuted: Evans served 16 years of her 40-year sentence, and Rosenberg served 16 of her 58 years.
*Marc Rich, a fugitive who had fled the U.S. during his prosecution, was residing in Switzerland. Rich owed $48 million in taxes and was charged with 51 counts for tax fraud, was pardoned of tax evasion. He was required to pay a $1 million fine and waive any use of the pardon as a defense against any future civil charges that were filed against him in the same case. Critics complained that Denise Eisenberg Rich, his former wife, had made substantial donations to both the Clinton library and to Mrs. Clinton&#x27;s senate campaign. According to Paul Volcker&#x27;s independent investigation of Iraqi Oil-for-Food kickback schemes, Marc Rich was a middleman for several suspect Iraqi oil deals involving over of oil. Longtime Clinton supporters and Democratic leaders such as former President Jimmy Carter, James Carville and Terry McAuliffe, were all critical of the Clinton pardon. Carter said the pardons were &quot;disgraceful.&quot;
*Susan McDougal, who had already completed her sentence, was pardoned for her role in the Whitewater scandal. McDougal had served the maximum possible 18 months, including eight in solitary confinement, on contempt charges for refusing to testify about Clinton&#x27;s role.
*Dan Rostenkowski, a former Democratic Congressman from Illinois and Chairman of House Ways and Means Committee, was pardoned for his role in the Congressional Post Office scandal. Rostenkowski had served 13 months of a 17-month sentence before being released in 1997. After his release from prison, Clinton granted him a pardon in December 2000.
*Mel Reynolds, a Democratic Congressman from Illinois, was convicted of bank fraud, 12 counts of sexual assault of a child, obstruction of justice, and solicitation of child pornography. His sentence was commuted on the bank fraud charge and he was allowed to serve the final months under the auspices of a halfway house. Reynolds had served his entire sentence on child sex abuse charges before the commutation of the later convictions.
*Patty Hearst, who was kidnapped by the Symbionese Liberation Army in 1974. After being isolated and threatened with death, she became supportive of their cause, making propaganda announcements for them and taking part in illegal activities. After her arrest in 1975, she was found guilty of bank robbery. The procedural correctness of her trial was upheld by the courts, although some celebrities, commentators and politicians felt it to be unjust. Hearst&#x27;s sentence was commuted by President Jimmy Carter, and she was pardoned by President Bill Clinton.
* Roger Clinton, the president&#x27;s brother, was pardoned for drug charges after having served the entire sentence more than a decade earlier. Roger Clinton would be charged with drunk driving and disorderly conduct in an unrelated incident within a year of the pardon. He was also briefly alleged to have been utilized in lobbying for the Braswell pardon, among others. However, no wrongdoing was uncovered.
*Harvey Weinig, a former Manhattan lawyer who was sentenced in 1996 to 11 years in prison for facilitating an extortion-kidnapping scheme and helping launder at least $19 million for the Cali cocaine cartel.
*Chris Wade, an Arkansas real estate broker involved in the Whitewater land deals who had been sentenced to prison for bank fraud and false statements on a loan application.
*Four Hasidic men from the all-Hasidic village of New Square, New York–Kalmen Stern, Jacob Elbaum, Benjamin Berger and David Goldstein–who in 1999 had been convicted of defrauding the federal government through receiving federal funding for a fictitious Jewish school, had their sentences commuted after lobbying from the village&#x27;s leader, Grand Rabbi David Twersky. A federal investigation examined allegations that the pardons were part of a quid-pro-quo in exchange for Twersky instructing his followers to vote for Hillary Clinton as Senator for New York in the November 2000 election. In June 2002, federal prosecutors announced they had closed the investigation without taking any action.

On February 18, 2001, Bill Clinton wrote a &quot;New York Times&quot; column defending the 140 pardons.

==See also==
*Second-term curse
*List of scandals with &quot;-gate&quot; suffix
*List of people pardoned by Bill Clinton
*List of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the United States

==References==
==Further reading==
* Alschuler, Albert W. &quot;Bill Clinton&#x27;s parting pardon party.&quot; &quot;Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology&quot; 100.3 (2010): 1131–1168.
*Clinton, Bill. &quot;My Life&quot;. New York: Knopf, 2004.
* Eksterowicz, Anthony J., and Robert N. Roberts, &quot;The specter of presidential pardons.&quot; &quot;White House Studies&quot; 6.4 (2006): 377–390.
* Erler, H. Abbie. &quot;Executive Clemency or Bureaucratic Discretion? Two Models of the Pardons Process.&quot; &quot;Presidential Studies Quarterly&quot; 37.3 (2007): 427–448.

==External links==
*&quot;Justice Undone: Clemency Decision in the Clinton White House&quot;, Report of the House Committee on Government Reform
*&quot;My Reasons for the Pardons&quot;, William Jefferson Clinton, &quot;New York Times&quot;, February 18, 2001
*&quot;Clinton&#x27;s Clemency Caper in Context.&quot; 
*&quot;Last Minute Pardons: Fact and Fiction&quot; </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="0" end="12" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="57" end="63" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="667" end="684" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="804" end="817" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="840" end="852" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q706542" start="1086" end="1095" title="Marc Rich" label="Marc Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301926" start="1169" end="1196" title="Clinton Presidential Center" label="Clinton Presidential Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="1201" end="1216" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1241" end="1252" title="United States Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779939" start="1293" end="1306" title="Mary Jo White" label="Mary Jo White"/>
<link wikidata="Q167607" start="1345" end="1356" title="James Comey" label="James Comey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131502" start="1504" end="1508" title="Fuerzas Armadas de Liberación Nacional Puertorriqueña" label="FALN"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="1707" end="1715" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094335" start="2189" end="2216" title="United States Attorney" label="U.S. Attorney&amp;#x27;s Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2222" end="2225" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400015" start="2235" end="2260" title="Federal Bureau of Prisons" label="Federal Bureau of Prisons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451416" start="2351" end="2376" title="Fraternal Order of Police" label="Fraternal Order of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="2378" end="2393" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891830" start="2400" end="2411" title="United States Senate election in New York, 2000" label="campaigning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889977" start="2642" end="2683" title="United States House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform" label="U.S. House Committee on Government Reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="2729" end="2747" title="United States Department of Justice" label="Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419945" start="2813" end="2832" title="executive privilege" label="executive privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346317" start="3012" end="3024" title="Edwin Cortes" label="Edwin Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363889" start="3060" end="3074" title="Elizam Escobar" label="Elizam Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322679" start="3110" end="3125" title="Ricardo Jiménez (FALN)" label="Ricardo Jimenez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684250" start="3161" end="3173" title="Adolfo Matos" label="Adolfo Matos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318795" start="3209" end="3227" title="Dylcia Noemi Pagan" label="Dylcia Noemi Pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q649745" start="3263" end="3279" title="Alicia Rodríguez (FALN)" label="Alicia Rodríguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5987095" start="3315" end="3332" title="Ida Luz Rodriguez" label="Ida Luz Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701070" start="3368" end="3377" title="Luis Rosa" label="Luis Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043609" start="3413" end="3428" title="Carmen Valentin" label="Carmen Valentin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712176" start="3464" end="3481" title="Alberto Rodriguez (Puerto Rican Nationalist)" label="Alberto Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714458" start="3517" end="3535" title="Alejandrina Torres" label="Alejandrina Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6299680" start="3571" end="3598" title="Juan Enrique Segarra-Palmer" label="Juan Enrique Segarra-Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776489" start="3701" end="3723" title="Antonio Camacho-Negron" label="Antonio Camacho-Negron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106111" start="3777" end="3795" title="Oscar López Rivera" label="Oscar López Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="3888" end="3900" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4037" end="4063" title="United Shows International" label="United Shows International"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856011" start="4080" end="4090" title="bank fraud" label="bank fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="4258" end="4268" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="4269" end="4284" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Hillary Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7823289" start="4310" end="4321" title="Tony Rodham" label="Tony Rodham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3187968" start="4428" end="4442" title="Judicial Watch" label="Judicial Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="4468" end="4491" title="United States Department of Justice" label="U.S. Justice Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q284868" start="4649" end="4661" title="quid pro quo" label="quid pro quo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633157" start="4770" end="4781" title="List of people pardoned by Bill Clinton" label="140 pardons"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485832" start="4979" end="4994" title="Peter MacDonald (Navajo leader)" label="Peter MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5158" end="5177" title="Big Boquillas Ranch" label="Big Boquillas Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q948920" start="5262" end="5280" title="Patrick J. Kennedy" label="Patrick J. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783171" start="5357" end="5370" title="Navajo Nation" label="Navajo Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042764" start="5438" end="5452" title="Carlos Vignali" label="Carlos Vignali"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="5474" end="5481" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733875" start="5552" end="5572" title="Almon Glenn Braswell" label="Almon Glenn Braswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735709" start="5598" end="5608" title="Mail and wire fraud" label="mail fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q310229" start="5613" end="5620" title="perjury" label="perjury"/>
<link wikidata="Q151900" start="5681" end="5697" title="money laundering" label="money laundering"/>
<link wikidata="Q5042764" start="5736" end="5750" title="Carlos Vignali" label="Carlos Vignali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5932520" start="5819" end="5830" title="Hugh Edwin Rodham" label="Hugh Rodham"/>
<link wikidata="Q240340" start="5989" end="6004" title="Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifth Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q107272603" start="6158" end="6169" title="Linda Evans (radical)" label="Linda Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648337" start="6174" end="6189" title="Susan Rosenberg" label="Susan Rosenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163724" start="6214" end="6233" title="Weather Underground" label="Weather Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q706542" start="6401" end="6410" title="Marc Rich" label="Marc Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="6591" end="6602" title="tax evasion" label="tax evasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257659" start="6793" end="6814" title="Denise Eisenberg Rich" label="Denise Eisenberg Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301926" start="6876" end="6891" title="Clinton Presidential Center" label="Clinton library"/>
<link wikidata="Q349785" start="6949" end="6961" title="Paul Volcker" label="Paul Volcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q296745" start="6998" end="7016" title="Oil-for-Food Programme" label="Iraqi Oil-for-Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q220695" start="7051" end="7060" title="Wholesale" label="middleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="7196" end="7208" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281204" start="7210" end="7224" title="James Carville" label="James Carville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518911" start="7229" end="7244" title="Terry McAuliffe" label="Terry McAuliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7648161" start="7342" end="7356" title="Susan McDougal" label="Susan McDougal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074621" start="7431" end="7449" title="Whitewater controversy" label="Whitewater scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q963898" start="7616" end="7632" title="Dan Rostenkowski" label="Dan Rostenkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="7643" end="7653" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="7654" end="7665" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Congressman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="7671" end="7679" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q260239" start="7696" end="7726" title="United States House Committee on Ways and Means" label="House Ways and Means Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160948" start="7761" end="7794" title="Congressional Post Office scandal" label="Congressional Post Office scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304863" start="7963" end="7975" title="Mel Reynolds" label="Mel Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856011" start="8034" end="8044" title="bank fraud" label="bank fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q525302" start="8086" end="8108" title="obstruction of justice" label="obstruction of justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q660567" start="8130" end="8147" title="child pornography" label="child pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565622" start="8269" end="8282" title="halfway house" label="halfway house"/>
<link wikidata="Q229556" start="8401" end="8413" title="Patty Hearst" label="Patty Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429446" start="8440" end="8466" title="Symbionese Liberation Army" label="Symbionese Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="8899" end="8911" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161657" start="8963" end="8976" title="Roger Clinton, Jr." label="Roger Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q816318" start="9160" end="9178" title="disorderly conduct" label="disorderly conduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917479" start="9804" end="9824" title="New Square, New York" label="New Square, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995850" start="10111" end="10124" title="David Twersky (Skverer Rebbe)" label="David Twersky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891830" start="10325" end="10347" title="2000 United States Senate election in New York" label="November 2000 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="10504" end="10518" title="The New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442990" start="10574" end="10591" title="Second-term curse" label="Second-term curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026965" start="10593" end="10639" title="List of scandals with &amp;quot;-gate&amp;quot; suffix" label="List of scandals with &amp;quot;-gate&amp;quot; suffix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633157" start="10641" end="10680" title="List of people pardoned by Bill Clinton" label="List of people pardoned by Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149281" start="10682" end="10763" title="List of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the United States" label="List of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020021" wikidata="Q2742711" url="?curid=1020021" title="Distance (graph theory)">
<text>In the mathematical field of graph theory, the distance between two vertices in a graph is the number of edges in a shortest path (also called a graph geodesic) connecting them. This is also known as the geodesic distance or shortest-path distance. Notice that there may be more than one shortest path between two vertices. If there is no path connecting the two vertices, i.e., if they belong to different connected components, then conventionally the distance is defined as infinite.

In the case of a directed graph the distance between two vertices and is defined as the length of a shortest directed path from to consisting of arcs, provided at least one such path exists. Notice that, in contrast with the case of undirected graphs, does not necessarily coincide with —so it is just a quasi-metric, and it might be the case that one is defined while the other is not.

==Related concepts==
A metric space defined over a set of points in terms of distances in a graph defined over the set is called a graph metric.
The vertex set (of an undirected graph) and the distance function form a metric space, if and only if the graph is connected.

The eccentricity of a vertex is the greatest distance between and any other vertex; in symbols,
:formula_1
It can be thought of as how far a node is from the node most distant from it in the graph.

The radius of a graph is the minimum eccentricity of any vertex or, in symbols, 
:formula_2

The diameter of a graph is the maximum eccentricity of any vertex in the graph. That is, is the greatest distance between any pair of vertices or, alternatively, 
:formula_3
To find the diameter of a graph, first find the shortest path between each pair of vertices. The greatest length of any of these paths is the diameter of the graph.

A central vertex in a graph of radius is one whose eccentricity is —that is, a vertex whose distance from its furthest vertex is equal to the radius, equivalently, a vertex such that .

A peripheral vertex in a graph of diameter is one whose eccentricity is —that is, a vertex whose distance from its furthest vertex is equal to the diameter. Formally, is peripheral if .

A pseudo-peripheral vertex has the property that, for any vertex , if is as far away from as possible, then is as far away from as possible. Formally, a vertex is pseudo-peripheral if, for each vertex with , it holds that .

A level structure of the graph, given a starting vertex, is a partition of the graph&#x27;s vertices into subsets by their distances from the starting vertex.

A geodetic graph is one for which every pair of vertices has a unique shortest path connecting them. For example, all trees are geodetic.

The weighted shortest-path distance generalises the geodesic distance to weighted graphs. In this case it is assumed that the weight of an edge represents its length or, for complex networks the cost of the interaction, and the weighted shortest-path distance is the minimum sum of weights across all the paths connecting and . See the shortest path problem for more details and algorithms.

==Algorithm for finding pseudo-peripheral vertices==
Often peripheral sparse matrix algorithms need a starting vertex with a high eccentricity. A peripheral vertex would be perfect, but is often hard to calculate. In most circumstances a pseudo-peripheral vertex can be used. A pseudo-peripheral vertex can easily be found with the following algorithm:

# Choose a vertex formula_4.
# Among all the vertices that are as far from formula_4 as possible, let formula_6 be one with minimal degree.
# If formula_7 then set formula_8 and repeat with step 2, else formula_4 is a pseudo-peripheral vertex.

==See also==

* Distance matrix
* Resistance distance
* Betweenness centrality
* Centrality
* Closeness
* Degree diameter problem for graphs and digraphs
* Metric graph
==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="7" end="19" title="mathematics" label="mathematical"/>
<link wikidata="Q131476" start="29" end="41" title="graph theory" label="graph theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742711" start="47" end="55" title="Distance (graph theory)" label="distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="68" end="76" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="82" end="87" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="116" end="129" title="shortest path problem" label="shortest path"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742711" start="145" end="159" title="Distance (graph theory)" label="graph geodesic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742711" start="204" end="221" title="Distance (graph theory)" label="geodesic distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742711" start="225" end="247" title="Distance (graph theory)" label="shortest-path distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415372" start="339" end="343" title="Path (graph theory)" label="path"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997928" start="407" end="426" title="component (graph theory)" label="connected component"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="504" end="518" title="directed graph" label="directed graph"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="791" end="803" title="Metric (mathematics)#Quasimetrics" label="quasi-metric"/>
<link wikidata="Q180953" start="898" end="910" title="metric space" label="metric space"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897900" start="1135" end="1144" title="connected (graph theory)" label="connected"/>
<link wikidata="Q65556227" start="1443" end="1451" title="Diameter (graph theory)" label="diameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="1661" end="1674" title="Shortest path problem" label="shortest path"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304193" start="1696" end="1704" title="vertex (graph theory)" label="vertices"/>
<link wikidata="Q6535097" start="2379" end="2394" title="level structure" label="level structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q381060" start="2439" end="2448" title="partition of a set" label="partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856863" start="2539" end="2553" title="geodetic graph" label="geodetic graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q272735" start="2655" end="2660" title="Tree (graph theory)" label="trees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2749" end="2764" title="Glossary of graph theory#weighted graph" label="weighted graphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q665189" start="2850" end="2866" title="complex networks" label="complex networks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2981" end="2986" title="Glossary of graph theory#path" label="paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058754" start="3012" end="3033" title="shortest path problem" label="shortest path problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050404" start="3138" end="3151" title="sparse matrix" label="sparse matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q383444" start="3554" end="3560" title="degree (graph theory)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q901698" start="3683" end="3698" title="Distance matrix" label="Distance matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315618" start="3701" end="3720" title="Resistance distance" label="Resistance distance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4899215" start="3723" end="3745" title="Betweenness centrality" label="Betweenness centrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062194" start="3748" end="3758" title="Centrality" label="Centrality"/>
<link wikidata="Q5062194" start="3761" end="3770" title="Closeness (graph theory)" label="Closeness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251835" start="3773" end="3796" title="Degree diameter problem" label="Degree diameter problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q141488" start="3801" end="3806" title="Graph (discrete mathematics)" label="graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="3812" end="3819" title="digraph (mathematics)" label="digraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269054" start="3823" end="3835" title="Metric graph" label="Metric graph"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020024" wikidata="Q1773116" url="?curid=1020024" title="Monie Captan">
<text>Monie Ralph Captan (born May 28, 1962) is the former foreign minister of Liberia from 1996 until 2003, former of Presidential Affairs 1996. During most of that time he served under President Charles Taylor. Captan&#x27;s mother was a native of Liberia and his father was Lebanese. Before serving as foreign minister, he was a local businessman, owner of an independent Liberian newspaper and a professor at the University of Liberia. During the Liberian Civil War, his newspaper expressed views which sometimes came across as being sympathetic to Charles Taylor and his National Patriot Front of Liberia (NPFL). When Taylor won the elections, he was subsequently named foreign minister. He is one of several Liberian elites who were not members of Taylor&#x27;s NPFL to be appointed to high level positions. During the Liberian Civil war he resided in Monrovia which was never controlled by the NPFL. Currently, Executive Chairman Comium Liberia. Captan who was overwhelmingly elected with over 70% of the votes on March 16, 2010 as President of the Liberia Chamber of Commerce.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1773116" start="0" end="18" title="Monie Captan" label="Monie Ralph Captan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6866161" start="53" end="69" title="Minister of Foreign Affairs (Liberia)" label="foreign minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014" start="73" end="80" title="Liberia" label="Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49090" start="191" end="205" title="Charles G. Taylor" label="Charles Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2606511" start="271" end="279" title="Lebanese people" label="Lebanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044628" start="411" end="432" title="University of Liberia" label="University of Liberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477500" start="445" end="463" title="First Liberian Civil War" label="Liberian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3748" start="852" end="860" title="Monrovia" label="Monrovia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020025" wikidata="Q3294409" url="?curid=1020025" title="Marksmanship Medal">
<text>The Marksmanship Medal is a United States Navy and the U.S. Coast Guard military award and is the highest award one may receive for weapons qualification. The Marksmanship Medal is the equivalent of the Expert Marksmanship Badge in the U.S. Army and U.S. Marine Corps. Additionally, select State National Guard organizations award marksmanship medals to guardsmen who achieve some of the highest aggregate scores at state-level marksmanship competitions.

The Marksmanship Medal is awarded for qualifying as an expert marksman on either the SIG Sauer M18 (Navy or Coast Guard), 9×19mm Beretta M9 (Navy or Coast Guard), .40 S&amp;W SIG P229 DAK (Coast Guard only), or M16 rifle. To qualify at the expert level, a superior score must be obtained on an approved weapons qualification course. The standard Navy weapons qualification course for pistol normally consists of several courses of fire from strong-side supported (standing), weak-side supported (standing), and strong-side supported (kneeling) positions. For the rifle, the Navy qualification course consists of firing from a sitting and prone positions.

Those qualifying as an expert marksman are authorized to wear the Marksmanship Medal, awarded as two separate decorations for rifle or pistol qualifications. Those having qualified on both pistol and rifle may receive both medals for simultaneous wear. The Marksmanship Medal is worn as a full-sized medal on dress uniforms. On a duty uniform all successful qualifiers may wear the award as the standard Marksmanship Ribbon. Those qualifying as an expert are authorized to wear the Expert device on the ribbon and those qualifying as a sharpshooter are authorized a &quot;S&quot; device (Navy-bronze and Coast Guard-silver) for that ribbon.

The Navy Marksmanship Medals were first issued in 1969.


Similarly, the Alaska Department of Military and Veterans Affairs awards the Alaska Adjutant General&#x27;s Marksmanship Proficiency Medals, one for rifle and one for pistol, to the top ten guardsman with the highest aggregate scores at the Alaska National Guard Adjutant General&#x27;s Match. The winners of these awards are selected to join the state&#x27;s marksmanship team to represent the Alaska National Guard at the Winston P. Wilson Rifle and Pistol Championships for a chance to win the Chief&#x27;s Fifty Marksmanship Badge. A red, white, and blue ribbon is used to represent both medals ( ); however, the actual rifle and pistol medals suspended by this ribbon are distinct.
==See also==
*Marksmanship Device
*Marksmanship Badge (United States)
*Awards and decorations of the United States military

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3294409" start="4" end="22" title="Marksmanship Medal" label="Marksmanship Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="28" end="46" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224" start="55" end="71" title="United States Coast Guard" label="U.S. Coast Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771397" start="203" end="228" title="Marksmanship Badge (United States)" label="Expert Marksmanship Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="236" end="245" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="250" end="267" title="United States Marines Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q928670" start="290" end="310" title="National Guard of the United States" label="State National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3529376" start="518" end="526" title="marksman" label="marksman"/>
<link wikidata="Q48989719" start="541" end="554" title="SIG Sauer M18" label="SIG Sauer M18"/>
<link wikidata="Q135550" start="578" end="584" title="9×19mm" label="9×19mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q647367" start="585" end="595" title="Beretta M9" label="Beretta M9"/>
<link wikidata="Q158782" start="619" end="630" title=".40 S&amp;amp;W" label=".40 S&amp;amp;W"/>
<link wikidata="Q866367" start="631" end="643" title="SIG P229" label="SIG P229 DAK"/>
<link wikidata="Q170318" start="667" end="676" title="M16 rifle" label="M16 rifle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771398" start="1516" end="1535" title="Marksmanship Ribbon" label="Marksmanship Ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771395" start="1594" end="1607" title="Marksmanship Device" label="Expert device"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708533" start="1827" end="1877" title="Alaska Department of Military and Veterans Affairs" label="Alaska Department of Military and Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1889" end="1951" title="Awards and decorations of the National Guard#Alaska" label="Alaska Adjutant General&amp;#x27;s Marksmanship Proficiency Medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026114" start="2236" end="2253" title="Winston P. Wilson" label="Winston P. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2309" end="2346" title="Marksmanship Badges (United States)#Chief.27s Fifty Marksmanship Badge" label="Chief&amp;#x27;s Fifty Marksmanship Badge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771395" start="2513" end="2532" title="Marksmanship Device" label="Marksmanship Device"/>
<link wikidata="Q6771397" start="2534" end="2568" title="Marksmanship Badge (United States)" label="Marksmanship Badge (United States)"/>
<link wikidata="Q784242" start="2570" end="2622" title="Awards and decorations of the United States military" label="Awards and decorations of the United States military"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020031" wikidata="Q5525121" url="?curid=1020031" title="Gary Gentry">
<text>Gary Edward Gentry (born October 6, 1946) is an American former right-handed Major League Baseball pitcher.

==Early years==
Gentry was a second baseman at Camelback High School in Phoenix, Arizona, and only began pitching while at Phoenix Junior College. He was drafted by the Houston Astros in the eleventh round of the inaugural major league draft in , and was a first-round pick of the Baltimore Orioles in the January Secondary Draft in , but signed with neither team, choosing instead to remain in college. In 1966, he led the Bears to a national junior college championship. Shortly afterwards, he was drafted by the San Francisco Giants, but again chose not to sign.

After two years at Phoenix College, Gentry transferred to Arizona State University. He went 17–1 with a college-record 229 strikeouts. In the 1967 NCAA University Division baseball tournament, Gentry tossed a fourteen-inning gem against Stanford University to help his team catch the College World Series title. He was named the pitcher of the All-Tournament Team. Shortly afterwards, he was drafted by the New York Mets in the &quot;Secondary Phase&quot; of the 1967 MLB June Draft. This time, he was ready to sign.

==New York Mets==
Gentry spent just two seasons in the Mets&#x27; farm system when he caught the eye of Mets manager Gil Hodges in Spring training , and earned a spot on the opening day roster behind Tom Seaver &amp; Jerry Koosman in the starting rotation. He came within an out of a complete game in his major league debut, defeating the Montreal Expos in front of 8,608 at Shea Stadium.

Overall, Gentry made 35 starts, and went 13–12 with a 3.43 earned run average and 154 strikeouts his rookie season. Unquestionably, his biggest game came on September 24. The Mets, who once trailed the Chicago Cubs by 9 games on August 13, were now in first place by six games, and now regularly drew crowds over 50,000 to Shea. Gentry pitched a four-hit, 6–0 shutout against the St. Louis Cardinals to clinch the National League East title for the Mets.

On his 23rd birthday, Gentry was sent to the mound for game three of the 1969 National League Championship Series against the Atlanta Braves. Gentry lasted only into the third inning, however, the Mets were able to mount a comeback that would allow them to sweep the NLCS, and head into the World Series against the Baltimore Orioles.

With the 1969 World Series tied at one game apiece, Gentry faced Jim Palmer in game three. Tommie Agee led off the bottom of the first inning with a home run to give the Mets the early 1–0 lead (Agee also made two spectacular catches in center field to prevent the Orioles from scoring up to five runs in this game). Gentry, meanwhile, held the mighty Orioles scoreless, pitching into the seventh inning before handing the ball to Nolan Ryan for the save. He also helped his own cause in the second inning with a double that plated two runs.

Gentry got off to a hot start in . Following a one-hit shutout of the Chicago Cubs on May 13, his record stood at 4–1 with a 1.71 ERA. He would cool off from there, and ended the season at 9–9 with a 3.68 ERA.

Following a season in which Gentry went 12–11 with a 3.23 ERA, the California Angels inquired about Gentry, dangling third baseman Jim Fregosi as bait. Unwilling to part with Gentry, the Mets sent Nolan Ryan to the Angels in one of the most infamous trades in franchise history.

He would remain with the Mets for one more season, going 7–10 with a 4.01 ERA. Gentry was traded along with Danny Frisella from the Mets to the Atlanta Braves for Félix Millán and George Stone on November 1, .

==Atlanta Braves==
Gentry exited his June 5 start in the first inning due to right elbow soreness. He made his next start, but was pulled after the second inning, and placed on the disabled list. He returned a month later, but after just two more appearances, his season was ended for good.

After surgery to have bone chips removed from his elbow, Gentry returned to the mound on April 30, , pitching an inning of relief. He made two more appearances before his season was once again cut short, this time for tendon surgery. He made seven appearances with the Braves in , playing his last game on May 6. The Braves placed him on waivers two days later. Gentry was then re-signed by the Mets, but after just one appearance at Double-A Jackson was he was released on June 19.

==Career stats==

Gentry was an exceptional fielding pitcher. The only error he committed in his career (in 182 total chances) came on August 23, 1970, covering first on a ground ball by Pete Rose.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5525121" start="0" end="18" title="Gary Gentry" label="Gary Edward Gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="77" end="98" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="99" end="106" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368195" start="138" end="152" title="second baseman" label="second baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025874" start="156" end="177" title="Camelback High School" label="Camelback High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="181" end="197" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186815" start="232" end="254" title="Phoenix Junior College" label="Phoenix Junior College"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="278" end="292" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881590" start="322" end="350" title="1965 Major League Baseball draft" label="inaugural major league draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="390" end="407" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="624" end="644" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q670897" start="734" end="758" title="Arizona State University" label="Arizona State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="799" end="808" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572738" start="818" end="867" title="1967 NCAA University Division baseball tournament" label="1967 NCAA University Division baseball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="913" end="932" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q692417" start="1083" end="1096" title="New York Mets" label="New York Mets"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="1260" end="1271" title="farm system" label="farm system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="1303" end="1310" title="manager (baseball)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q515894" start="1311" end="1321" title="Gil Hodges" label="Gil Hodges"/>
<link wikidata="Q669904" start="1325" end="1340" title="Spring training" label="Spring training"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287084" start="1394" end="1404" title="Tom Seaver" label="Tom Seaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299104" start="1411" end="1424" title="Jerry Koosman" label="Jerry Koosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237411" start="1432" end="1449" title="starting rotation" label="starting rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153773" start="1469" end="1472" title="out (baseball)" label="out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132884" start="1478" end="1491" title="complete game" label="complete game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="1533" end="1547" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056326" start="1569" end="1581" title="Shea Stadium" label="Shea Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="1643" end="1661" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="1670" end="1679" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="1786" end="1798" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="1935" end="1938" title="hit (baseball)" label="hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q262031" start="1944" end="1951" title="shutout" label="shutout"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="1964" end="1983" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360147" start="1998" end="2018" title="National League East" label="National League East"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511218" start="2113" end="2153" title="1969 National League Championship Series" label="1969 National League Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="2166" end="2180" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="2331" end="2343" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144500" start="2385" end="2402" title="1969 World Series" label="1969 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356627" start="2441" end="2451" title="Jim Palmer" label="Jim Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7819117" start="2467" end="2478" title="Tommie Agee" label="Tommie Agee"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="2525" end="2533" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q5059480" start="2613" end="2625" title="Center fielder" label="center field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="2673" end="2677" title="run (baseball)" label="runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q721948" start="2807" end="2817" title="Nolan Ryan" label="Nolan Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377846" start="2826" end="2830" title="save (baseball)" label="save"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="2889" end="2895" title="double (baseball)" label="double"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="3197" end="3214" title="California Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368170" start="3247" end="3260" title="third baseman" label="third baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195080" start="3261" end="3272" title="Jim Fregosi" label="Jim Fregosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008197" start="3518" end="3532" title="Danny Frisella" label="Danny Frisella"/>
<link wikidata="Q461595" start="3554" end="3568" title="Atlanta Braves" label="Atlanta Braves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511620" start="3573" end="3585" title="Félix Millán" label="Félix Millán"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544873" start="3590" end="3602" title="George Stone (pitcher)" label="George Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="3802" end="3815" title="disabled list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q6117254" start="4347" end="4363" title="Jackson Mets" label="Double-A Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202128" start="4468" end="4473" title="error (baseball)" label="error"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828099" start="4509" end="4522" title="total chances" label="total chances"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="4584" end="4593" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020034" wikidata="Q1264701" url="?curid=1020034" title="Umar Mustafa Al Muntasir">
<text>Umar Mustafa Al Muntasir () (1939 – 23 January 2001) was secretary of the General People&#x27;s Committee (Prime Minister) of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya from 1 March 1987 to 7 October 1990. He succeeded Jadallah Azzuz at-Talhi as secretary of the General People&#x27;s Committee in a cabinet reshuffle. Al Muntasir also served as the foreign minister from 13 August 1992 until 16 July 2000. Umar Mustafa died of natural causes on 23 January 2001.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1264701" start="0" end="24" title="Umar Mustafa Al Muntasir" label="Umar Mustafa Al Muntasir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762722" start="74" end="105" title="General People&amp;#x27;s Committee" label="General People&amp;#x27;s Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q17435890" start="130" end="152" title="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya" label="Libyan Arab Jamahiriya"/>
<link wikidata="Q711897" start="203" end="226" title="Jadallah Azzuz at-Talhi" label="Jadallah Azzuz at-Talhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20901295" start="334" end="350" title="foreign minister" label="foreign minister"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020043" wikidata="Q4570445" url="?curid=1020043" title="1961 Pulitzer Prize">
<text>The [[Pulitzer Prize]]s for 1961 are:

==Journalism awards==
*Public Service:
** The &quot;Amarillo Globe-Times&quot;, for &quot;exposing a breakdown in local law enforcement with resultant punitive action that swept lax officials from their posts and brought about the election of a reform slate. The newspaper thus exerted its civic leadership in the finest tradition of journalism.&quot;
*Local Reporting, Edition Time:
**Sanche de Gramont of the &quot;New York Herald Tribune&quot;, &quot;for of Leonard Warren on the Metropolitan Opera stage&quot;.
*Local Reporting, No Edition time:
**Edgar May of &quot;The Buffalo Evening News&quot;, for his 14-part series about New York&#x27;s public welfare services, &quot;Our Costly Dilemma&quot;, which &quot;brought about reforms that attracted nationwide attention&quot;.
*National Reporting:
**Edward R. Cony of &quot;The Wall Street Journal&quot;, &quot;for his analysis of a timber transaction which drew the attention of the public to problems of business ethics&quot;.
*International Reporting:
**Lynn Heinzerling of the Associated Press, &quot;for his reporting, under extraordinarily difficult conditions, of the early stages of the Congo crisis and his keen analysis of events in other parts of Africa&quot;.
*Editorial Writing:
** William J. Dorvillier of &quot;The San Juan Star&quot;, &quot;for his editorials on clerical interference in the 1960 gubernatorial election in Puerto Rico&quot;.
*Editorial Cartooning:
** Carey Orr of the &quot;Chicago Tribune&quot;, &quot;for his long and distinguished career as an editorial cartoonist, as exemplified by a cartoon captioned, &#x27;The Kindly Tiger&#x27;, published on October 8, 1960&quot;.

*Photography:
**Yasushi Nagao of &quot;Mainichi&quot; (Tokyo), for &quot;Tokyo Stabbing&quot;, a photograph of the assassination of Japanese politician Inejiro Asanuma, distributed in the United States by United Press International.

==Letters, Music and Drama Awards==
*Fiction:
**&quot;To Kill a Mockingbird&quot; by Harper Lee (Lippincott)
*Drama:
**&quot;All the Way Home&quot; by Tad Mosel (Obolensky)
*History:
** &quot;Between War and Peace: The Potsdam Conference&quot; by Herbert Feis (Princeton Univ. Press)
*Biography or Autobiography:
** &quot;Charles Sumner and the Coming of the Civil War&quot; by David Donald (Knopf)
*Poetry:
** &quot;Times Three: Selected Verse From Three Decades&quot; by Phyllis McGinley (Viking)
*Music:
** &quot;Symphony No. 7&quot; by Walter Piston (Associated Music Publishers), first performed by the Philadelphia Orchestra on February 10, 1961, and commissioned by the Philadelphia Orchestra Association.
*Special Citation:
** &quot;American Heritage Picture History of the Civil War&quot;, as a distinguished example of American book publishing.

==References==
==External links==
*Pulitzer Prizes for 1961</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4570445" start="4" end="32" title="1961 Pulitzer Prize" label="[[Pulitzer Prize]]s for 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q644995" start="62" end="76" title="Pulitzer Prize for Public Service" label="Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740266" start="91" end="111" title="Amarillo Globe-Times" label="Amarillo Globe-Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q636181" start="392" end="421" title="Pulitzer Prize for Local Reporting, Edition Time" label="Local Reporting, Edition Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399828" start="425" end="442" title="Sanche de Gramont" label="Sanche de Gramont"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="456" end="479" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q560546" start="500" end="514" title="Leonard Warren" label="Leonard Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="522" end="540" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117825" start="555" end="587" title="Pulitzer Prize for Investigative Reporting" label="Local Reporting, No Edition time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337369" start="591" end="600" title="Edgar May" label="Edgar May"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390786" start="610" end="634" title="The Buffalo Evening News" label="The Buffalo Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1671917" start="822" end="840" title="Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting" label="National Reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23585593" start="844" end="858" title="Edward R. Cony" label="Edward R. Cony"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="868" end="891" title="The Wall Street Journal" label="The Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117807" start="1024" end="1047" title="Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting" label="International Reporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q100394713" start="1051" end="1067" title="Lynn Heinzerling" label="Lynn Heinzerling"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="1075" end="1091" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773926" start="1189" end="1201" title="Congo crisis" label="Congo crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117840" start="1267" end="1284" title="Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Writing" label="Editorial Writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013205" start="1289" end="1310" title="William J. Dorvillier" label="William J. Dorvillier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762201" start="1320" end="1337" title="The San Juan Star" label="The San Juan Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258628" start="1402" end="1429" title="1960 Puerto Rican general election" label="1960 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q649953" start="1453" end="1473" title="Pulitzer Prize for Editorial Cartooning" label="Editorial Cartooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039205" start="1478" end="1487" title="Carey Orr" label="Carey Orr"/>
<link wikidata="Q47596" start="1501" end="1516" title="Chicago Tribune" label="Chicago Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503021" start="1703" end="1714" title="Pulitzer Prize for Photography" label="Photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q376396" start="1718" end="1731" title="Yasushi Nagao" label="Yasushi Nagao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136866" start="1741" end="1749" title="Mainichi Shimbun" label="Mainichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q93745" start="1854" end="1869" title="Inejiro Asanuma" label="Inejiro Asanuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q493845" start="1907" end="1933" title="United Press International" label="United Press International"/>
<link wikidata="Q833633" start="1973" end="1980" title="Pulitzer Prize for Fiction" label="Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q212340" start="1990" end="2011" title="To Kill a Mockingbird" label="To Kill a Mockingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q182658" start="2021" end="2031" title="Harper Lee" label="Harper Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q15077094" start="2033" end="2043" title="J. B. Lippincott &amp;amp; Co." label="Lippincott"/>
<link wikidata="Q289214" start="2046" end="2051" title="Pulitzer Prize for Drama" label="Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730209" start="2061" end="2077" title="All the Way Home (play)" label="All the Way Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529199" start="2087" end="2096" title="Tad Mosel" label="Tad Mosel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16090089" start="2098" end="2107" title="Ivan Sergeyevich Obolensky" label="Obolensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q599254" start="2110" end="2117" title="Pulitzer Prize for History" label="History"/>
<link wikidata="Q151187" start="2155" end="2173" title="Potsdam Conference" label="Potsdam Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5734072" start="2183" end="2195" title="Herbert Feis" label="Herbert Feis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708210" start="2197" end="2218" title="Princeton University Press" label="Princeton Univ. Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q285117" start="2221" end="2247" title="Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography" label="Biography or Autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q5234936" start="2314" end="2326" title="David Herbert Donald" label="David Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431868" start="2328" end="2333" title="Alfred A. Knopf" label="Knopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117891" start="2336" end="2342" title="Pulitzer Prize for Poetry" label="Poetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188601" start="2409" end="2425" title="Phyllis McGinley" label="Phyllis McGinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q921536" start="2427" end="2433" title="Viking Press" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783509" start="2436" end="2441" title="Pulitzer Prize for Music" label="Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661608" start="2452" end="2466" title="Symphony No. 7 (Piston)" label="Symphony No. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q711052" start="2476" end="2489" title="Walter Piston" label="Walter Piston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3093066" start="2491" end="2518" title="G. Schirmer" label="Associated Music Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q659181" start="2544" end="2566" title="Philadelphia Orchestra" label="Philadelphia Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259350" start="2650" end="2666" title="Pulitzer Prize Special Citations and Awards" label="Special Citation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020044" wikidata="Q797551" url="?curid=1020044" title="Waiver">
<text>A waiver is the voluntary or surrender of some known right or privilege.

A waiver is often written, such as a disclaimer that has been accepted, but it may also be spoken between two or more parties. When the right to hold a person liable through a lawsuit is waived, the waiver may be called an exculpatory clause, liability waiver, legal release, or hold harmless clause.

In some cases, parties may sign a &quot;non-waiver&quot; contract which specifies that no rights are waived, particularly if a person&#x27;s actions may suggest that rights are being waived. This is particularly common in insurance.
Sometimes the elements of &quot;voluntary&quot; and &quot;known&quot; are established by a legal fiction. In this case, one is presumed to know one&#x27;s rights and that those rights are voluntarily relinquished if not asserted at the time.

In the United States, regulatory agencies of state departments or the federal government may issue waivers to exempt companies from certain regulations. For example, a 2010 law restricted the size of banks, but when banks exceeded these sizes, they obtained waivers.

In civil procedure, certain arguments must be raised in the first objection that a party submits to the court, or else they will be deemed waived.

==Enforceability==
The following represent a general overview of considerations; specifics may vary dramatically depending on the jurisdiction.

Key factors that some courts (depending on jurisdiction) may look at while determining the applicability of a waiver:
* In some jurisdictions, one may not prospectively waive liability for some or all intentional activities
* Waivers generally must be made voluntarily and with the full knowledge (or the ability to know) of the right being waived
* The waiver should be unambiguous and clear to a reasonable person
* In some jurisdictions (not including the United States), it may be necessary that the parties to the waiver have equal bargaining power
* A waiver may have limited application where one contracts for an &quot;essential service&quot; such that it may violate public policy for liability to be waived
* A waiver that the courts will not enforce because the purpose of the agreement is to achieve an illegal end constitutes an illegal agreement.

==Examples==
===Personal jurisdiction===
In the case of &quot;Insurance Corp. of Ireland v. Compagnie des Bauxites de Guinee&quot;, 456 U.S. 694 (1982) the United States Supreme Court decided that when a court orders a party to produce proof on a certain point, and that party refuses to comply with the court&#x27;s order, the court may deem that refusal to be a waiver of the right to contest that point and assume that the proof would show whatever the opposing party claims that it would.

In that court case, the defendant had argued that the court lacked personal jurisdiction over it but refused a court order to produce evidence of this lack of jurisdiction. The defendant argued that, because the court lacked jurisdiction, the court had no authority to issue an order to show proof of the lack of jurisdiction. The Supreme Court rejected that argument and determined that the defendant&#x27;s refusal to comply waived the right to contest jurisdiction, just as if it had never contested jurisdiction at all.

===Illegal waiver or agreement===
In US states such as California, a waiver is not lawful when it is contrary to an express provision of law, its implicit policy, or good morals. Furthermore, one cannot waive responsibility for violation of law, willful injury to a person or property of another, for fraud, or waive their residential tenant rights.

===State health programs===
Under Section 1115 of the Social Security Act, the United States federal government may issue waivers to individual states so that they may provide Medicaid or the Children&#x27;s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) in different ways from how the law typically mandates provision.

===Local government===
In the United Kingdom, standing orders adopted by local councils typically designate limits on the level of authority delegated to staff to take action without approval by elected members, with provision being made to waive these limits in appropriate circumstances such as urgency or where the requirements for competition in public procurement cannot be engaged.

==See also==
* Disclaimer
* Due process
* Estoppel
* Illegal agreement
* Loan waiver
* Tort reform
* Waiver and forfeiture

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q797551" start="2" end="8" title="Waiver" label="waiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646691" start="29" end="38" title="Surrender (law)" label="surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q780687" start="53" end="58" title="Rights" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q273395" start="62" end="71" title="Privilege (law)" label="privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q906118" start="111" end="121" title="disclaimer" label="disclaimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q552754" start="297" end="315" title="exculpation" label="exculpatory clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q6539418" start="317" end="333" title="liability waiver" label="liability waiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517577" start="335" end="348" title="legal release" label="legal release"/>
<link wikidata="Q708399" start="353" end="366" title="hold harmless" label="hold harmless"/>
<link wikidata="Q931483" start="700" end="713" title="legal fiction" label="legal fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="859" end="872" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q206937" start="1123" end="1138" title="civil procedure" label="civil procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="1224" end="1229" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141616" start="2255" end="2272" title="illegal agreement" label="illegal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="2431" end="2458" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q159394" start="2793" end="2802" title="defendant" label="defendant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7170598" start="2836" end="2857" title="personal jurisdiction" label="personal jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="3349" end="3359" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550813" start="3699" end="3718" title="Social Security Act" label="Social Security Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="3821" end="3829" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603105" start="3837" end="3877" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Health Insurance Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q853171" start="4024" end="4038" title="local government in the United Kingdom" label="local councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q20665717" start="4301" end="4319" title="public procurement" label="public procurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q906118" start="4355" end="4365" title="Disclaimer" label="Disclaimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068288" start="4368" end="4379" title="Due process" label="Due process"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142833" start="4382" end="4390" title="Estoppel" label="Estoppel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17141616" start="4393" end="4410" title="Illegal agreement" label="Illegal agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663476" start="4413" end="4424" title="Loan waiver" label="Loan waiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7827280" start="4427" end="4438" title="Tort reform" label="Tort reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469551" start="4441" end="4462" title="Waiver and forfeiture" label="Waiver and forfeiture"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020046" wikidata="Q3045261" url="?curid=1020046" title="Nonattachment (philosophy)">
<text>Nonattachment, non-attachment, or detachment is a state in which a person overcomes their emotional attachment to or desire for things, people, or worldly concerns and thus attains a heightened perspective. It is considered a wise virtue and is promoted in various Eastern religions, such as Hinduism, Jainism, Taoism, and Buddhism. It is also a key concept in Christian spirituality (often referred to by the Greek term ), where it signifies a detachment from worldly objects and concerns.

==Importance of the term==
Detachment as release from desire and consequently from suffering is an important principle, or even ideal, in Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Stoicism, Taoism, and Baháʼí Faith.

In Buddhist and Hindu religious texts the opposite concept is expressed as , translated as &quot;attachment&quot;. Attachment—that is, the inability to practice or embrace detachment—is viewed as the main obstacle towards a serene and fulfilled life. Many other spiritual traditions identify attachment with the continuous worries and restlessness produced by desire and personal ambitions.

==Jainism==
Detachment is one of the supreme ideals of Jainism, along with non-violence. Non-possession/non-attachment is one of the Mahavratas, the five great vows that Jain monks observe. Detachment is meaningful if accompanied by the knowledge of self as a soul; moreover, it can serve as the means for attaining self realization. According to Jain saint Shrimad Rajchandra, for those who are lifeless ritualists, mere bodily restraint does not help in attaining self-realization — detachment and are necessary. Therefore, he suggests one should undertake such activities, but one must not get stuck there. One cannot get rid of the root cause of birth and death without self-realization. As such, a Jain must understand and apply detachment for the purpose of gaining realization. However, he states that if one bears hardships that do not lead to a reduction in defilement, one strays from the path to liberation.

==Baháʼí Faith==
The second definition is in the Words of Wisdom:
==Buddhism==

Regarding the concept of detachment, or non-attachment, Buddhist texts in Pali mention , a word generally translated as &quot;renunciation&quot;. This word also conveys more specifically the meaning of &quot;giving up the world and leading a holy life&quot; or &quot;freedom from lust, craving, and desires.&quot;

The writings of Milarepa are canonical Mahayana Buddhist texts that emphasize the temporary nature of the physical body and the need for non-attachment.

Detachment is a central concept in Zen Buddhist philosophy. One of the most important technical Chinese terms for detachment is &quot;&quot; (), which literally means &quot;no thought.&quot; This does not signify the literal absence of thought, but rather the state of being &quot;unstained&quot; ( ) by thought. Therefore, &quot;detachment&quot; is being detached from one&#x27;s thoughts. It is to separate oneself from one&#x27;s own thoughts and opinions in detail as to not be harmed mentally and emotionally by them.

==Christianity==

Eastern Christian monasticism cultivated practices of detached watchfulness which were designed to calm the passions and lead to an ongoing state of calm detachment known as . 

In Western Christianity, Ignatian spirituality encourages detachment, sometimes referred to as &quot;indifference&quot;, in order to maximize a person&#x27;s &quot;availability&quot; to God and to their neighbors.

==Hinduism==

The Hindu view of detachment comes from the understanding of the nature of existence. The true ultimate state sought is that of being in the moment: While one is responsible and active, one does not worry about the past or future. The detachment is towards the result of one&#x27;s actions rather than towards everything in life. This concept is cited extensively within Puranic and Vedic literature, for example:
 is a Hindu term which is often translated as detachment.

==Taoism==
The Tao Te Ching expresses the concept (in chapter 44) as:

Be content with what you have; rejoice in the way things are. When you realize there is nothing lacking, the whole world belongs to you
== Stoicism ==
The Christian practices of detachment derive from ancient Greek philosophy, most notably Stoicism. According to the Stoics, , which can be translated as &quot;equanimity&quot;, was the quality that characterized the sage.

Whereas Aristotle had claimed that virtue was to be found in the golden mean between an excess and a deficiency of emotion (), the Stoics thought that living virtuously provided freedom from the passions, resulting in . It meant eradicating the tendency to react emotionally or egotistically to external events, the things that cannot be controlled. For Stoics, it was the optimally rational response to the world, for things cannot be controlled if they are caused by the will of others or by Nature; only one&#x27;s own will can be controlled. That did not mean a loss of feeling, or total disengagement from the world. The Stoic who performs correct (virtuous) judgments and actions as part of the world order experiences contentment () and good feelings ().

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3045261" start="0" end="13" title="Nonattachment (philosophy)" label="Nonattachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045261" start="15" end="29" title="Nonattachment (philosophy)" label="non-attachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045261" start="34" end="44" title="Nonattachment (philosophy)" label="detachment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12558574" start="194" end="205" title="perspective (cognitive)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q799" start="226" end="230" title="wisdom" label="wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="231" end="237" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="292" end="300" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="302" end="309" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="311" end="317" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="323" end="331" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="630" end="638" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="640" end="648" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="650" end="657" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="659" end="667" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="669" end="675" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="681" end="693" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="1143" end="1150" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="1163" end="1175" title="non-violence" label="non-violence"/>
<link wikidata="Q22205402" start="1221" end="1230" title="Mahavrata" label="Mahavrata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784985" start="1258" end="1268" title="Jain muni" label="Jain monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874480" start="1404" end="1420" title="self realization" label="self realization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16382" start="1446" end="1464" title="Shrimad Rajchandra" label="Shrimad Rajchandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2144" end="2152" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="2162" end="2166" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q58431" start="2419" end="2427" title="Milarepa" label="Milarepa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="2442" end="2450" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="2592" end="2595" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330059" start="3099" end="3128" title="Eastern Christian monasticism" label="Eastern Christian monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338290" start="3162" end="3174" title="Watchfulness (Christian)" label="watchfulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5992682" start="3302" end="3323" title="Ignatian spirituality" label="Ignatian spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="3877" end="3884" title="Puranic" label="Puranic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="3889" end="3894" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q134425" start="3994" end="4006" title="Tao Te Ching" label="Tao Te Ching"/>
<link wikidata="Q48235" start="4290" end="4298" title="Stoicism" label="Stoicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624172" start="4417" end="4421" title="Sage (Sophos)" label="sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q868" start="4432" end="4441" title="Aristotle" label="Aristotle"/>
<link wikidata="Q157811" start="4459" end="4465" title="virtue" label="virtue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054131" start="4489" end="4500" title="Golden mean (philosophy)" label="golden mean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5408345" start="4619" end="4627" title="Stoic passions" label="passions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020053" wikidata="Q661767" url="?curid=1020053" title="Ciarán Bourke">
<text>Ciarán Bourke (18 February 1935 – 10 May 1988) was an Irish musician and one of the original founding members of the Irish folk band The Dubliners.

==Early life==
Ciarán Bourke was born in Dublin on 18 February 1935, but lived most of his life in Tibradden, County Dublin. His father, a doctor, was in practice in the city. The children had an Irish-speaking nanny. Ciarán&#x27;s early exposure to Irish continued throughout his education, attending Colaiste Mhuire, Parnell Square, Dublin. He later attended University College Dublin for a course in Agricultural Science. He did not take his degree but always retained an interest in farming.

==The Dubliners==
After leaving university he met two of his future bandmates in The Dubliners, Ronnie Drew and Barney McKenna, who invited Ciarán to join their sessions in O&#x27;Donoghue&#x27;s Pub where he played tin whistle, mouth organ and guitar, as well as singing. Luke Kelly, who had been singing around the clubs in England, returned to Dublin and joined them; the four gained local popularity. Taking the name The Dubliners, the group put together the first folk concert of its kind in Dublin. The concert was a success, then a theatrical production called &quot;A Ballad Tour of Ireland&quot; was put on at the Gate Theatre shortly afterwards.

In 1964 fiddle player John Sheahan joined the band, and this became known as the original Dubliners line-up.

Ciarán was responsible for bringing a Gaelic element to The Dubliners&#x27; music with songs such as &quot;Peggy Lettermore&quot; and &quot;Sé Fáth Mo Bhuartha&quot; being performed in the Irish language. He also sang a number of the group&#x27;s more lighthearted and humorous numbers such as &quot;Jar of Porter&quot;, &quot;The Dublin Fusiliers&quot;, &quot;The Limerick Rake&quot;, &quot;Mrs. McGrath&quot;, &quot;Darby O&#x27;Leary&quot;, &quot;All For Me Grog&quot; and &quot;The Ballad of Ronnie&#x27;s Mare&quot;, as well as patriotic songs such as &quot;Roddy McCorley&quot;, &quot;The Enniskillen Dragoons&quot;, &quot;Take It Down From The Mast&quot; and &quot;Henry Joy&quot;.

==Declining health and death==
On 5 April 1974, The Dubliners travelled to Eastbourne where they were to appear in concert. Luke was worried by the way Ciarán kept moving his head about, as if trying to alleviate increasing pain. Four minutes into the second half, it was decided he could not continue with the show. Luke insisted that a doctor should be phoned and instructed to await their return to the Irish Club at Eaton Square. The roadie for the trip, John Corry, thought that it was better to drive straight to St George&#x27;s Hospital in London, where the doctors diagnosed a brain aneurysm. Ciarán was transferred to the Atkinson Morley Hospital in Wimbledon, while doctors waited for his wife to return from a trip to Ghana, to get her signature before operating. She was told that there was danger of further haemorrhaging. Ciarán was operated on at the earliest opportunity. The bleeding began again while he was on the table which meant that they could not repair the damage, just staunch the bleeding. This left him paralysed down his left side and confused as to where he was and what had happened.

Ciarán received intensive therapy, attending a clinic in Dún Laoghaire, County Dublin. He was heartened by his progress and insisted on rejoining the Dubliners on their next tour of the Continent in November that year.

Ciarán&#x27;s continued insistence that he was fit enough to join them on the forthcoming German tour caused them considerable disquiet. They preferred he ease himself back to work, with a few small shows in Ireland. The tour gradually began to take its toll on Ciarán, and it was decided that for the sake of his health he should return home. He flew from Brussels to Dublin.

Ciarán made his last public appearance on Ireland&#x27;s RTÉ One during &quot;The Late Late Show&quot;&#x27;s tribute to The Dubliners in 1987. Despite his lingering paralysis he recited &quot;The Lament for Brendan Behan&quot; after which everyone in the studio, led by Ronnie Drew, sang &quot;The Auld Triangle&quot;.

Ciarán Bourke died on 10 May 1988 after a long illness. From 1974 until his death he had continued to be paid by the band. A fifth member of the group was not recruited until after his death.

==Personal life==
Ciarán married Jeannie Bonham on 5 April 1964. Together they had six daughters-Ciara, Laoighse, Síobhra (R.I.P.), Rathfíonna, Saoirse and Seodhna and nine grandchildren Benn, Ceoladh, Jack, Clara, Aoibh, Cairo, Ríona, Phoenix and Daire.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q661767" start="0" end="13" title="Ciarán Bourke" label="Ciarán Bourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q478629" start="133" end="146" title="The Dubliners" label="The Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="190" end="196" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3777165" start="248" end="257" title="Tibradden" label="Tibradden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467626" start="468" end="482" title="Parnell Square" label="Parnell Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="510" end="535" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q478629" start="727" end="740" title="The Dubliners" label="The Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q362406" start="742" end="753" title="Ronnie Drew" label="Ronnie Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q723053" start="758" end="772" title="Barney McKenna" label="Barney McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005419" start="819" end="845" title="O&amp;#x27;Donoghue&amp;#x27;s Pub" label="O&amp;#x27;Donoghue&amp;#x27;s Pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q369933" start="919" end="929" title="Luke Kelly" label="Luke Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q693584" start="1325" end="1337" title="John Sheahan" label="John Sheahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48816631" start="1774" end="1791" title="The Limerick Rake" label="The Limerick Rake"/>
<link wikidata="Q208262" start="2178" end="2188" title="Eastbourne" label="Eastbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5192677" start="2523" end="2535" title="Eaton Square" label="Eaton Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495316" start="2622" end="2647" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q189389" start="2695" end="2703" title="aneurysm" label="aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="2763" end="2772" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q745989" start="3277" end="3290" title="Dún Laoghaire" label="Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096518" start="3875" end="3882" title="RTÉ One" label="RTÉ One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612445" start="3896" end="3914" title="The Late Late Show (Irish talk show)" label="The Late Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q478629" start="3939" end="3952" title="The Dubliners" label="The Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q313063" start="4026" end="4039" title="Brendan Behan" label="Brendan Behan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362406" start="4089" end="4100" title="Ronnie Drew" label="Ronnie Drew"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915745" start="4113" end="4130" title="The Auld Triangle" label="The Auld Triangle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020055" wikidata="Q5043056" url="?curid=1020055" title="Carlton Sherwood">
<text>Carlton Alex Sherwood (December 16, 1946 – June 11, 2014) was an American journalist who produced the anti-John Kerry film &quot;Stolen Honor&quot;. Sherwood served on two news teams which were responsible for the award of the Pulitzer Prize and the Peabody Award to their organizations.

After working for the Unification Church-owned &quot;Washington Times&quot;, he authored &quot;&quot;, a book about the &quot;United States v. Sun Myung Moon&quot; which involved Sun Myung Moon, the leader of the same church.

In 1987, the Blinded American Veterans Foundation established the annual Carlton Sherwood Media Award to recognize &quot;both journalistic excellence and those members of the media who have shown special interest in—and dedication to—the needs and concerns of American veterans.&quot;

==Early life and career==
He was born in Camden, New Jersey, in 1946, the son of a naval submarine officer. He enlisted in the US Marine Corps and participated in the United States occupation of the Dominican Republic. He later attended the University of Maryland. His career as a reporter began at the &quot;Philadelphia Bulletin&quot; in 1968.

==Journalism==
Sherwood, John M. Hanchette, and William F. Schmick, were responsible for the Gannett News Service winning the 1980 Pulitzer Prize public service gold medal. The award was for a series investigating a fund-raising scandal involving the Pauline Fathers of Doylestown, Pennsylvania and the Vatican&#x27;s role in the subsequent cover up. It was the first time this award was given to a wire service.

Sherwood also was part of a team of reporters who documented abuse, neglect, and deaths among children, the aged, and the mentally ill cared for by Oklahoma&#x27;s Department of Human Services. The investigation culminated with articles published by Gannett, a special report produced by Karen Burns and Bill Lichtenstein which aired on the ABC News Magazine &quot;20/20&quot; entitled &quot;Throwaway Kids&quot; and a report, &quot;Oklahoma Shame&quot;, which aired on Gannett-owned TV station KOCO in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The series was honored with a 1982 Peabody Award.

==Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund==
In a November 1983 four-part series for Gannett-owned Washington, D.C. television station WDMV (now WUSA) Channel 9 called &quot;Vietnam Memorial: A Broken Promise?&quot;.

:...he &quot;raised serious questions regarding the financial propriety&quot; of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund, a private organization that raised $9 million to build the wall. Sherwood reported that only $2.6 million had been spent and wanted to know where the rest of the money was.

Bob Doubek, project director for the Fund, said that &quot;It was a hit piece. All of Sherwood&#x27;s stuff was conjecture, smoke and mirrors.&quot; To prevent a lawsuit, the station aired a retraction and donated $50,000 to the Fund. Sherwood was arrested and charged with illegally taping one of the subjects of the report, John P. Wheeler III, chairman of the Fund and special council to the chairman of the SEC. The charges against Sherwood were later dropped. An audit of the Fund by the General Accounting Office, made public in May 1984, concluded that Sherwood&#x27;s charges regarding the Fund were baseless.

In December, the station refused to air another report by Sherwood criticizing the Fund. Sherwood quit and got a job for &quot;The Washington Times&quot; at a lower salary. &quot;The New York Times&quot; headline on this controversy read &quot;Reporter&#x27;s Project Ruins His Career&quot;. (July 17, 1984)

==&quot;Inquisition&quot;==
In his book &quot;Inquisition: The Persecution and Prosecution of the Reverend Sun Myung Moon&quot;, Sherwood concluded:
:&quot;The Unification Church, its leaders and followers were and continue to be the victims of the worst kind of religious prejudice and racial bigotry this country has witnessed in over a century. Moreover, virtually every institution we as Americans hold sacred the Congress, the courts, law enforcement agencies, the press, even the U.S. Constitution itself was prostituted in a malicious, oftentimes brutal manner, as part of a determined effort to wipe out this small but expanding religious movement.&quot;

Sherwood&#x27;s independence from the subject matter, however, was called into question. Sherwood had previously worked for &quot;The Washington Times&quot;, owned by members of the Unification Church.

In the story &quot;The Resurrection Of Reverend Moon&quot; (January 21, 1992), the PBS television series &quot;Frontline&quot; produced a copy of a letter addressed to Moon, written by James Gavin, a leader in Moon&#x27;s Unification Church. Gavin tells Moon he reviewed the &quot;overall tone and factual contents&quot; of the book before publication and suggested revisions. Gavin adds that &quot;Mr. Sherwood has assured me that all this will be done when the manuscript is sent to the publisher.&quot; Gavin concludes by telling Moon, &quot;When all of our suggestions have been incorporated, the book will be complete and in my opinion will make a significant impact. ... In addition to silencing our critics now, the book should be invaluable in persuading others of our legitimacy for many years to come.&quot;

==Pentagon military analyst program==
Sherwood was one of 75 members of the Pentagon military analyst program, recruited in 2002 to make appearances in the US media as military analysts while delivering talking points in favor of the Bush administration&#x27;s invasion of Iraq.

==&quot;Stolen Honor&quot;==
During the 2004 presidential campaign, Sherwood wrote and directed the anti-Kerry documentary &quot;Stolen Honor&quot;, which presented the viewpoints of a number of American Vietnam War veterans who contend that John Kerry&#x27;s anti-war activities harmed them and depicted Kerry as a traitor. Sherwood told Fox News, &quot;We&#x27;re all Vietnam combat vets, and we were all slandered and vilified by John Kerry, branded as baby killers.&quot; The journalistic standards of this piece were widely called into question. Sinclair Broadcasting planned to broadcast it on the eve of the general election, stating that they considered it to be newsworthy. After the ensuing controversy, Sinclair did not broadcast the film.

&quot;Stolen Honor&quot; was a project of Sherwood&#x27;s Red, White and Blue Productions based in Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, whose public affairs are managed by Quantum Communications, a company owned by lobbyist Charles Gerow. In 2000, Gerow ran on the Republican ticket for Congress. In 2003, he was nominated by President Bush to be a Member of the Benjamin Franklin Tercentenary Commission. Gerow acted as publicist for the film.

Sherwood sued Kerry, alleging that he was responsible for Sinclair refusing to air the film and for damage to Sherwood&#x27;s reputation. Kerry created a legal defense fund called Fund for Truth and Honor, a play on the title of Sherwood&#x27;s film. The lawsuit was dismissed.

==Republican appointments==
Sherwood formerly worked for Pennsylvania governor Tom Ridge, whom George W. Bush later appointed as the first Secretary of Homeland Security. Sherwood and Ridge met when Ridge was a Congressman and a key critic of the planned Vietnam Veterans Memorial and Sherwood was reporting negatively on the Memorial Fund. Sherwood served as Executive Vice President and Director of Communications of the WVC3 Group, Inc., an anti-terrorism, security firm headquartered in Reston, VA.

According to his profile on the WVC3 website, Sherwood &quot;served as Special Media Advisor to the Secretary of the Navy during the Reagan Administration.&quot;

==Death==
On June 11, 2014, he died in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania from congestive heart failure at the age of 67.

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Sherwood, Carlton. (1991). &quot;Inquisition: The Persecution and Prosecution of the Reverend Sun Myung Moon&quot;. Regnery Press. 
* Sherwood, Carlton. (1982). &quot;The Wayward Shepherds&quot;. Putnam Publishing Group. .

==External links==
* Bio from stolenhonor.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5043056" start="0" end="21" title="Carlton Sherwood" label="Carlton Alex Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="107" end="117" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618615" start="129" end="141" title="Stolen Honor" label="Stolen Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="227" end="241" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q838121" start="250" end="263" title="Peabody Award" label="Peabody Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="311" end="329" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="342" end="358" title="Washington Times" label="Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375999" start="415" end="446" title="United States v. Sun Myung Moon" label="United States v. Sun Myung Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q296734" start="468" end="482" title="Sun Myung Moon" label="Sun Myung Moon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="529" end="565" title="Blinded American Veterans Foundation" label="Blinded American Veterans Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="843" end="861" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="929" end="944" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q955457" start="969" end="1019" title="United States occupation of the Dominican Republic (1965–66)" label="United States occupation of the Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="1043" end="1065" title="University of Maryland" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182639" start="1111" end="1132" title="Philadelphia Bulletin" label="Philadelphia Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345971" start="1242" end="1262" title="Gannett News Service" label="Gannett News Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="1280" end="1294" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q644995" start="1295" end="1320" title="Pulitzer Prize for Public Service" label="public service gold medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q846687" start="1400" end="1415" title="Pauline Fathers" label="Pauline Fathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010232" start="1419" end="1443" title="Doylestown, Pennsylvania" label="Doylestown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="1452" end="1459" title="Roman Curia" label="Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q192283" start="1548" end="1560" title="wire service" label="wire service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909910" start="1867" end="1884" title="Bill Lichtenstein" label="Bill Lichtenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q197867" start="1922" end="1939" title="20/20 (US television series)" label="&amp;quot;20/20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7798527" start="1955" end="1969" title="Throwaway Kids" label="Throwaway Kids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1996" end="2010" title="Oklahoma Shame" label="Oklahoma Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334811" start="2058" end="2062" title="KOCO" label="KOCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q34863" start="2066" end="2089" title="Oklahoma City, Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma City, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2231" end="2247" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q645710" start="2267" end="2271" title="WUSA (TV)" label="WDMV"/>
<link wikidata="Q506378" start="2967" end="2986" title="John Wheeler III" label="John P. Wheeler III"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="3052" end="3055" title="Securities and Exchange Commission" label="SEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="3134" end="3159" title="General Accounting Office" label="General Accounting Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="3387" end="3407" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="3439" end="3457" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="4363" end="4383" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="4519" end="4522" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2894569" start="4547" end="4556" title="Frontline (US TV series)" label="Frontline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4621" end="4632" title="James Gavin (Unification Church)" label="James Gavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="4658" end="4676" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164978" start="5331" end="5364" title="Pentagon military analyst program" label="Pentagon military analyst program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679860" start="5458" end="5472" title="talking points" label="talking points"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="5489" end="5508" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="5516" end="5532" title="Iraq War" label="invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q7618615" start="5664" end="5676" title="Stolen Honor" label="Stolen Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q22316" start="5777" end="5787" title="John Kerry" label="John Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="5874" end="5882" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288792" start="6086" end="6107" title="Sinclair Broadcasting" label="Sinclair Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q25280" start="6386" end="6410" title="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania" label="Harrisburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="6541" end="6551" title="United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q559822" start="7080" end="7089" title="Tom Ridge" label="Tom Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="7096" end="7110" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q642859" start="7140" end="7170" title="Secretary of Homeland Security" label="Secretary of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7424" end="7440" title="WVC3 Group, Inc." label="WVC3 Group, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="7707" end="7733" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="7739" end="7763" title="congestive heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579498" start="7933" end="7946" title="Regnery Press" label="Regnery Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1020060" wikidata="Q5262941" url="?curid=1020060" title="Deroy Murdock">
<text>Deroy Murdock (born 1963) is an American political commentator, a contributing editor with &quot;National Review Online&quot;, an emeritus media fellow of the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, and member of the Council on Foreign Relations. A native of Los Angeles, Murdock lives in New York City. A first-generation American, his parents were born in Costa Rica.

==Education==
Deroy Murdock earned his Bachelor&#x27;s Degree in Government from Georgetown University in 1986 and his Master of Business Administration in Marketing and International Business from New York University in 1989. His MBA program included a semester as an exchange student at the Chinese University of Hong Kong.

==Career==
Murdock&#x27;s columns appear in &quot;The New York Post, The Boston Herald, The Washington Times, National Review, The Orange County Register&quot; and many other newspapers and magazines in the United States and abroad. He is a Fox News Contributor whose political commentary also has aired on ABC&#x27;s &quot;Nightline, NBC Nightly News,&quot; CNN, MSNBC, PBS, other television news channels, and numerous radio outlets. He is openly gay.

Murdock is also a senior fellow with the Atlas Network in Washington, D.C., and an emeritus media fellow with the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. He is a member of the Council on Foreign Relations.

Murdock has debated or made presentations in foreign countries and at organizations such as the National Academy of Sciences, the Cato Institute, Harvard Medical School, the Council on Foreign Relations, the Heritage Foundation, and Stanford, Tulane, USC, and Dartmouth universities.

Murdock interned for U.S. senator Orrin Hatch between 1982 and 1985 and then-U.S. senator Pete Wilson in 1984. Murdock is a veteran of the 1980 and 1984 presidential campaigns of Ronald Reagan and was a communications consultant with Steve Forbes&#x27; 2000 presidential campaign.

In February 2013, Murdock joined the board of advisors of the Coalition to Reduce Spending.

Murdock was a producer of &quot;I&#x27;ll Say She Is – The Lost Marx Brothers Musical&quot;, which was based on the 1924 &quot;I&#x27;ll Say She Is&quot; musical comedy. The production opened in 2016, at the Connelly Theater in Manhattan&#x27;s East Village.

==Views==
Murdock opposes governmental involvement in issues relating to both gay and heterosexual marriage. He also opposes the war on drugs.

Murdock said on MSNBC&#x27;s &quot;Hardball with Chris Matthews&quot; on September 16, 2007, that he believes Saddam Hussein was involved in perpetrating the September 11, 2001, terrorist attack on America. Murdock cited the holding in &quot;Smith v. Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan&quot;, 262 F. Supp. 2d 217, a federal case heard by U.S. District Judge Harold Baer Jr. who found that Hussein&#x27;s Baathist government and the Taliban assisted Osama bin Laden and al-Qaeda in the September 11 attacks and ruled that the defendants, including Hussein’s Iraq, were jointly and severally liable for civil damages to the families of two killed in a September 11 attack.

==See also==
* Black conservatism in the United States

== References ==
==External links==
* National Review columns
* Biography at the Institute for Humane Studies
* &quot;Smith v. Islamic Emirate of Afg&quot;. 262 F. Supp. 2d 217 
* CBSNews.com: &quot;Court Rules: Al Qaida, Iraq Linked&quot;
* Saddam Hussein&#x27;s Philanthropy of Terror
* Article on Dean&#x27;s World
* Clip from MSNBC&#x27;s &quot;1600 Pennsylvania Avenue&quot;
* I&#x27;ll Say She Is – the Lost Marx Brothers Musical</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5262941" start="0" end="13" title="Deroy Murdock" label="Deroy Murdock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="97" end="119" title="National Review Online" label="National Review Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="159" end="177" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="181" end="200" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="220" end="248" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="413" end="435" title="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s Degree" label="Bachelor&amp;#x27;s Degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="455" end="476" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="493" end="526" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="572" end="591" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q15570" start="667" end="698" title="Chinese University of Hong Kong" label="Chinese University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="751" end="768" title="The New York Post" label="The New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="770" end="787" title="The Boston Herald" label="The Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="789" end="809" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699649" start="811" end="826" title="National Review" label="National Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413231" start="828" end="854" title="The Orange County Register" label="The Orange County Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="942" end="950" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="1008" end="1011" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768706" start="1025" end="1034" title="Nightline (US news program)" label="Nightline"/>
<link wikidata="Q594503" start="1036" end="1052" title="NBC Nightly News" label="NBC Nightly News"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="1060" end="1063" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="1065" end="1070" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="1072" end="1075" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q757172" start="1197" end="1210" title="Atlas Network" label="Atlas Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147088" start="1270" end="1288" title="Hoover Institution" label="Hoover Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1292" end="1311" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="1335" end="1363" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="1462" end="1490" title="National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051256" start="1496" end="1510" title="Cato Institute" label="Cato Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49121" start="1512" end="1534" title="Harvard Medical School" label="Harvard Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q876787" start="1574" end="1593" title="Heritage Foundation" label="Heritage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="1599" end="1607" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193547" start="1609" end="1615" title="Tulane University" label="Tulane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614" start="1617" end="1620" title="University of Southern California" label="USC"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="1626" end="1635" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="1685" end="1696" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q714909" start="1741" end="1752" title="Pete Wilson" label="Pete Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365209" start="1786" end="1794" title="Ronald Reagan 1980 presidential campaign" label="the 1980"/>
<link wikidata="Q96402538" start="1799" end="1826" title="Ronald Reagan 1984 presidential campaign" label="1984 presidential campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="1830" end="1843" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q780842" start="1885" end="1897" title="Steve Forbes" label="Steve Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965966" start="2153" end="2173" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Say She Is" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Say She Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="2415" end="2427" title="war on drugs" label="war on drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127348" start="2465" end="2493" title="Hardball with Chris Matthews" label="Hardball with Chris Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="2540" end="2554" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="2588" end="2624" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11, 2001, terrorist attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660002" start="2784" end="2799" title="Harold Baer Jr." label="Harold Baer Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q2582421" start="2830" end="2838" title="Ba&amp;#x27;athism" label="Baathist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="2858" end="2865" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2994" end="3022" title="Joint and several liability#Joint and several liability" label="jointly and severally liable"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922301" start="3113" end="3152" title="Black conservatism in the United States" label="Black conservatism in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q794256" start="3235" end="3263" title="Institute for Humane Studies" label="Institute for Humane Studies"/>
</links>
</doc>
