<doc id="871336" wikidata="Q512599" url="?curid=871336" title="Real estate appraisal">
<text>Real estate appraisal, property valuation or land valuation is the process of assessing the value of real property (usually market value). Real estate transactions often require appraisals because every property has unique characteristics. The location also plays a key role in valuation. Appraisal reports form the basis for mortgage loans, settling estates and divorces, taxation, and so on. Sometimes an appraisal report is used to establish a sale price for a property.

==Types of value==
There are several types and definitions of value sought by a real estate appraisal. Some of the most common are:

*Market value – the price at which an asset would trade in a competitive Walrasian auction setting. Market value is usually interchangeable with &quot;open market value&quot; or &quot;fair value&quot;. International Valuation Standards (IVS) define:

::Market value – the estimated amount for which an asset or liability should exchange on the &quot;valuation date&quot; between a willing buyer and a willing seller in an arm&#x27;s length transaction, after proper marketing and where the parties had each acted knowledgeably, prudently and without compulsion.

*Value-in-use, or use value – the net present value (NPV) of a cash flow that an asset generates for a specific owner under a specific use. Value-in-use is the value to one particular user, and may be above or below the market value of a property.
*Investment value – the value to one particular investor, and may or may not be higher than the market value of a property. Differences between the &quot;investment value&quot; of an asset and its &quot;market value&quot; motivate buyers or sellers to enter the marketplace. International Valuation Standards (IVS) define:

::Investment value – the value of an asset to the owner or a prospective owner for individual investment or operational objectives.

* Ad valorem tax value – the value used for taxation purposes, determined by the collection of data through the mass appraisal process. The mass appraisal process applies the data collected through various sources to real property to determine taxable value.
*Insurable value – the value of real property covered by an insurance policy. Generally, it does not include the site value.
*Liquidation value – may be analyzed as either a forced liquidation or an orderly liquidation and is a commonly sought standard of value in bankruptcy proceedings. It assumes a seller who is compelled to sell after an exposure period which is less than the market-normal time-frame.

===Price vs value===
There can be differences between what the property is worth (market value) and what it cost to buy it (price). A price paid might not represent that property&#x27;s market value. Sometimes, special considerations may have been present, such as a special relationship between the buyer and the seller where one party had control or significant influence over the other party. In other cases, the transaction may have been just one of several properties sold or traded between two parties. In such cases, the price paid for any particular piece is not its market &quot;value&quot; (with the idea usually being, though, that all the pieces and prices add up to the market value of all the parts) but rather it&#x27;s market &quot;price&quot;.

At other times, a buyer may willingly pay a premium price, above the generally accepted market value, if his subjective valuation of the property (its &quot;investment value&quot; for him) was higher than the market value. One specific example of this is an owner of a neighboring property who, by combining his property with the subject property (assemblage), could obtain economies-of-scale and added value (plottage value). Similar situations sometimes happen in corporate finance. For example, this can occur when a merger or acquisition happens at a price which is higher than the value represented by the price of the underlying stock. The usual explanation for these types of mergers and acquisitions is that &quot;the sum is greater than its parts&quot;, since full ownership of a company provides full control of it. This is something that purchasers will sometimes pay a high price for. This situation can happen in real estate purchases too.

But the most common reason for value differing from price is that either the buyer or the seller is uninformed as to what a property&#x27;s market value is but nevertheless agrees on a contract at a certain price which is either too expensive or too cheap. This is unfortunate for one of the two parties. It is the obligation of a real property appraiser to estimate the true &quot;market value&quot; of a property and not its &quot;market price.&quot;

Frequently, properties are assessed at a value below their market values; this is known as fractional assessment. Fractional assessment can result in properties that are assessed at 10% or less of their given market values.

===Market value definitions in the United States===
In the United States, appraisals are for a certain type of value (e.g., foreclosure value, fair market value, distressed sale value, investment value). The most commonly used definition of value is market value. While Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP) does not define Market Value, it provides general guidance for how Market Value should be defined:

A type of value, stated as an opinion, that presumes the transfer of a property (i.e., a right of ownership or a bundle of such rights), as of a certain date, under specific conditions set forth in the definition of the term identified by the appraiser as applicable in an appraisal.

Thus, the definition of value used in an appraisal or Current Market Analysis (CMA) analysis and report is a set of assumptions about the market in which the subject property may transact. It affects the choice of comparable data for use in the analysis. It can also affect the method used to value the property. For example, tree value can contribute up to 27% of property value.

==Main approaches to value==
There are three traditional groups of methodologies for determining value. These are usually referred to as the &quot;three approaches to value&quot; which are generally independent of each other:

*The sales comparison approach (comparing a property&#x27;s characteristics with those of comparable properties that have recently sold in similar transactions).
*The cost approach (the buyer will not pay more for a property than it would cost to build an equivalent).
*The income approach (similar to the methods used for financial valuation, securities analysis or bond pricing – where the implied property value is a function of the property&#x27;s pro forma cash flow, or NOI in the context of real estate). 

However, the recent trend of the business tends to be toward the use of a scientific methodology of appraisal which relies on the foundation of quantitative-data, risk, and geographical based approaches. Pagourtzi &quot;et al.&quot; have provided a review on the methods used in the industry by comparison between conventional approaches and advanced ones.

As mentioned before, an appraiser can generally choose from three approaches to determine value. One or two of these approaches will usually be most applicable, with the other approach or approaches usually being less useful. The appraiser has to think about the &quot;scope of work&quot;, the type of value, the property itself, and the quality and quantity of data available for each approach. No overarching statement can be made that one approach or another is always better than one of the other approaches.

The appraiser has to think about the way that most buyers usually buy a given type of property. What appraisal method do most buyers use for the type of property being valued? This generally guides the appraiser&#x27;s thinking on the best valuation method, in conjunction with the available data. For instance, appraisals of properties that are typically purchased by investors (e.g., skyscrapers, office buildings) may give greater weight to the Income Approach. Buyers interested in purchasing single family residential property would rather compare price, in this case, the Sales Comparison Approach (market analysis approach) would be more applicable. The third and final approach to value is the Cost Approach to value. The Cost Approach to value is most useful in determining insurable value, and cost to construct a new structure or building.

For example, single apartment buildings of a given quality tend to sell at a particular price per apartment. In many of those cases, the sales comparison approach may be more applicable. On the other hand, a multiple-building apartment complex would usually be valued by the income approach, as that would follow how most buyers would value it. As another example, single-family houses are most commonly valued with the greatest weighting to the sales comparison approach. However, if a single-family dwelling is in a neighborhood where all or most of the dwellings are rental units, then some variant of the income approach may be more useful. So the choice of valuation method can change depending upon the circumstances, even if the property being valued does not change much.

===The sales comparison approach===
The sales comparison approach is based primarily on the principle of substitution. This approach assumes a prudent (or rational) individual will pay no more for a property than it would cost to purchase a comparable substitute property. The approach recognizes that a typical buyer will compare asking prices and seek to purchase the property that meets his or her wants and needs for the lowest cost. In developing the sales comparison approach, the appraiser attempts to interpret and measure the actions of parties involved in the marketplace, including buyers, sellers, and investors.

====Data collection methods and valuation process====

Data is collected on recent sales of properties similar to the subject being valued, called &quot;comparables&quot;. Only SOLD properties may be used in an appraisal and determination of a property&#x27;s value, as they represent amounts actually paid or agreed upon for properties. Sources of comparable data include real estate publications, public records, buyers, sellers, real estate brokers and/or agents, appraisers, and so on. Important details of each comparable sale are described in the appraisal report. Since comparable sales are not identical to the subject property, adjustments may be made for date of sale, location, style, amenities, square footage, site size, etc. The main idea is to simulate the price that would have been paid if each comparable sale were identical to the subject property. If the comparable is superior to the subject in a factor or aspect, then a downward adjustment is needed for that factor. Likewise, if the comparable is inferior to the subject in an aspect, then an upward adjustment for that aspect is needed. The adjustment is somewhat subjective and relies on the appraiser&#x27;s training and experience. From the analysis of the group of adjusted sales prices of the comparable sales, the appraiser selects an indicator of value that is representative of the subject property. It is possible for various appraisers to choose a different indicator of value which ultimately will provide different property value.

====Steps in the sales comparison approach====
#Research the market to obtain information pertaining to sales, and pending sales that are similar to the subject property
#Investigate the market data to determine whether they are factually correct and accurate
#Determine relevant units of comparison (e.g., sales price per square foot), and develop a comparative analysis for each
#Compare the subject and comparable sales according to the elements of comparison and adjust as appropriate
#Reconcile the multiple value indications that result from the adjustment (upward or downward) of the comparable sales into a single value indication

===The cost approach===
The cost approach was once called the summation approach. The theory is that the value of a property can be estimated by summing the land value and the depreciated value of any improvements. The value of the improvements is often referred to by the abbreviation RCNLD (for &quot;reproduction/replacement cost new less depreciation&quot;). Reproduction refers to reproducing an exact replica; replacement cost refers to the cost of building a house or other improvement which has the same utility, but using modern design, workmanship and materials. In practice, appraisers almost always use replacement cost and then deduct a factor for any functional dis-utility associated with the age of the subject property. An exception to the general rule of using the replacement cost is for some insurance value appraisals. In those cases, reproduction of the exact asset after a destructive event like a fire is the goal.

In most instances when the cost approach is involved, the overall methodology is a hybrid of the cost and sales comparison approaches (representing both the suppliers&#x27; costs and the prices that customers are seeking). For example, the replacement cost to construct a building can be determined by adding the labor, material, and other costs. On the other hand, land values and depreciation must be derived from an analysis of comparable sales data.

The cost approach is considered most reliable when used on newer structures, but the method tends to become less reliable for older properties. The cost approach is often the only reliable approach when dealing with special use properties (e.g., public assembly, marinas). However, it is important to consider if there is actually a market for the use and all forms of obsolescence. Some special use properties lack an active market such that the cost approach may not be reliable either and may be more indicative of a use value or such. In some cases, it may be appropriate to consider alternative uses.

====Obsolescence====
The cost approach requires adjustments for obsolescence, stemming from three sources.

* Physical (depreciation) - Reduction based on the wearing-out of the physical components.
* Functional - Loss in value for some functional or design aspect of the property.
* External - Loss in value for something outside of the property.

Physical depreciation is most familiar. As a structure ages, there is an effect on value. For example, buyers may reduce prices because they expect to make expensive replacements soon. Or in other cases, buyers expect higher utility expenses because they figure the property has older and worn insulation.

Functional obsolescence relates to the design of the property. It could be something that is inadequate about a property (say a house that lacks a swimming pool in a hot climate like Arizona) or something that is superadequate (say a 2-bedroom house that has 9 bathrooms). In either case, there is a deduction to the value compared to the costs of the structures that are there. For example, the 9 bathrooms all cost the same to construct but they add less and less. The appraisal should evaluate whether it is feasible to cure (fix) the item - that is, consider if the increase in value by fixing it exceeds the cost of the fix.

External obsolescence is something outside of the property. It could be changes in market conditions, or an undesirable neighboring property. External obsolescence cannot be fixed.

===The income approach===

The income capitalization Approach (often referred to simply as the &quot;income approach&quot;) is used to value commercial and investment properties. Because it is intended to directly reflect or model the expectations and behaviors of typical market participants, this approach is generally considered the most applicable valuation technique for income-producing properties, where sufficient market data exists.

In a commercial income-producing property this approach capitalizes an income stream into a value indication. This can be done using revenue multipliers or capitalization rates applied to a Net Operating Income (NOI). Usually, an NOI has been stabilized so as not to place too much weight on a very recent event. An example of this is an unleased building which, technically, has no NOI. A stabilized NOI would assume that the building is leased at a normal rate, and to usual occupancy levels. The Net Operating Income (NOI) is gross potential income (GPI), less vacancy and collection loss (= Effective Gross Income) less operating expenses (but excluding debt service, income taxes, and/or depreciation charges applied by accountants).

Alternatively, multiple years of net operating income can be valued by a discounted cash flow analysis (DCF) model. The DCF model is widely used to value larger and more expensive income-producing properties, such as large office towers or major shopping centres. This technique applies market-supported yields (or discount rates) to projected future cash flows (such as annual income figures and typically a lump reversion from the eventual sale of the property) to arrive at a present value indication. In Canada, reversion values typically range from 16x-21x the NOI of year of sale.

When homes are purchased for personal use the buyer can validate the asking price by using the income approach in the opposite direction. An expected rate of return can be estimated by comparing net expected costs to the asking price. This return can be compared to the home owner&#x27;s other investing opportunities.

===UK valuation methods===
In the United Kingdom, valuation methodology has traditionally been classified into five methods:

1. Comparative method. Used for most types of property where there is good evidence of previous sales. This is analogous to the sales comparison approach outlined above.

2. Investment method, also known as hardcore. Used for most commercial (and residential) property that is producing future cash flows through the letting of the property. This method compares the estimated rental value (ERV), or &quot;top slice&quot; to the current (&quot;passing&quot;) income, or &quot;bottom slice&quot;, to give an indication of whether the future value of the property should rise or fall based on income. If a property&#x27;s income is higher than the ERV this is sometimes known as &quot;froth&quot;, which may be confused with the US use of &quot;froth&quot; describing the period before a real estate bubble.

The cash flows can be compared to the market-determined equivalent yield, and the property value can be determined by means of a simple model. Note that this method is really a comparison method, since the main variables are determined in the market. In standard U.S. practice, however, the closely related capitalizing of NOI is confounded with the DCF method under the general classification of the income capitalization approach (see above).

3. Residual method. Used for properties ripe for development or redevelopment or for bare land only. The site or unimproved property value is based on the improved or developed value less costs of construction, professional fees, development finance costs and a developer&#x27;s profit or return on risk. 

4. Profit method. Used for trading properties where evidence of rates is slight, such as hotels, restaurants and old-age homes. A three-year average of operating income (derived from the profit and loss or income statement) is capitalized using an appropriate yield. Note that since the variables used are inherent to the property and are not market-derived, therefore unless appropriate adjustments are made, the resulting value will be value-in-use or investment value, not market value.

5. Cost method. Used for land and buildings of special character for which profit figures cannot be obtained or land and buildings for which there is no market because of their public service or heritage characteristics. Both the residual method and the cost method would be grouped in the United States under the cost approach (see above).

Under the current RICS Valuation Standards, the following bases of value are recognized:
* Market value (see PS 3.2);
* Market rent (see PS 3.3);
* Worth (investment value) (see PS 3.4); and
* Fair value (see PS 3.5)

====Practice in the UK====
The common public experience of chartered surveyors is in the process of obtaining a mortgage loan. 
A mortgage valuation will be required by any mortgage lender as a condition of obtaining a mortgage loan. The homebuyer may take the option to instruct the same surveyor to carry out a &quot;RICS HomeBuyer Report&quot; or a &quot;RICS Building Survey&quot; (sometimes called a &quot;Structural Survey&quot;), usually at additional cost. When the surveyor is instructed in this combined role, the mortgage valuation is still produced for the lender, and the HomeBuyer Report or Building Survey is additionally prepared for the borrower. This arrangement can avoid the potential conflict of interest where the surveyor has as client both the lender and the borrower in the transaction. Because of the ethics and professional liability aspect, borrowers should note that the lender&#x27;s survey is produced solely for the lender and the surveyor will not be liable for loss or omission to the borrower. Since reform of the RICS Red Book of valuation practice in recent years, the definition of a mortgage valuation has been deleted. It is now a market valuation which is the same definition given to the valuation in the RICS HomeBuyer Report.

The Council of Mortgage Lenders recommends that buyers should not rely only on the mortgage valuation, but obtain a fuller survey for their own purposes. However, a fuller survey is rarely a condition of the loan.
 The borrower may prefer to select an independent surveyor to undertake the HomeBuyer Report or Building Survey.

;Mortgage valuation report
A mortgage valuation is for the benefit of the lender. Its purpose is merely to confirm the property is worth the price paid, in order to protect the lender&#x27;s interests. Invariably there is a disclaimer on the report that confirms that the surveyor has no responsibility to the borrower. This is a legally valid exclusion.

;RICS Home Surveys
Under the reforms undertaken by RICS in the early 21st century to better regulate the provision of professional products to the general public, a sector that is usually unable to fully appreciate the consequences of inadequate specification of the required items to be surveyed and how they are reported, RICS produced a new range of consumer products with RICS branding. Three consumer products are now available - 
1. RICS Condition Report
2. RICS HomeBuyer Report
3. RICS Building Survey
These products have a consistent appearance over the range, with common typefaces and general format. The distinctions come in the detail that is subsequently provided. These are discussed below.

;RICS Condition Report
This is short report that looks briefly at the property to report on the visual condition of nine external elements of construction, nine internal elements of construction, seven services supplied to the building, and three key components of the grounds in which the property is sited. The reports rates conditions from 1 - good, 2, - needing attention in the near future, 3 - needing attention now using a traffic light system to draw attention to things that matter.

In practice this report is of little value to the buyer unless the surveyor attends at the same time as the buyer is carrying out a viewing and wants an early indication of general condition, making the most of the surveyor&#x27;s expert knowledge about how buildings can fail that are not obvious to the average buyer. Some surveyors agree to carry out these surveys as a precursor to then extending the service with a more detailed report in either of the other two types in the RICS Home Surveys suite. Usually, the fee for the first report is discounted in the fee for the detailed follow up report, since when the surveyor returns to the property, there is already an understanding of what problems are in the property.

;RICS HomeBuyer Report
This document format has been revised in 2010 to include an easy to assimilate format for the reader. The problem with the earlier format often reported to RICS by clients in receipt of the previous &#x27;Homebuyer&#x27;s Survey and Valuation&#x27; was that the structure did not easily distinguish the faults from the main description. A traffic light system was introduced and surveyors have to rate each element of the inspection according to priority. In this way, serious impediments are identified easily, and less critical defects commented upon to give the reader advice on what will need attention in the near future. It does not comment on the maintenance requirements for items found to be in satisfactory condition, only confirming that there is no cause for concern at this time. This format is suitable for a wide range of properties, but is best suited to traditionally built houses that are not subject to very serious distress or previous major alterations or extensions. This report is much longer than the condition report and looks in more detail at the property to report on the visual condition and maintenance needs of nine external elements of construction, nine internal elements of construction, seven services supplied to the building, and three key components of the grounds in which the property is sited. The reports rates conditions from 1 - good, 2 - needing attention in the near future, 3 - needing attention now using a traffic light system to draw attention to things that matter. The report also includes commentary to advise the solicitor on issues that need addressing in the conveyance, and any risks that affect the building, grounds and people of a more general nature. There is also a market valuation of the property and an assessment of rebuilding costs for insurance purposes.

Not all chartered surveyors are permitted to undertake providing the RICS HomeBuyer Report as it contains a market valuation. Under rules of the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, any surveyor undertaking these surveys must also be an RICS Registered Valuer and carry professional indemnity insurance for this task. This is an attempt by RICS to provide consumer confidence after the older valuation reports came into disrepute.

;RICS Building Survey

There are a number of variations to a residential building survey which offers the home purchaser a choice of products. The two main variants are the RICS Guidance note version stemming from the earlier RICS guidance note 2004 (more recently updated by the &quot;Surveys of residential property RICS guidance note 3rd edition&quot; which was introduced in December 2013). The primary difference between guidance note and the practice note for the consumer is the format of the reports. A bespoke style or a framework (traffic light signal) style. For surveyors guidance is &quot;best practice&quot; and practice note is &quot;mandatory&quot;.

The guidance note version can be provided in an agreed word document style format with an appendix for photographs etc. There is also a choice (at extra commissioning cost) to add a market valuation and other services such as costing for repairs and project management / further investigation services by agreement as cited at the end of this description. In effect, is a fully bespoke report.

The alternative is the practice note version (introduced to the market in November 2012). It is a similar traffic light signal format as the other RICS survey products such as the RICS condition report and the RICS homebuyer reports.

Both report formats (guidance note and practice note versions) are appropriate for virtually all properties, including but not limited to listed buildings, thatched cottages, timber frame homes and so on.

The building survey is the most detailed survey available from most firms of Chartered Surveyors. Thorough though it is, it may still lead to recommendations for further investigation from other specialists; see below. However, A competent surveyor will always try to investigate causes of damp and building defects before recommending for further investigation. The building survey report is much longer than the condition report but may not be much longer than the homebuyer report as its content depends on the condition observed in each individual case. The practice note version building survey looks in more detail at the property to report on the visual condition and maintenance needs of nine external elements of construction, with scope for sub-division into individual features, with the nine internal elements of construction and the seven services supplied to the building examined in a similar manner. Also the three key components of the grounds in which the property is sited can be subdivided as necessary.

The practice note version of the report also rates conditions from 1 - good, 2 - needing attention in the near future, 3 - needing attention now using a traffic light system to draw attention to things that matter. In this format, if there is a defect, not only will it be identified but its causes analyzed and methods of repair and elimination of the cause discussed in some detail. The report also includes commentary to advise the solicitor on issues that need addressing in the conveyance, and any risks that affect the building, grounds and people of a more general nature. There is also discussion on the means of escape in case of fire, which in older houses in particular can be compromised by poor design and alterations. There is no market valuation or an assessment of rebuilding costs for insurance purposes in the document. These can be added, along with cost estimates for the repairs by a separate agreement as discussed in the helpful RICS explanatory notes to clients.

Collectively, a key feature of RICS building surveys are that they provide an opportunity for clients and surveyors to strike up a detailed dialogue about the property they are intending to purchase. Purchasers find a building survey useful in allowing for further negotiations on price or for providing a clients briefing document for extensions or repairs. The building survey is a very interactive process.

;Energy performance certificate
Chartered surveyors can also provide an energy performance certificate.

;Limits

Chartered Surveyors are not necessarily specialists in other fields, and may recommend further investigations by an electrician, a gas engineer, a structural engineer or expert of another kind, depending on what they find during their inspection. They may also recommend work by the buyer&#x27;s solicitor to confirm matters which might affect their valuation, such as (with leasehold properties), the unexpired term of the lease, who is responsible for the boundaries, and so forth.

The Chartered Surveyor&#x27;s inspection is typically non-intrusive. They do not have the authority to lift floorboards, drill holes, or perform excavations at a property which the prospective buyer does not, at this stage, own, which means that certain defects or problems may not be apparent from their inspection.

Their fees are a component of the cost of moving house in the United Kingdom.

== Appraisers ==
Besides the mandatory educational grade, which can vary from Finance to Construction Technology, most, but not all, countries require appraisers to have the license for the practice. Usually, the real estate appraiser has the opportunity to reach 3 levels of certification: Appraisal Trainee, Licensed Appraiser and Certified Appraiser. The second and third levels of license require no less than 2000 experience hours in 12 months and 2500 experience hours in no less than 24 months respectively. Appraisers are often known as &quot;property valuers&quot; or &quot;land valuers&quot;; in British English they are &quot;valuation surveyors&quot;. If the appraiser&#x27;s opinion is based on market value, then it must also be based on the highest and best use of the real property. In the United States, mortgage valuations of improved residential properties are generally reported on a standardized form like the Uniform Residential Appraisal Report. Appraisals of more commercial properties (e.g., income-producing, raw land) are often reported in narrative format and completed by a Certified General Appraiser.

==Further considerations==

===Scope of work===
While the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP) has always required appraisers to identify the scope of work needed to produce credible results, it became clear in recent years that appraisers did not fully understand the process for developing this adequately. In formulating the scope of work for a credible appraisal, the concept of a &quot;limited&quot; versus &quot;complete&quot; appraisal and the use of the Departure Rule caused confusion to clients, appraisers, and appraisal reviewers. To deal with this, USPAP was updated in 2006 with what came to be known as the Scope of Work Project. Following this, USPAP eliminated both the Departure Rule and the concept of a limited appraisal, and a new Scope of Work rule was created. In this, appraisers were to identify six key parts of the appraisal problem at the beginning of each assignment:

*Client and other intended users
*Intended use of the appraisal and appraisal report
*Definition of value (e.g., market, foreclosure, investment)
*Any hypothetical conditions or extraordinary assumptions
*Effective date of the appraisal analysis
*Salient features of the subject property

Based on these factors, the appraiser must identify the scope of work needed, including the methodologies to be used, the extent of the investigation, and the applicable approaches to value. Currently, minimum standards for scope of work are:
*Expectations of the client and other users
*The actions of the appraiser&#x27;s peers who carry out similar assignments

The scope of work is the first step in any appraisal process. Without a strictly defined scope of work, an appraisal&#x27;s conclusions may not be viable. By defining the scope of work, an appraiser can properly develop a value for a given property for the intended user, and for the intended use of the appraisal. The whole idea of &quot;scope of work&quot; is to provide clear expectations and guidelines for all parties as to what the appraisal report does, and does not, cover; and how much work has gone into it.

===Types of ownership interest===
The type of real estate &quot;interest&quot; that is being valued, must also be known and stated in the report. Usually, for most sales, or mortgage financings, the fee simple interest is being valued. The fee simple interest is the most complete bundle of rights available. However, in many situations, and in many societies which do not follow English Common Law or the Napoleonic Code, some other interest may be more common. While there are many different possible interests in real estate, the three most common are:

*Fee simple value (known in the UK as freehold) – The most complete ownership in real estate, subject in common law countries to the powers reserved to the state (taxation, escheat, eminent domain, and police power)
*Leased fee value – This is simply the fee simple interest encumbered by a lease. If the lease is at market rent, then the leased fee value and the fee simple value are equal. However, if the tenant pays more or less than market, the residual owned by the leased fee holder, plus the market value of the tenancy, may be more or less than the fee simple value.
*Leasehold value – The interest held by a tenant. If the tenant pays market rent, then the leasehold has no market value. However, if the tenant pays less than the market, the difference between the present value of what is paid and the present value of market rents would be a positive leasehold value. For example, a major chain retailer may be able to negotiate a below-market lease to serve as the anchor tenant for a shopping center. This leasehold value may be transferable to another anchor tenant, and if so the retail tenant has a positive interest in the real estate.

Valuer and Valuation:

A &quot;valuer&quot; is an individual or professional who is trained and qualified to determine the value of assets, typically real estate or personal property, for various purposes. Valuers assess the worth or fair market value of these assets based on their knowledge, expertise, and analysis of relevant data.

&quot;Valuation&quot; refers to the process of determining the value or worth of an asset, property, business, or financial instrument. Valuation can be performed for a wide range of reasons, including businesses, assets, etc.

===Home inspection===
If a home inspection is performed prior to the appraisal and that report is provided to the appraiser, a more useful appraisal can result. This is because the appraiser, who is not an expert home inspector, will be told if there are substantial construction defects or major repairs required. This information can cause the appraiser to arrive at a different, probably lower, opinion of value. This information may be particularly helpful if one or both of the parties requesting the appraisal may end up in possession of the property. This is sometimes the case with property in a divorce settlement or a legal judgment.

==Mass appraisal and automated valuation models==
Automated valuation models (AVMs) are growing in acceptance. These rely on statistical models such as multiple regression analysis, or machine learning algorithms. While AVMs can be quite accurate, particularly when used in a very homogeneous area, there is also evidence that AVMs are not accurate in other instances such as when they are used in rural areas, or when the appraised property does not conform well to the neighborhood.

Computer-assisted mass appraisal (CAMA) is a generic term for any software package used by government agencies to help establish real estate appraisals for property tax calculations. A CAMA is a system of appraising property, usually only certain types of real property, that incorporates computer-supported statistical analyses such as multiple regression analysis and adaptive estimation procedure to assist the appraiser in estimating value.

Geographic-assisted mass appraisal (GAMA) is a generic term for any geographic information system-centric software package used by government agencies to help establish real estate appraisals for property tax calculations.

Spatial-CAMA (SCAMA) is a general term for mass appraisal where spatial data is used with spatial dependence or spatial heterogeneity models. Spatial Lag Model (SLM) and Spatial Autoregressive Moving Average (SARMA) fall under spatial dependence while Geographically Weighted Regression Models (GWR) falls under spatial heterogeneity.

==Governing authorities and professional organizations==
===International===
The various U.S. appraisal groups and international professional appraisal organizations have started collaborating in recent years towards the development of International Valuation Standards. This will facilitate global real estate appraisal standards, a much-needed adjunct to real estate investment portfolios which cross national boundaries. Some appraisal groups are already international organizations and thus, to some extent, already incorporate some level of global standards.

The International Valuation Standards Council (IVSC) is a non-governmental organization (NGO) member of the United Nations with membership that encompasses all the major national valuation standard-setters and professional associations from 150 different countries (including the Appraisal Institute, the American Society of Appraisers, the RICS, the [Practising Valuers Association of India] and the Appraisal Institute of Canada). IVSC publishes the &quot;International Valuation Standards&quot; (IVS), now in its 12th edition.

===Germany===
In Germany, real estate appraisal is known as real estate valuation (&quot;Immobilienbewertung&quot;). Real estate appraisers (&quot;Immobilienbewerter&quot; or &quot;Gutachter&quot;) can qualify to become a &quot;Öffentlich bestellter und vereidigter Sachverständiger&quot; (officially appointed and sworn expert). However, this formerly very important title has lost a lot of its importance over the past years, but still is of some value in court procedures. The title is not generally required for appraisals.

====Governing authorities====
Real estate appraisal in Germany is partly codified by law. The federal Baugesetzbuch (abbr. BauGB, &quot;German statutory code on building and construction&#x27;&quot;) contains guidelines on governing authorities, defines the term market value and refers to continuative rules (chapter 3, articles 192 ff.). Each municipality (city or administrative district) must form a &quot;Gutachterausschuss&quot; (appraisal committee), consisting of a chairman and honorary members. The committee gathers information on all real estate deals (it is mandatory to send a copy of each notarial purchase contract to the &quot;Gutachterausschuss&quot;) and includes it in the &quot;Kaufpreissammlung&quot; (purchase price database). Most committees publish an official real estate market report every two years, in which besides other information on comparables the land value is determined. The committees also perform appraisals on behalf of public authorities.

====Federal regulations====
The BauGB defines the &quot;Verkehrswert&quot; or &quot;Marktwert&quot; (market value, both terms with identical meaning) as follows: &quot;The market value is determined by the price that can be realized at the date of valuation, in an arm&#x27;s length transaction, with due regard to the legal situation and the effective characteristics, the nature and lay of the premises or any other subject of the valuation&quot; (non-official translation). The intention, as in other countries, is to include all objective influences and to exclude all influences resulting from the subjective circumstances of the involved parties.

This federal law is supported by the &quot;Wertermittlungsverordnung&quot; (abbr. WertV, &quot;regulation on the determination of value&quot;). The WertV defines the codified valuation approaches and the general valuation technique. German codified valuation approaches (other approaches such as DCF or residual approach are also permitted, but not codified) are the:

*&quot;Vergleichswertverfahren&quot; (sales comparison approach) – used where good evidence of previous sales is available and for owner-occupied assets, especially condominiums and single-family houses;
*&quot;Ertragswertverfahren&quot; (German income approach) – standard procedure for property that produces future cash flows from the letting of the property;
*&quot;Sachwertverfahren&quot; (German cost approach) – used for specialised property where none of the above approaches applies, e. g. public buildings.

WertV&#x27;s general regulations are further supported by the &quot;Wertermittlungsrichtlinie&quot; (abbr. WertR, &quot;directive on the determination of value&quot;). The WertR provides templates for calculations, tables (e.g., economic depreciation) and guidelines for the consideration of different influences. WertV and WertR are not binding for appraisals for nonofficial use, nonetheless, they should be regarded as best practice or Generally Accepted (German) Valuation Practice (GAVP).

====Comments on German GAVP====
In most regards Generally Accepted (German) Valuation Principles is consistent with international practice. The investment market weighs the income approach most heavily. However, there are some important differences:

*Land and improvements are treated separately. German GAVP assumes that the land can be used indefinitely, but the buildings have a limited lifespan; This coincides with the balancing of the assets. The value of the land is determined by the sales comparison approach in both the income and cost approaches, using the data accumulated by the &quot;Gutachterausschuss&quot; which is then added to the building value.
*In order to account for the usage of the land, the net operating income is reduced by the &quot;Liegenschaftszins&quot; (interest paid to the land-owner by the owner of the building, i.e., ground rent). The &quot;Liegenschaftszins&quot; is the product of the land value and the &quot;Liegenschaftszinssatz&quot; (interest rate for land use). The &quot;Liegenschaftszinssatz&quot; is the equivalent of the yield—with some important differences—and is also determined by the &quot;Gutachterausschuss&quot;.
*Unlike the All Risks Yield (ARY) in UK practice, the &quot;Liegenschaftszinssatz&quot; (abbr. LZ) does not include an allowance for default (not to be confused with a structural vacancy), therefore this needs to be subtracted from gross operating income. As a result, the &quot;Liegenschaftszinssatz&quot; will usually be lower than the All Risks Yield.
*Based on the assumption that the economic life of the improvements is limited, the yield and remaining economic life determine the building value from the net operating income.
*Contracts in Germany generally prescribe that the landlord bears a higher portion of maintenance and operating costs than their counterparts in the United States and the UK.

====Criticism====
Mathematically the distinction between land and improvements in the income approach will have no impact on the overall value when the remaining economic life is more than thirty years. For this reason, it has become quite common to use the &quot;Vereinfachtes Ertragswertverfahren&quot; (simplified income approach), omitting the land value and the &quot;Liegenschaftszins&quot;. However, the separate treatment of land and buildings leads to more precise results for older buildings, especially for commercial buildings, which typically have a shorter economic life than residential buildings.

An advantage of the comparatively high degree of standardization practiced by professional appraisers is the greater ability to check an appraisal for inconsistency, accuracy and transparency.

====Professional organizations====
The Federal German Organisation of Appointed and Sworn Experts (&quot;Bundesverband Deutscher Sachverständiger und Fachgutachter&quot;, abbr. BDSF) is the main professional organization encompassing the majority of licensed appraisers in Germany. In recent years, with the move towards a more global outlook in the valuation profession, the RICS has gained a foothold in Germany, somewhat at the expense of the BDSF.
Another German Organisation of Appointed and Sworn Experts is the &quot;Deutsche Sachverständigen Gesellschaft&quot;, abbr. DESAG. This organization also includes a large number of licensed appraisers in Germany.

With special focus on hypothetical value, in 1996, German banks with real estate financing activities formed the &quot;HypZert GmbH&quot;, an association for the certification of real estate valuers. A &quot;HypZert&quot; qualification is regarded as mandatory by many German banks.

===Israel===
In Israel, the real estate appraisal profession is regulated by the Council of Land Valuers, an organ of the Ministry of Justice; the largest professional organization, encompassing the majority of appraisers/land valuers is the Association of Land Valuers. Valuers must be registered with the Council, which is a statutory body set up by law, and which oversees the training and administers the national professional exams that are a prerequisite for attaining registration. In 2005 the Council set up a Valuation Standards Committee with the purpose of developing and promulgating standards that would reflect best practice; these have tended to follow a rules-based approach.

Historically, most valuations in Israel were statutory valuations (such as valuations performed for purposes of Betterment Tax, a tax administered on any gains accruing to the property by way of changes to the local planning) as well as valuations performed for purposes of bank lending. Since Israel implemented the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) in 2008, the profession has been engaged in performing valuations for purposes of financial reporting.

=== United Arab Emirates ===
In the UAE, real estate appraisal is licensed and regulated by the Dubai Real Estate Regulatory Agency. Valuations are carried out by regulated firms, AVMs such as YallaValue, or even the Dubai Land Department itself.

===United Kingdom===

In the UK, real estate appraisal is known as &quot;property valuation&quot; and a real estate appraiser is a &quot;land valuer&quot; or &quot;property valuer&quot; (usually a qualified chartered surveyor who specializes in property valuation). Property valuation in the UK is regulated by the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS), a professional body encompassing all of the building and property-related professions. The RICS professional guidelines for valuers are published in what is commonly known as the &quot;Red Book&quot;. The 2017 version was the &quot;RICS Valuation – Global Standards&quot; (1 July 2017), superseding an edition published in 2011. RICS Valuation Standards contains mandatory rules, best practice guidance and related commentary. The 2017 version adopts and applies the International Valuation Standards (IVS) published by the International Valuation Standards Council (IVSC). Changes to the standards are approved by the RICS Valuation Professional Group Board, and the &quot;Red Book&quot; is updated accordingly on a regular basis. While based in the UK, RICS is a global organization and has become very active in the United States in recent years through its affiliation with the Counselors of Real Estate, a division of the National Association of Realtors.

===United States===
Appraisal practice in the United States is regulated by state. The Appraisal Foundation (TAF) is the primary standards body; its Appraisal Standards Board (ASB) promulgates and updates best practices as codified in the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP), while its Appraisal Qualifications Board (AQB) promulgates minimum standards for appraiser certification and licensing.

The federal government regulates appraisers indirectly because if the Appraisal Subcommittee (ASC) of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) finds that a particular state&#x27;s appraiser regulation and certification program is inadequate, then under federal regulations all appraisers in that state would no longer be eligible to conduct appraisals for federally chartered banks. The ASC oversees the TAF. Banks make widespread use of mortgage loans and mortgage-backed securities, and would be unable to do so without appraisals.

The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (FIRREA) demanded all the states to develop systems for licensing and certifying real estate appraisers. To accomplish this, the Appraisal Subcommittee (ASC) was formed within the FFIEC, with representatives from the various Federal mortgage regulatory agencies. Thus, currently all the real estate appraisers must be state-licensed and certified. But prior to the 1990s, there were no commonly accepted standards either for appraisal quality or for appraiser licensure. In the 1980s, an ad-hoc committee representing various appraisal professional organizations in the United States and Canada met to codify the best practices into what became known as the USPAP. The U.S. Savings and Loan Crisis resulted in increased federal regulation via FIRREA, which required federal lending regulators to adopt appraisal standards. A nonprofit organization, The Appraisal Foundation (TAF), was formed by the same organizations that had developed USPAP, and the copyright for USPAP was signed over to TAF. Federal oversight of TAF is provided by the Appraisal Subcommittee, made up of representatives of various federal lending regulators. TAF carries out its work through two boards: the Appraisal Standards Board promulgates and updates USPAP; the Appraisal Qualifications Board (AQB) promulgates minimum recommended standards for appraiser certification and licensure. During the 1990s, all of the states adopted USPAP as the governing standards within their states and developed licensure standards which met or exceeded the recommendations of TAF. Also, the various state and federal courts have adopted USPAP for real estate litigation and all of the federally lending regulators adopt USPAP for mortgage finance appraisal.

====Professional organizations====

In addition, there are professional appraisal organizations, organized as private non-profit organizations that date to the Great Depression of the 1930s. One of the oldest in the United States is the American Society of Farm Managers and Rural Appraisers (ASFMRA), which was founded in 1929. Others were founded as needed and the opportunity arose in specialized fields, such as the Appraisal Institute (AI) and the American Society of Appraisers (ASA) founded in the 1930s, the International Right of Way Association and the National Association of Realtors which were founded after World War II. These organizations all existed to establish and enforce standards, but their influence waned with increasing government regulation. In March 2007, three of these organizations (ASFMRA, ASA, and AI) announced an agreement in principle to merge. NAIFA (National Association of Independent Fee Appraisers), a charter member of The Appraisal Foundation, helped to write Title XI, the Real Estate Appraisal Reform Amendments. It was founded in 1961.

One of the most recognized professional organizations of real estate appraisers in America is the Appraisal Institute (AI). It was formed from the merger of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers and the Society of Real Estate Appraisers. Founded along with others in the 1930s, the two organizations merged in the 1990s to form the AI. This group awards four professional designations: &quot;SRA&quot;, to residential appraisers, &quot;AI-RRS&quot;, to residential review appraisers, &quot;MAI&quot;, to commercial appraisers, and &quot;AI-GRS&quot;, to commercial review appraisers. The Institute has enacted rigorous regulations regarding the use and display of these designations. For example, contrary to popular belief, &quot;MAI&quot; does &quot;not&quot; stand for &quot;Member, Appraisal Institute&quot;. According to the institute, the letters &quot;do not represent specific words&quot;, and an MAI may not use the words &quot;Member, Appraisal Institute&quot; &quot;in lieu&quot; of the MAI mark. The primary motive for this rule is to prevent trademark dilution. These designations require attendance in appraisal technique classes, ethical training, exams, and a review of the candidate&#x27;s work by designated appraisers.

The National Association of Appraisers (NAA) was formed with a purpose of uniting those engaged in the appraisal profession for the purpose of exerting a beneficial influence upon the profession and to advocate appraiser interests. The NAA has established an advisory group consisting of leadership at the state organizations and coalitions called the Board of Governors where those states can help guide the NAA in acting in the best interest of all appraisers. The NAA also has a designated membership, MNAA (Member of the National Association of Appraisers, who is an individual who holds an appraisal license, certification or similar appraisal credential issued by a governmental agency; and who accepts the membership requirements and objectives of the National Association of Appraisers.

Other leading appraisal organizations include the National Association of Independent Fee Appraisers and the National Association of Master Appraisers, which were also founding sponsor-members of the Appraisal Foundation. The Massachusetts Board of Real Estate Appraisers (MBREA), founded in 1934, is the only state appraisal association that has been named a sponsor of the Appraisal Foundation. In recent years, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) has become highly regarded in the United States, and has formed a collaboration with the Counselors of Real Estate, a division of the National Association of Realtors. RICS, which is headquartered in London, operates on a global scale and awards the designations &quot;MRICS&quot; and &quot;FRICS&quot; to Members and Fellows of RICS. The Real Estate Counseling Group of America is a small group of top U.S. appraisers and real estate analysts who have collectively authored a disproportionately large body of appraisal methodology and, the National Association of Real Estate Appraisers (NAREA), founded in 1966, with the goal to elevate the professionalism and success of the Appraisal Industry.

The leading appraisal organization for personal property valuation is the American Society of Appraisers which is a sponsor member of the Appraisal Foundation and awards the ASA (Accredited Senior Appraiser) designation to candidates who complete five years of documented appraisal experience, pass a comprehensive exam along with required commercial and/or residential appraisal coursework, and submit two appraisal reports for review.

==== Racial bias ====
Implicit bias and racial composition of neighborhoods have long been thought to impact on home appraisal values. Recent studies from Freddie Mac and other industry leaders have confirmed that traditional modelling based on comparable sales and a variety of other factors (income, credit score, etc.) cannot explain the appraisal value gap minorities face. Some would argue that these pricing disparities are partially explained by neighborhood quality, which opponents say is a byproduct of historical redlining.

===Russia===
In Russia, on par with many other former Soviet Union economies, the profession emerged in the first half of 1990, and represented a clean break with the former practice of industry-specific pricing specialists and with activities of statutory price-setting authorities in the Soviet Union. Currently, property valuation, as it is called, is a specialism within general-purpose &quot;valuation profession&quot;, which functions in a self-regulatory mode overseen by &quot;self-regulated professional organizations&quot; of valuers (SROs), i.e. public supervisory entities established under provisions of special legislation (which very loosely can be likened to trade unions). The principal among those is Russian Society of Appraisers, established in 1993 and presently exercising oversight over about half of the valuation profession membership. Among its 6000+ members a sizeable majority are real property valuers, rubbing shoulders with business and intangible assets appraisers. The latter categories of valuers are also allowed to value property, though valuation professionals tend to specialize. In late 2016, it was mandated that valuers should pass through compulsory state-administered attestation process to verify their competence, the details of which as to breakdown in specialization or otherwise remain to be hammered out.

As of mid-2016, Valuers in Russia, including real property valuers, are deemed to be purposely-educated individuals maintaining their Valuation SRO membership and bearing unlimited property liability for the result of their services, that is their professional status is modeled on the organization of public notaries. Regardless of the fact, over 80% of valuers tend to be employed by valuation or consulting companies, and thus do not enter practice as stand-alone individual entrepreneurs. High-end appraisal services are principally represented by valuation arms of the International &quot;Big-four&quot; consultancies in the country, but there also exist reputable national corporate valuation brands.

The majority of property valuations in the country are typically conducted to meet legal requirements outlined in the Federal Valuation Law, with the most recent amendment taking place in 2016. Additionally, other related laws, such as the Joint Stock Companies Law, outline over 20 instances where valuations are mandated. These mandatory cases include valuations for purposes such as privatization, securing loans, handling bankruptcy and liquidation proceedings, among others.

Before the year 2000, valuations for corporate financial reporting held greater significance. However, this changed when the national accounting regulator discontinued its promotion of the accounting fair value option. Currently, the government is in the process of outsourcing the mass appraisal of properties for taxation purposes to professional valuation institutions.

Adjudication of valuer-certified estimates of value in case of the onset of disputes is conducted through the Experts Councils of valuers&#x27; SROs. Official courts tend to concur with the resolutions of such Councils. In some rare instances the imprimatur of SRO&#x27;s Experts Councils is also required for a valuation done by a particular valuer to enter into effect.

The technical details of practice of real estate valuers in Russia are aligned with the international pattern. Members of the Russian Society of Appraisers formerly were bound by the observance of the International Valuation Standards. There also exists a set of 14 general-purpose government-developed &quot;Federal Valuation Standards&quot; (FSOs 1,2,3 --are the general valuation standards first adopted in 2007 (and revised 2015) and covering Terms of engagement and Valuation report content requirements, FSOs 7–11 are asset-specific standards adopted in 2015, while FSO 9 is currently the only purpose-specific standard in the set dealing with valuations of property for loan security purposes; the last two FSO standards adopted in 2016 cover determination of investment and liquidation values, however, they do not touch on the methodology for determining these values, only scraping the reporting requirements). In view of the international conformity drive in the latest round of FSO standards setting, general requirements in the new FSO standards are close to those in the International Valuation standards set, however they can be more specific on occasion and mandate compulsory disclosure of uncertainty in valuation reports using the interval/range format.

With effect from 1 August 2017, new amendments to the Federal Valuation Law came to impose the compulsory certification of valuers by a state-affiliated testing centre. Consequently, this two-hour written exam certification measure, aimed to counter a perception of wide-spread malpractice among the members of the national valuation profession, provides for three valuer-specializations: real estate valuers, plant and machinery valuers, and business and intangible asset valuers, with the exam content requirements varying substantially for each specialization. Valuers would lose a right to practice, unless they comply with the requirement to take this compulsory certification exam at or before 31 March 2018. A general assessment of this measure is that the numbers of certified valuers in Russia are set to dwindle down to some 2000–3000 valuers nationwide (across all the specialisms mentioned), i.e. decimating some 80% of the current Valuer SRO&#x27;s membership, due to the complexity of the certification exams.

===Hong Kong===
The Hong Kong Institute of Surveyors (HKIS) regulates property surveyors in Hong Kong. Established in 1984, Institute is the only professional organisation representing the surveying profession in Hong Kong. The HKIS was statutorily incorporated by virtue of the Hong Kong Institute of Surveyors Ordinance in January 1990 (Cap. 1148). In July 1991, the Surveyors Registration Ordinance (Cap. 417) was passed to set up a Registration Board to administer the registration of surveyors. In May 2006, the number of members had reached 6,723.
A general practice surveyor advises on the best use of the land, assesses the feasibility and viability of the proposed development project as well as the valuation, marketing, sale, leasing and management of completed developments. It also has a website to provide real-time properties&#x27; value estimate across whole Hong Kong.

===Australia===
The Australian Property Institute (API) was formed in 1926 as the Commonwealth Institute of Valuers. The Institute has undergone several name changes over the last century as the array of services offered by its members expanded. It serves to regulate the profession of property valuers throughout Australia.

Today the API represents the interests of more than 8,600 property professionals throughout Australia. API members include residential, commercial and plant and machinery valuers, property advisers, property analysts, property fund and asset managers, property facility managers, property lawyers and property researchers and academics. The Institute&#x27;s primary role is to set and maintain the highest standards of professional practice, education, ethics and professional conduct for its members and the broader property profession.

===New Zealand===
Real estate valuation in New Zealand is regulated by the New Zealand Institute of Valuers (&#x27;NZIV&#x27;) and the Valuers Registration Board of New Zealand (&#x27;VRB&#x27;), both of which are statutory bodies established under the Valuers Act 1948 (NZ). The NZIV remains the statutory professional body for valuers in New Zealand, with perpetual succession under the Act. The NZIV can make Rules as lower level legislation and has a Code of Ethics (reviewed in 2023). The NZIV Rules were last changed in 2012 and remain current. The VRB has jurisdiction in relation to serious matters affecting the registration of a valuer including discipline where a valuer has acted in such a way as to meet the threshold. The Valuers Act 1948 sets the threshold under s31 as matters where a valuer could be struck off the register of valuers. The NZIV has power for discipline for relatively more minor matters. The NZIV governs NZIV members and has power to discipline members and fine them up to $500, admonish members or terminate their membership. The designations &quot;Registered Valuer&quot; and &quot;Public Valuer&quot; are legally protected under the legislation, being reserved for Valuers Registered under the Act. The NZIV, under the Act, can admit non-valuer members (such as non-valuer land economists).

There are also voluntary professional bodies for real estate valuation such as the Royal Institute of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) and the Property Institute of New Zealand (PINZ). Both of these bodies have a wider membership, beyond real estate valuers. PINZ has around 1,700 members in New Zealand and overseas (such as ex-pats in the UK, Asia and Australia). PINZ has a service level agreement with the NZIV, whereby PINZ contracts to perform tasks for the statutory professional body, NZIV. PINZ was formed in 2000 to act as the voice of the property professions. There have been &#x27;political divisions&#x27; within the valuation profession in New Zealand, expressed at AGMs and through &#x27;proxy wars&#x27; over the last 20 years or so. Many valuers are supportive of amalgamation of the NZIV functions under the multi-disciplinary voluntary body PINZ, whilst many others wish to retain a separate statutory professional body for valuers (the NZIV). There are various reasons in the debate and the governing legislation is under review and amendments or repeal is being considered. At present, the Act remains in force and the NZIV is legally a distinct body with statutory functions, powers and duties.

PINZ incorporated much of the membership of the NZIV, the Institute of Plant &amp; Machinery Valuers (IPMV) and the Property &amp; Land Economy Institute of New Zealand (PLEINZ). PINZ now represents the interests of valuers, property and facilities managers, property advisors and plant and machinery valuers. PINZ has developed into one of the largest professional bodies for standards, qualifications and ethics across all facets of the property profession within New Zealand. It works with government, industry and other professional associations, education stakeholders and the media to promote its standards and views.

In New Zealand, the terms &quot;valuation&quot; and &quot;valuer&quot; usually relates to one who undertakes that professional role in terms of the Valuer Act 1948 requirements or the unregulated or voluntarily self-regulated (if members of PINZ) plant and machinery, marine or art valuers. Whereas, the term &quot;appraisal&quot; is usually related to an estimate by a real estate sales person or licensed agent under the Real Estate Agents Act 2008. The Real Estate Institute of New Zealand includes many valuer members, but the governing legislation for sales and agency (disposal of interests of land on behalf of others) does not extend to include provision for that role by valuers regardless of membership of NZIV, RICS or PINZ.

There exists a significant difference in the responsibilities of a real estate agent and a valuer. While a real estate agent is allowed to represent the interests of their client, a valuer is required to offer an unbiased and independent assessment of value. The legal framework governing these roles is distinct as well. Lawyers, Conveyancers, and Real Estate Agents operate under legislation separate from that which regulates valuers. Specifically, the legal provision outlining the responsibilities of Lawyers and Conveyancers is the Lawyers and Conveyancers Act of 2006..

The number of Registered Valuers in New Zealand has generally between 1,000 - 1,300. This is an ageing &#x27;top heavy&#x27; professional with difficulty retaining new and young members due to pay, work stress and the recent advent of &#x27;clearing houses&#x27; for banks to order valuations for mortgage purposes. The clearing houses have largely ended the long-standing local practice of members of the public seeking advice directly from a valuer. The use of electronic estimates based on Rating Values (Local Government mass appraisal for levies) is also leading to a reduction in standard valuation work and is significantly affecting the viability of small valuation businesses. The profession is in the process of a wider corporate re-structuring of the valuation market due to these factors with various perceptions within profession as to the merits of the events of the last five years.

==See also==

* American Measurement Standard
* Auditing Standards Board
* Building inspection
* Climate appraisal
* Conveyancing
* German income approach
* Home inspection
* Housing affordability index
* International Property Measurement Standards
* Investment rating for real estate
* Kriging
* Land value tax
* List of real estate topics
* Peak land value intersection
* Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors
* Verification and validation
* Real estate
* Real estate business
* Real estate bubble
==References==
==Further reading==
*Barris, J. (2008) &quot;An expert system for appraisal by the method of comparison&quot;. PhD Thesis, UPC, Barcelona
*Barris, J., &amp; Garcia-Almirall, P. (2011) &quot;A density Function of the Appraisal Value&quot;. European Real Estate Society 2011 – Eindhoven, The Netherlands, Best Paper on Real Estate Valuation
*Baum, A., Nunnigton, N., &amp; Mackmin, D. (2011) &quot;The Income Approach to Property Valuation&quot; (6th Edition). Estates Gazette, London
*Brown, G., &amp; Matysiak, G. (1999) &quot;Real Estate Investment: A Capital Market Approach&quot;. Financial Times, London
*Isaac, D., &amp; O&#x27;Leary, J. (2012) &quot;Property Valuation Principles&quot; (2nd Edition), Palgrave MacMillan, London
*Kane, S., Linne, M. and Johnson, J. (2004) &quot;Practical Applications in Appraisal Valuation Modeling&quot;. Appraisal Institute, Chicago
*Hayward, R. (ed.) (2008) &quot;Valuation: Principles into Practice&quot; (6th edition). Estates Gazette, London
*
*Simons, Robert (2007) &quot;When Bad Things Happen to Good Property&quot; Environmental Law Institute, Washington, DC
*Tachovsky, Michael, &quot;Environmental Dead Zones: The Evaluation of Contaminated Properties&quot; The Appraisal Journal (2021)
*The Appraisal Foundation, &quot;Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice&quot;. Updated and published annually through the 2006 edition; henceforth, updated editions are to appear biannually.
*The Appraisal Institute, &quot;The Appraisal of Real Estate&quot; (15th Edition). 
*The Appraisal Services in Middle East and North Africa, &quot;www.landsterling.com&quot;. RICS certified Valuation services.
*Italian Property Valuation Standard – Codice delle Valutazioni Immobiliari, Third edition – English version (2006)
*Duca, John V., John Muellbauer, and Anthony Murphy. 2021. &quot;What Drives House Price Cycles? International Experience and Policy Issues.&quot; Journal of Economic Literature, 59 (3): 773-864.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512599" start="0" end="21" title="Real estate appraisal" label="Real estate appraisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q512599" start="23" end="41" title="Real estate appraisal" label="property valuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q512599" start="45" end="59" title="Real estate appraisal" label="land valuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="101" end="114" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="124" end="136" title="market value" label="market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200129" start="216" end="222" title="Product differentiation" label="unique"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292478" start="351" end="358" title="Estate (land)" label="estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="609" end="621" title="Market value" label="Market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423059" start="681" end="698" title="Walrasian auction" label="Walrasian auction"/>
<link wikidata="Q600549" start="810" end="843" title="International Valuation Standards Committee" label="International Valuation Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509608" start="1172" end="1184" title="Value-in-use" label="Value-in-use"/>
<link wikidata="Q192472" start="1205" end="1222" title="net present value" label="net present value"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060896" start="1420" end="1436" title="Investment value" label="Investment value"/>
<link wikidata="Q600549" start="1694" end="1727" title="International Valuation Standards Committee" label="International Valuation Standards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2136" end="2151" title="Insurable value" label="Insurable value"/>
<link wikidata="Q977871" start="2195" end="2211" title="insurance policy" label="insurance policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557499" start="2261" end="2278" title="Liquidation value" label="Liquidation value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="2626" end="2638" title="market value" label="market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q160151" start="2668" end="2673" title="price" label="price"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060896" start="3463" end="3479" title="investment value" label="investment value"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205131" start="3716" end="3724" title="plottage" label="plottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134763" start="3772" end="3789" title="corporate finance" label="corporate finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="3989" end="4013" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="5189" end="5201" title="market value" label="market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885083" start="5209" end="5261" title="Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice" label="Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5981" end="5991" title="Tree measurement#Tree value approximation (USA)" label="tree value"/>
<link wikidata="Q352204" start="6269" end="6294" title="sales comparison approach" label="sales comparison approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174759" start="6431" end="6444" title="cost approach" label="cost approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050450" start="6538" end="6553" title="income approach" label="income approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="8036" end="8047" title="skyscrapers" label="skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901028" start="8255" end="8270" title="market analysis" label="market analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744407" start="9806" end="9813" title="American Measurement Standard" label="measure"/>
<link wikidata="Q114403" start="12244" end="12255" title="depreciated" label="depreciated"/>
<link wikidata="Q466707" start="12580" end="12587" title="utility" label="utility"/>
<link wikidata="Q721207" start="13726" end="13732" title="marina" label="marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q863946" start="15178" end="15191" title="Diminishing_returns" label="less and less"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035804" start="16138" end="16157" title="capitalization rate" label="capitalization rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q455422" start="16795" end="16815" title="discounted cash flow" label="discounted cash flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313531" start="18123" end="18145" title="Fair market rent" label="estimated rental value"/>
<link wikidata="Q186582" start="18542" end="18560" title="real estate bubble" label="real estate bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="19522" end="19538" title="income statement" label="income statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901350" start="19792" end="19804" title="market value" label="market value"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174759" start="20121" end="20134" title="cost approach" label="cost approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="20479" end="20492" title="mortgage loan" label="mortgage loan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21416" end="21429" title="RICS Red Book" label="RICS Red Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q471719" start="21538" end="21554" title="market valuation" label="market valuation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176462" start="21642" end="21669" title="Council of Mortgage Lenders" label="Council of Mortgage Lenders"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="27967" end="27982" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="27985" end="28001" title="thatched cottage" label="thatched cottage"/>
<link wikidata="Q165029" start="30689" end="30700" title="electrician" label="electrician"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30704" end="30716" title="gas engineer" label="gas engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305987" start="30720" end="30739" title="structural engineer" label="structural engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14284" start="30869" end="30878" title="solicitor" label="solicitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630687" start="30948" end="30957" title="leasehold" label="leasehold"/>
<link wikidata="Q716894" start="30997" end="31002" title="lease" label="lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4689027" start="31410" end="31452" title="cost of moving house in the United Kingdom" label="cost of moving house in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979" start="32061" end="32076" title="British English" label="British English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1985742" start="32211" end="32231" title="highest and best use" label="highest and best use"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885074" start="32386" end="32422" title="Uniform Residential Appraisal Report" label="Uniform Residential Appraisal Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885083" start="32646" end="32698" title="Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice" label="Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q843280" start="34882" end="34892" title="fee simple" label="fee simple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="35063" end="35081" title="English Common Law" label="English Common Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q151060" start="35089" end="35104" title="Napoleonic Code" label="Napoleonic Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912198" start="36987" end="37002" title="home inspection" label="home inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826487" start="37655" end="37681" title="Automated_valuation_model" label="Automated valuation models"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="37766" end="37785" title="regression analysis" label="regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10494269" start="38347" end="38360" title="real property" label="real property"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="38428" end="38456" title="multiple regression analysis" label="multiple regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="38605" end="38634" title="geographic information system" label="geographic information system"/>
<link wikidata="Q600549" start="39333" end="39366" title="International Valuation Standards" label="International Valuation Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q600549" start="39666" end="39707" title="International Valuation Standards Council" label="International Valuation Standards Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="39720" end="39749" title="NGO" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781683" start="39942" end="39961" title="Appraisal Institute" label="Appraisal Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745048" start="39967" end="39997" title="American Society of Appraisers" label="American Society of Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q743381" start="40003" end="40007" title="RICS" label="RICS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40063" end="40092" title="Appraisal Institute of Canada" label="Appraisal Institute of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q600549" start="40120" end="40153" title="International Valuation Standards" label="International Valuation Standards"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40824" end="40837" title="Baugesetzbuch" label="Baugesetzbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362513" start="42938" end="42958" title="German income approach" label="Ertragswertverfahren"/>
<link wikidata="Q830382" start="43667" end="43680" title="best practice" label="best practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q720862" start="44459" end="44479" title="net operating income" label="net operating income"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45145" end="45167" title="gross operating income" label="gross operating income"/>
<link wikidata="Q743381" start="46806" end="46810" title="RICS" label="RICS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4898586" start="48185" end="48195" title="Betterment" label="Betterment"/>
<link wikidata="Q176831" start="48390" end="48433" title="International Financial Reporting Standards" label="International Financial Reporting Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4047841" start="48641" end="48676" title="Dubai Real Estate Regulatory Agency" label="Dubai Real Estate Regulatory Agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="48738" end="48748" title="YallaValue" label="YallaValue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086869" start="49000" end="49018" title="Chartered surveyors in the United Kingdom" label="chartered surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q743381" start="49108" end="49148" title="Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors" label="Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970742" start="50084" end="50116" title="National Association of Realtors" label="National Association of Realtors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714037" start="50202" end="50226" title="The Appraisal Foundation" label="The Appraisal Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885083" start="50358" end="50410" title="Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice" label="Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3740862" start="50647" end="50697" title="Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council" label="Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210094" start="51001" end="51014" title="mortgage loan" label="mortgage loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q545906" start="51020" end="51046" title="mortgage-backed security" label="mortgage-backed securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449605" start="51102" end="51170" title="Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989" label="Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="51840" end="51868" title="Savings and Loan Crisis" label="U.S. Savings and Loan Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="53052" end="53068" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781683" start="53312" end="53331" title="Appraisal Institute" label="Appraisal Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745048" start="53345" end="53375" title="American Society of Appraisers" label="American Society of Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6052772" start="53408" end="53446" title="International Right of Way Association" label="International Right of Way Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970742" start="53455" end="53487" title="National Association of Realtors" label="National Association of Realtors"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="53513" end="53525" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060823" start="55040" end="55058" title="trademark dilution" label="trademark dilution"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56070" end="56120" title="National Association of Independent Fee Appraisers" label="National Association of Independent Fee Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56129" end="56170" title="National Association of Master Appraisers" label="National Association of Master Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56246" end="56291" title="Massachusetts Board of Real Estate Appraisers" label="Massachusetts Board of Real Estate Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q743381" start="56438" end="56478" title="RICS Americas" label="Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970742" start="56620" end="56652" title="National Association of Realtors" label="National Association of Realtors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300905" start="56825" end="56864" title="Real Estate Counseling Group of America" label="Real Estate Counseling Group of America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57027" end="57073" title="National Association of Real Estate Appraisers" label="National Association of Real Estate Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745048" start="57259" end="57289" title="American Society of Appraisers" label="American Society of Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6007314" start="57645" end="57658" title="Implicit bias" label="Implicit bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q935969" start="57778" end="57789" title="Freddie Mac" label="Freddie Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453838" start="58147" end="58156" title="redlining" label="redlining"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382133" start="58878" end="58907" title="Russian Society of Appraisers" label="Russian Society of Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824582" start="64656" end="64685" title="Australian Property Institute" label="Australian Property Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744407" start="70899" end="70928" title="American Measurement Standard" label="American Measurement Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819960" start="70931" end="70955" title="Auditing Standards Board" label="Auditing Standards Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070898" start="70958" end="70977" title="Building inspection" label="Building inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133397" start="70980" end="70997" title="Climate appraisal" label="Climate appraisal"/>
<link wikidata="Q759815" start="71000" end="71012" title="Conveyancing" label="Conveyancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362513" start="71015" end="71037" title="German income approach" label="German income approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912198" start="71040" end="71055" title="Home inspection" label="Home inspection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916099" start="71058" end="71085" title="Housing affordability index" label="Housing affordability index"/>
<link wikidata="Q17138035" start="71088" end="71132" title="International Property Measurement Standards" label="International Property Measurement Standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060885" start="71135" end="71168" title="Investment rating for real estate" label="Investment rating for real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q225926" start="71171" end="71178" title="Kriging" label="Kriging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057250" start="71181" end="71195" title="Land value tax" label="Land value tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6019043" start="71198" end="71224" title="List of real estate topics" label="List of real estate topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119685" start="71227" end="71255" title="Peak land value intersection" label="Peak land value intersection"/>
<link wikidata="Q743381" start="71258" end="71298" title="Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors" label="Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919644" start="71301" end="71328" title="Verification and validation" label="Verification and validation"/>
<link wikidata="Q684740" start="71331" end="71342" title="Real estate" label="Real estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q97359520" start="71345" end="71365" title="Real estate business" label="Real estate business"/>
<link wikidata="Q186582" start="71368" end="71386" title="Real estate bubble" label="Real estate bubble"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871337" wikidata="Q380373" url="?curid=871337" title="Mikhail of Tver">
<text>Mikhail Yaroslavich (; 1271 – 22 November 1318) was Prince of Tver from 1285 and Grand Prince of Vladimir from 1304 to 1314 and again from 1315 until his death in 1318. He was canonized and counted among the saints of the Russian Orthodox Church.

Mikhail Yaroslavich was the second son of Yaroslav III Yaroslavich of Tver, the younger brother of Aleksandr Nevsky; he succeeded his elder brother Yaroslav as the prince of Tver in 1285. His mother Xenia was the second spouse to Yaroslav III and is known as the saint Xenia of Tarusa. Upon the death of Andrei Aleksandrovich, Aleksandr Nevsky&#x27;s son and Yaroslav&#x27;s nephew, Mikhail became the grand prince of Vladimir in 1304, as was consistent with traditional succession practices. He was confirmed in office by Tokhta, the khan of the Golden Horde.

==Reign==
===Troubles as grand prince and rivalry with Moscow===

While he seemed secure in the throne, being the legitimate heir and having been confirmed by the khan in Sarai, Grand Prince Mikhail suffered a series of setbacks as grand prince which led to him losing the grand princely office for both himself and, in some ways, ultimately for his descendants. He was, like most Grand Princes of Vladimir, accepted as Prince of Novgorod the Great in 1309, but fought with Novgorod, going so far as to withdraw his lieutenants (namestniki) and cut off grain shipments into the city in 1312. 
While he was on decent terms with Tokhta Khan, and initially with his successor, Uzbeg Khan (Mikhail paid homage on Uzbeg&#x27;s accession to the throne in 1313 and remained in Sarai until 1315), he eventually lost influence to Yury of Moscow, who gained influence in Novgorod while the grand prince was away in Sarai. Mikhail did manage to finally take control of the city in 1316 with Mongol aid, but the following year Uzbeg Khan gave the &quot;yarlik&quot; or patent of office of the Grand Prince of Vladimir to Yury, who also married Uzbeg&#x27;s sister.

After granting Yury the iarlyk or patent of office, the Khan sent his army under the Mongol general Kavgadii to help Yuri in his struggle with Mikhail Yaroslavich. On 22 December 1317 Mikhail defeated Yuri at a village called Bortenevo (40 km from Tver). Mikhail captured Yuri&#x27;s wife, who was the Khan&#x27;s sister. When she died in Mikhail&#x27;s custody, he was blamed for her death, although it seems unlikely that he would have killed her knowing how much it would hurt him politically for such little gain. He released Kavgadii, who returned to Sarai and accused Mikhail of murdering the Khan&#x27;s sister, withholding tribute, and warring against his Mongol overlord. As a result, Mikhail was summoned to the Horde by the Khan and executed on 22 November 1318.

===Relations with the Church===
Mikhail also alienated the Church, particularly Metropolitan Petr (ruled 1308–1326). When Metropolitan Maksim died in 1305, Mikhail nominated another candidate, but Petr was consecrated by the Patriarch of Constantinople. Petr sided with Moscow and opposed Mikhail on several occasions. In 1309, he appointed David as Archbishop of Novgorod and David was instrumental in the argument that led Mikhail to withdraw his lieutenants and cut the grain supplies to the city. In 1314, Novgorod called on Yury to be named grand prince and for Mikhail to be deposed. Thus the support of the Church aided Yury to Mikhail&#x27;s detriment. Despite his having been unfavored by the Russian Orthodox Church during his lifetime, the Church later declared Mikhail a saint because of his piousness during his summons by the Khan which he knew was to certain death and because his relics, when transported to his hometown, were discovered to be incorrupt.

==Family and children==
In 1294 Mikhail married Princess Anna of Rostov, daughter of Dimitry of Rostov. They had five children:
# Prince Dmitry of Tver (1299–1326)
# Prince Alexander of Tver (1301–1339)
# Prince Konstantin of Tver (1306–1346)
# Prince Vasily of Kashin (d. after 1368)
# Feodora of Tver

Mikhail&#x27;s sons and successors Dmitry the Terrible Eyes and Alexander were both also loved in the Horde, as was Alexander&#x27;s elder son, Mikhail. Both Aleksandr Mikhailovich, and Mikhail Aleksandrovich briefly held the Grand Princely office (in 1326-1327 and 1371-1372 respectively) but Mikhail&#x27;s failure to defeat Yury of Moscow, followed by Aleksandr&#x27;s role (real or perceived) in the Tver Uprising of 1327, led the Tver branch to lose the favor of the Khans, and the Danilovich - the Muscovite princes, held the title for all but two years after 1317.

Mikhail&#x27;s wife took the veil in Kashin&#x27;s nunnery and died there on 2 October 1368. She is commemorated as Anna of Kashin by the Russian Orthodox Church and was canonized in 1677.
==Ancestry==

==See also==
*Family tree of Russian monarchs

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Biography
* Canonical biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q380373" start="0" end="19" title="Mikhail of Tver" label="Mikhail Yaroslavich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3254684" start="52" end="66" title="Prince of Tver" label="Prince of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434316" start="81" end="105" title="Grand Prince of Vladimir" label="Grand Prince of Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="176" end="185" title="Russian Orthodox Church#Canonization" label="canonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155588" start="208" end="214" title="List of Russian saints (until 15th century)" label="saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="222" end="245" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q547839" start="290" end="322" title="Yaroslav III" label="Yaroslav III Yaroslavich of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q174044" start="347" end="363" title="Aleksandr Nevsky" label="Aleksandr Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140983" start="517" end="532" title="Xenia of Tarusa" label="Xenia of Tarusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296177" start="552" end="573" title="Andrey of Gorodets" label="Andrei Aleksandrovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q470312" start="771" end="777" title="Toqta" label="Tokhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="795" end="807" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q477152" start="981" end="986" title="Sarai (city)" label="Sarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425394" start="1230" end="1248" title="Prince of Novgorod" label="Prince of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q470312" start="1437" end="1443" title="Tokhta" label="Tokhta"/>
<link wikidata="Q335097" start="1484" end="1494" title="Uzbeg Khan" label="Uzbeg Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q477152" start="1580" end="1585" title="Sarai (city)" label="Sarai"/>
<link wikidata="Q297295" start="1631" end="1645" title="Yury of Moscow" label="Yury of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q181888" start="2699" end="2703" title="Khan (title)" label="Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652445" start="2819" end="2836" title="Peter of Moscow" label="Metropolitan Petr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652434" start="2861" end="2880" title="Maximus, Metropolitan of all Rus" label="Metropolitan Maksim"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="2964" end="2991" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q954858" start="3089" end="3111" title="Archbishop of Novgorod" label="Archbishop of Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="3441" end="3464" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q752380" start="3699" end="3708" title="Incorruptibility" label="incorrupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141121" start="3768" end="3772" title="Anna of Kashin" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q193342" start="3776" end="3782" title="Rostov, Yaroslavl Oblast" label="Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162885" start="3796" end="3813" title="Prince Dmitry Borisovich" label="Dimitry of Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q982255" start="3841" end="3862" title="Dmitry of Tver" label="Prince Dmitry of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q679083" start="3877" end="3901" title="Alexander of Tver" label="Prince Alexander of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231318" start="3916" end="3941" title="Konstantin of Tver" label="Prince Konstantin of Tver"/>
<link wikidata="Q4104445" start="3956" end="3979" title="Vasily of Kashin" label="Prince Vasily of Kashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q145621" start="4625" end="4631" title="Kashin (town)" label="Kashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141121" start="4704" end="4718" title="Anna of Kashin" label="Anna of Kashin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60995" start="4726" end="4749" title="Russian Orthodox Church" label="Russian Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379009" start="4805" end="4836" title="Family tree of Russian monarchs" label="Family tree of Russian monarchs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871341" wikidata="Q2181577" url="?curid=871341" title="Cephalotus">
<text>Cephalotus ( or ; Greek: &quot;κεφαλή&quot; &quot;head&quot;, and &quot;οὔς&quot;/&quot;ὠτός&quot; &quot;ear&quot;, to describe the head of the anthers) is a genus which contains one species, Cephalotus follicularis the Albany pitcher plant, a small carnivorous pitcher plant. The pit-fall traps of the modified leaves have inspired the common names for this plant, which also include Western Australian pitcher plant, Australian pitcher plant, or fly-catcher plant. It is an evergreen herb that is endemic to peaty swamps in the southwestern corner of Western Australia. As with the unrelated &quot;Nepenthes&quot;, it catches its victims with pitfall traps.

== Description ==
&quot;Cephalotus follicularis&quot; is a small, low growing, herbaceous species. Evergreen leaves appear from underground rhizomes, are simple with an entire leaf blade, and lie close to the ground. The insectivorous leaves are small and have the appearance of moccasins, forming the &#x27;pitcher&#x27; of the common name. The pitchers develop a dark red colour in high light levels but stay green in shadier conditions. The foliage is a basal arrangement that is closely arranged with outward facing adapted leaf blades. These leaves give the main form of the species a height around 20 cm.

The &#x27;pitcher&#x27; trap of the species is similar to other pitcher plants. The peristome at the entrance of the trap has a spiked arrangement that allows the prey to enter, but hinders its escape. The lid over the entrance, the operculum, prevents rainwater entering the pitcher and thus diluting the digestive enzymes inside. Insects trapped in this digestive fluid are consumed by the plant. The operculum has translucent cells which confuse its insect prey as they appear to be patches of sky.

The inflorescence is groupings of small, hermaphroditic, six-parted, regular flowers, which are creamy, or whitish.

In the cooler months of winter (down to about 5 degrees Celsius), they have a natural dormancy period of about 3–4 months, triggered by the temperature drop and reduced light levels.

=== Habitus ===
The Australian pitcher plant is a wintergreen, long lasting, herbaceous plant, which grows autochthonous rosettes and grows up to a height of 10 centimetres.

The rhizome is bulky, nodose with numerous scaly leaves and many offshoots. New rosettes grow at its stolon so that it forms large tussocks with increasing age. The rhizome grows numerous fibrous roots. Younger plants also have a taproot, which dies when they grow older.
=== Leaves ===
The Australian pitcher plant grows two kinds of leaves with the change of seasons: simple flat leaves as well as strongly modified trap leaves. Occasionally, there are intermediate forms of leaves with only partially developed traps, lacking the front part. All leaves grow alternating, they are petiolate, with single-celled fine hairs and beset with numerous sessile nectaries.

The form of the flat leaves range from spatulate to reverse ovoid. Additionally, they are pointed and up to 15 centimetres long. Approximately, half of the length of the leaves is allotted to the petiole. They are thick and coriaceaous, the edges are fringed while the leaf surface is smooth and glossy.

==== Trap leaves ====
The trap leaves are up to 5 centimeters long, egg-shaped and liquid-filled pitfall traps that are open at the top. They lie on the substrate at an angle of 45° or they are sunk into it in the case of mossy substrates. The petiole is cylindrical and fused to the back of the upper edge of the trap.

Four very hairy ridges on the outside of the traps make it easier for crawling animals to reach the trap opening. The outer skin is completely covered with glands that secrete a liquid, presumably nectar.

A lid over the opening, an outgrowth of the petiole, spans the interior and protects it from rain, which could cause the pitcher fluid to overflow and wash out dead prey. It is curved, notched and ciliated at the edge, lacking a midrib. The inside is covered with short, downward-pointing hairs. The lid is alternately divided into white-translucent and dark red sections without chlorophyll. The translucent sections appear window-like, through which trapped flying insects try to escape, only to fall back into the pitchers afterwards.

The inwardly overhanging, thickened edge of the trap is surrounded by large, inward-pointing, claw-like teeth in between nectar glands. Immediately adjacent to this is an area of short, downward-facing papillae that make it difficult to climb back up. The rest of the inner wall of the cauldron is smooth, so that the prey slips into the trap and cannot climb out of it.
The upper third, or the upper half of the trap leaf, is finely beset with glands. In the lower part of the trap there are two kidney-shaped, red-coloured spots that are densely covered with larger glands. These glands most likely produce the liquid in the can, as well as the digestive enzymes and also absorb the nutrients from the prey.

=== Blossoms, fruit and seeds ===
Stipules are missing. The single flower stalk appears at the beginning of the Australian summer (flowering time: January–February) and is up to 60 centimetres long, with a panicle at its end. Each of the secondary axes bears up to four or five white, upright, six-cornered flowers, which are up to 7 millimeters in diameter. There are missing petals and the six carpels are not fused. Flowers sag when they are fertilized. The spadiciform leathery, hairy follicle fruits and contain one or two brown, ovoid seeds with a membranous testa and rich, granular endosperm. The seeds are 0.8 millimetres long and 0.4 millimetres wide. The germination only occurs if the seed remains in the fruit.

=== Cytology and constituents ===
The chromosome number is 2n = 20. Tannin cells are present as well as myricetin, quercetin, ellagic acid, gallic acid. However, iridoids are absent.

== Taxonomy ==
The genus as well as the family Cephalotaceae include only this one species, which means they are monotypic. The Cunoniaceae are their nearest relations. &quot;Brocchinia reducta&quot; and the Australian pitcher plant are the only carnivorous plants that are not part of the orders of Lamiales, Caryophyllales or Ericales and therefore not even indirectly related to other carnivorous plants.

=== Taxonomic history ===
Botanical specimens were first collected during the visit of to King George Sound in December 1801 and January 1802. On 2 January 1802 the expedition&#x27;s botanist, Robert Brown, wrote in his diary:

This represents the earliest documentary reference to this species; and although not entirely unambiguous as to the first collection, it is usually taken as evidence that the plant was discovered by Ferdinand Bauer and William Westall on 1 January 1802. Whether or not there was an earlier collection is largely immaterial, however, as all collections were incorporated into Brown&#x27;s collection without attribution, so Brown is treated as the collector in botanical contexts.

Brown initially gave this species the manuscript name &quot;&#x27;Cantharifera paludosa&#x27; KG III Sound&quot;, but this name was not published, and it would not be Brown who published the first description.

The following year, further specimens were collected by Jean Baptiste Leschenault de la Tour, botanist to Nicolas Baudin&#x27;s expedition. In 1806, Jacques Labillardière used these specimens as the basis of his publication of the species in &quot;Novae Hollandiae plantarum specimen&quot;. Labillardière did not attribute Leschenault as the collector, and it was long thought that Labillardière had collected the plant himself during his visit to the area in the 1790s; in particular, Brown wrongly acknowledged Labillardière as the discoverer of this plant.

Leschenault&#x27;s specimen was a fruiting plant, but the fruit was in poor condition, and as a result Labillardière erroneously placed it in the family Rosaceae. This error was not corrected until better fruiting specimens were collected by William Baxter in the 1820s. These were examined by Brown, who concluded that the plant merited its own family, and accordingly erected Cephalotaceae. It has remained in this monogeneric family ever since.

=== Current placement ===
The Australian pitcher plant is an advanced rosid, and thus closer related to apples and oaks than to other pitcher plants like Nepenthaceae (basal core eudicots) and Sarraceniaceae (basal asterids). The placement of its monotypic family Cephalotaceae in the order Saxifragales has been abandoned. It is now placed within the order of Oxalidales where it is most closely related to Brunelliaceae, Cunoniaceae, and Elaeocarpaceae. The monotypic arrangement of the family and genus is indicative of a high degree of endemism, one of four such species of the region.

== Ecology ==

The plant occurs in southern coastal districts of the Southwest botanical province in Australia; it has been recorded in the Warren, southern Jarrah Forest, and Esperance Plains regions. Its habitat is on moist peaty sands found in swamps or along creeks and streams, but it is tolerant of less damp situations. Its population in the wild has been reduced by habitat destruction and overcollecting; it is therefore classified as vulnerable species (VU A2ac; C2a(i)) by the IUCN. However, this classification is not in unison with Australia&#x27;s national EPBC Act List of Threatened Species or Western Australia&#x27;s Wildlife Conservation Act 1950, which both list the species as Not Threatened.

The larvae of &quot;Badisis ambulans&quot;, an ant-like wingless micropezid fly, develop inside the pitchers. They have never been found anywhere else.

The plants survive occasional bush fires in the undergrowth by sprouting again from the rhizome. However, the seeds are not pyrophytes.

=== Carnivore ===
After the pitcher is formed, the lid lifts from the peristome and the pitcher is ready to catch. Digestive fluid is already in the pitcher. The prey is attracted by nectar secretions on the bottom of the pitcher lid and between the grooves of the pitcher rim. This causes the prey to fall in and drown. The liquid contains enzymes that break down the nutrients, including esterases, phosphatases and proteases. In the majority of cases, ants are caught.

=== Traps as biotopes ===
As with all other carnivorous plant species with sliding traps, the trap fluid is also a biotope for other organisms. A study published in 1985 counted 166 different species, including 82% protozoa, 4% oligochaeta and nematodes, 4% arthropods (copepods, diptera and mites), 2% rotifers, 1% tardigrades and 7% others (bacteria, fungi, algae). Bacteria and fungi in particular also secrete digestive enzymes and thus support the plant&#x27;s digestive process. It is particularly noticeable that the traps are the &quot;nursery&quot; of two species of diptera. In addition to the larvae of a &quot;Dasyhelea&quot; species, the larvae of the micropezidae &quot;Badisis ambulans&quot; also live in the cans.

== Distribution and Endangerment ==
The plant is endemic to the southwest of Australia, in the coastal area northeast of Albany in a zone of around between Augusta and Cape Riche. It is mainly found in cushions of Sphagnum on consistently moist but well-drained, acidic peat soils over granite, in seeping areas, along riverbanks or under so-called tussocks, grasses that grow in clumps (z. B. from Restionaceae).

The Australian pitcher plant is categorised as &quot;Vulnerable&quot; by the IUCN due to its restricted distribution. However, there is no acute threat. Because parts of its distribution area are protected and the plants are common within this, they have been removed from CITES-Appendix II.

== Uses ==
The Australian pitcher plant is popular with enthusiasts of carnivorous plants and cultivated worldwide – however, its cultivation is considered challenging.

=== Cultivation ===

&quot;Cephalotus&quot; are cultivated worldwide. In the wild, they prefer warm day-time temperatures of up to 25 degrees Celsius during the growing season, coupled with cool night-time temperatures. It is commonly grown in a mixture of sphagnum peat moss, perlite, and sand, a reasonable humidity (60–80%) is also preferred. It is successfully propagated from root and leaf cuttings, usually non-carnivorous leaves although pitchers can also be used. A dormancy period is probably crucial to long-term health of the plant.

The plants become colourful and grow vigorously when kept in direct sunlight, while plants cultivated in bright shade remain green.

Living plants were delivered to Kew Gardens by Phillip Parker King in 1823. A specimen flowered in 1827 and provided one source for an illustration in &quot;Curtis&#x27;s Botanical Magazine&quot;.

This plant is a recipient of the Royal Horticultural Society&#x27;s Award of Garden Merit.

There are several dozen &quot;Cephalotus&quot; clones that exist in cultivation; nine have been officially registered as cultivars. One of the most well-known is &#x27;Eden Black&#x27;, a cultivar with unusually dark-coloured pitchers.

==Genomics==
The genome of the pitcher plant &quot;Cephalotus follicularis&quot; has been sequenced. Its carnivorous and non-carnivorous leaves have been compared to identify genetic differences associated with key features relating to the attraction of prey and their capture, digestion and nutrient absorption. Results support the independent convergent evolution of &quot;Cephalotus&quot; and other carnivorous plant lineages. but also suggest that different lineages co-opted similar genes in developing digestive functions. This implies that the ways in which carnivory can be developed are limited.

== Botanical History ==
The Australian pitcher plant was possibly already discovered in 1791 on the expedition by the botanist Archibald Menzies. The plant was first described in 1806 by Jacques Julien Houtton de La Billardière. In 1800 Robert Brown had already observed the species while catching insects. Since 1823 specimens of the plant have been cultivated in the botanic garden Kew Gardens. In 1829 Dumortier categorised the species in its own monotypic family, which is still valid today.

Due to the form of the anther La Billardière uses the Greek term &quot;kefalotus&quot; (&quot;to have a head&quot;) for the genus. &quot;Follicularis&quot; derives from &quot;follicus&quot;, meaning &quot;small sack&quot;, and refers to the form of the jars. The Australian pitcher plant is also called &quot;Albany Pitcher Plant&quot; or &quot;Western Australian Pitcher Plant&quot;.

==Images==
== See also ==
* Carnivorous plants of Australia

== References ==
== External links ==

* 
* Inner World of &quot;Cephalotus follicularis&quot; from the John Innes Centre </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="158" end="163" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="183" end="190" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181577" start="220" end="240" title="Cephalotus" label="Albany pitcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18240" start="250" end="261" title="carnivorous plant" label="carnivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956533" start="262" end="275" title="pitcher plant" label="pitcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="337" end="348" title="common name" label="common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181577" start="385" end="417" title="Cephalotus" label="Western Australian pitcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181577" start="419" end="443" title="Cephalotus" label="Australian pitcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2181577" start="448" end="465" title="Cephalotus" label="fly-catcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217530" start="600" end="609" title="Nepenthes" label="Nepenthes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="645" end="658" title="Carnivorous plant#Pitfall traps" label="pitfall traps"/>
<link wikidata="Q677088" start="882" end="895" title="insectivorous" label="insectivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="896" end="902" title="leaves" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q252484" start="940" end="949" title="moccasin (footwear)" label="moccasins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956533" start="1337" end="1350" title="pitcher plant" label="pitcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540567" start="1357" end="1366" title="peristome" label="peristome"/>
<link wikidata="Q447888" start="1506" end="1515" title="Operculum (botany)" label="operculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="1589" end="1595" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q487623" start="1690" end="1701" title="translucent" label="translucent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="1726" end="1732" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q156428" start="1780" end="1793" title="inflorescence" label="inflorescence"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="1853" end="1860" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="2154" end="2170" title="herbaceous plant" label="herbaceous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="2256" end="2263" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q633912" start="2353" end="2359" title="stolon" label="stolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743290" start="2383" end="2391" title="Tussock grass" label="tussocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="2448" end="2452" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q609336" start="2482" end="2489" title="taproot" label="taproot"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="2587" end="2593" title="Leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="2908" end="2914" title="nectar" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3116" end="3123" title="Leaf#Characteristics of the petiole" label="petiole"/>
<link wikidata="Q171934" start="3743" end="3749" title="nectar (botany)" label="nectar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43177" start="4132" end="4143" title="chlorophyll" label="chlorophyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q148600" start="5208" end="5215" title="panicle" label="panicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="5309" end="5315" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q107412" start="5379" end="5385" title="petals" label="petals"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="5398" end="5405" title="carpels" label="carpels"/>
<link wikidata="Q147807" start="5491" end="5499" title="follicle (fruit)" label="follicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="5567" end="5572" title="testa (botany)" label="testa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25624" start="5592" end="5601" title="endosperm" label="endosperm"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="5795" end="5807" title="Tannins" label="Tannin cells"/>
<link wikidata="Q951449" start="5831" end="5840" title="myricetin" label="myricetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q409478" start="5842" end="5851" title="quercetin" label="quercetin"/>
<link wikidata="Q422044" start="5853" end="5865" title="ellagic acid" label="ellagic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q375837" start="5867" end="5878" title="gallic acid" label="gallic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q416840" start="5889" end="5897" title="iridoids" label="iridoids"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="5930" end="5935" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="5951" end="5957" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="6024" end="6033" title="Monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764" start="6039" end="6050" title="Cunoniaceae" label="Cunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q141436" start="6086" end="6104" title="Brocchinia reducta" label="Brocchinia reducta"/>
<link wikidata="Q21742" start="6211" end="6219" title="Lamiales" label="Lamiales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21808" start="6221" end="6235" title="Caryophyllales" label="Caryophyllales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21737" start="6239" end="6247" title="Ericales" label="Ericales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18240" start="6299" end="6316" title="carnivorous plant" label="carnivorous plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q682405" start="6410" end="6427" title="King George Sound" label="King George Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="6513" end="6525" title="Robert Brown (Scottish botanist from Montrose)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q79012" start="6747" end="6762" title="Ferdinand Bauer" label="Ferdinand Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020218" start="6767" end="6782" title="William Westall (artist)" label="William Westall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1684666" start="7296" end="7332" title="Jean Baptiste Leschenault de la Tour" label="Jean Baptiste Leschenault de la Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q560680" start="7346" end="7360" title="Nicolas Baudin" label="Nicolas Baudin"/>
<link wikidata="Q528925" start="7389" end="7410" title="Jacques Labillardière" label="Jacques Labillardière"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064396" start="7488" end="7523" title="Novae Hollandiae plantarum specimen" label="Novae Hollandiae plantarum specimen"/>
<link wikidata="Q46299" start="7954" end="7962" title="Rosaceae" label="Rosaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568422" start="8043" end="8057" title="William Baxter (botanist)" label="William Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q338878" start="8320" end="8325" title="rosid" label="rosid"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="8354" end="8359" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="8365" end="8368" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956533" start="8384" end="8397" title="pitcher plant" label="pitcher plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q217530" start="8404" end="8416" title="Nepenthaceae" label="Nepenthaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="8418" end="8423" title="basal (evolution)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q165468" start="8424" end="8437" title="eudicot" label="core eudicots"/>
<link wikidata="Q834427" start="8443" end="8457" title="Sarraceniaceae" label="Sarraceniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q747502" start="8465" end="8472" title="asterid" label="asterid"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="8497" end="8506" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="8507" end="8513" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q36602" start="8535" end="8540" title="order (biology)" label="order"/>
<link wikidata="Q21855" start="8541" end="8553" title="Saxifragales" label="Saxifragales"/>
<link wikidata="Q21891" start="8611" end="8621" title="Oxalidales" label="Oxalidales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049919" start="8658" end="8671" title="Brunelliaceae" label="Brunelliaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131764" start="8673" end="8684" title="Cunoniaceae" label="Cunoniaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q131280" start="8690" end="8704" title="Elaeocarpaceae" label="Elaeocarpaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="8790" end="8798" title="endemism" label="endemism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3502879" start="8910" end="8938" title="Southwest botanical province" label="Southwest botanical province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7970002" start="8981" end="8987" title="Warren (biogeographic region)" label="Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160938" start="8998" end="9011" title="Jarrah Forest" label="Jarrah Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5398850" start="9017" end="9033" title="Esperance Plains" label="Esperance Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="9215" end="9234" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="9285" end="9303" title="vulnerable species" label="vulnerable species"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="9329" end="9333" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001293" start="9476" end="9506" title="Wildlife Conservation Act 1950" label="Wildlife Conservation Act 1950"/>
<link wikidata="Q799173" start="9576" end="9592" title="Badisis ambulans" label="Badisis ambulans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046465" start="9603" end="9611" title="Ant mimicry" label="ant-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782917" start="9621" end="9631" title="Micropezidae" label="micropezid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="9632" end="9635" title="fly" label="fly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754865" start="9833" end="9843" title="pyrophytes" label="pyrophytes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540567" start="9916" end="9925" title="peristome" label="peristome"/>
<link wikidata="Q418750" start="10236" end="10244" title="esterase" label="esterase"/>
<link wikidata="Q422476" start="10247" end="10258" title="phosphatase" label="phosphatase"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="10264" end="10272" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q101274" start="10534" end="10542" title="protozoa" label="protozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q193006" start="10547" end="10558" title="oligochaeta" label="oligochaeta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="10563" end="10572" title="nematodes" label="nematodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360" start="10577" end="10587" title="arthropods" label="arthropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q189973" start="10589" end="10597" title="copepods" label="copepods"/>
<link wikidata="Q25312" start="10599" end="10606" title="diptera" label="diptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2441993" start="10611" end="10616" title="mites" label="mites"/>
<link wikidata="Q180148" start="10622" end="10630" title="rotifers" label="rotifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194" start="10635" end="10646" title="tardigrades" label="tardigrades"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226999" start="10941" end="10950" title="Dasyhelea" label="Dasyhelea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782917" start="10984" end="10996" title="micropezidae" label="micropezidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q799173" start="11003" end="11019" title="Badisis ambulans" label="Badisis ambulans"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="11099" end="11106" title="Endemism" label="endemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="11127" end="11136" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q704257" start="11171" end="11177" title="Albany, Western Australia" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q81200" start="11206" end="11213" title="Augusta, Western Australia" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035016" start="11218" end="11228" title="Cape Riche" label="Cape Riche"/>
<link wikidata="Q30019" start="11252" end="11272" title="Sphagnum" label="cushions of Sphagnum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743290" start="11399" end="11407" title="Tussock grass" label="tussocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q131501" start="11449" end="11461" title="Restionaceae" label="Restionaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="11542" end="11546" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="11738" end="11743" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q30019" start="12185" end="12203" title="Sphagnum" label="sphagnum peat moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q655819" start="12205" end="12212" title="perlite" label="perlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="12218" end="12222" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q180600" start="12237" end="12245" title="humidity" label="humidity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188617" start="12638" end="12649" title="Kew Gardens" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338334" start="12653" end="12672" title="Phillip Parker King" label="Phillip Parker King"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269599" start="12763" end="12795" title="Curtis&amp;#x27;s Botanical Magazine" label="Curtis&amp;#x27;s Botanical Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032739" start="12837" end="12864" title="Royal Horticultural Society" label="Royal Horticultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501416" start="12872" end="12893" title="Award of Garden Merit" label="Award of Garden Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="13017" end="13025" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="13150" end="13156" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q200312" start="13478" end="13498" title="convergent evolution" label="convergent evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q633378" start="13866" end="13883" title="Archibald Menzies" label="Archibald Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q528925" start="13926" end="13966" title="Jacques Labillardière" label="Jacques Julien Houtton de La Billardière"/>
<link wikidata="Q155764" start="13976" end="13988" title="Robert Brown (botanist, born 1773)" label="Robert Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q188617" start="14123" end="14134" title="Kew Gardens" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q316571" start="14144" end="14153" title="Barthélemy Charles Joseph Dumortier" label="Dumortier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725616" start="14259" end="14265" title="Sexual reproduction in plants" label="anther"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044140" start="14650" end="14681" title="Carnivorous plants of Australia" label="Carnivorous plants of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871344" wikidata="Q525123" url="?curid=871344" title="Girolamo del Pacchia">
<text>Girolamo del Pacchia (c. 1477 – after 1533), was an Italian painter.

==Life==

He was born, probably in Siena, likely into a family of modest means, probably son of a Hungarian cannon-founder.
It is believed that he began his artistic training early, possibly studying with Domenico Beccafumi, a master painter and one of the most important figures of Sienese art during the early 16th century. Through this connection, del Pacchia absorbed much of Beccafumi&#x27;s style, marked by graceful figures and a use of color and light that conveyed a sense of harmony and elegance.
Del Pacchia’s work is rooted in the tradition of Sienese painting but was also shaped by broader Renaissance developments, especially the influence of artists such as Raphael and Leonardo da Vinci. His art was characterized by its balanced compositions, clear narrative elements, and the integration of figural and architectural space, which reflects the increasing sophistication of perspective and anatomy during the Renaissance.

One of del Pacchia’s most well-known stylistic contributions was his blending of the classical heritage of the Sienese school with the more contemporary developments of Central Italian painting, particularly the softer, more atmospheric qualities seen in the work of artists like Perugino and Raphael.
Having joined a turbulent club named the Bardotti he disappeared from Siena in 1535, when the club was dispersed, and nothing of a later date is known about him. His most celebrated work is a fresco of the &quot;Nativity of the Virgin&quot;, in the Oratory of San Bernardino, Siena, a work cited as graceful and tender, with a certain artificiality.

Another renowned fresco, in the church of Santa Caterina, Siena, represents that saint on her visit to St Agnes of Montepulciano, who, having just expired, raises her foot by miracle. In the National Gallery, London there is a &quot;Virgin and Child.&quot;

The forms of G. del Pacchia are fuller than those of Perugino (his principal model of style appears to have been in reality Franciabigio); the drawing is not always unexceptionable; the female heads have sweetness and beauty of feature, and some of the colouring has noticeable force.
Despite not achieving the fame of some of his contemporaries, del Pacchia was respected for his refined style, and he continued to receive commissions throughout his life. By the time of his death, he had largely been overshadowed by other painters, but his work remains an important part of the Sienese Renaissance tradition.

While specific details of his death are unclear, he is known to have been active until at least 1534. His legacy, though somewhat overshadowed, can still be appreciated in the context of the rich artistic history of Siena during the Renaissance. His works can still be found in various collections and churches in Siena, offering a glimpse into the evolution of Sienese painting in the early 16th century.

== References ==
* 
* Freedberg, Sydney J. (1978). Pintura en Italia, 1500-1600. Editorial Cátedra, Madrid. , página 121.
* The Grove Dictionary of Art, Macmillan Publishers (2000)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q525123" start="0" end="20" title="Girolamo del Pacchia" label="Girolamo del Pacchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="60" end="67" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751" start="105" end="110" title="Siena" label="Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="168" end="177" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884503" start="1561" end="1593" title="Oratory of San Bernardino, Siena" label="Oratory of San Bernardino, Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623823" start="1647" end="1660" title="artificiality" label="artificiality"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1705" end="1726" title="Santa Caterina, Siena" label="Santa Caterina, Siena"/>
<link wikidata="Q180788" start="1854" end="1878" title="National Gallery, London" label="National Gallery, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5827" start="1974" end="1982" title="Pietro Perugino" label="Perugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q537712" start="2045" end="2057" title="Franciabigio" label="Franciabigio"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871348" wikidata="Q4436714" url="?curid=871348" title="List of best-selling singles by year in the United Kingdom">
<text>This is a list of the best-selling singles on the UK Singles Chart for each year. Note that the &quot;Number sold&quot; section denotes the number sold within the year, not in total, as very often the single continues to sell more in later years (and sometimes other singles released within a particular year will go on to outsell the year-end winner – e.g., Kylie Minogue and Jason Donovan&#x27;s &quot;Especially for You&quot;, from 1988, ultimately outsold &quot;Mistletoe and Wine&quot;).

The best-selling UK single of all time is &quot;Candle in the Wind 1997/Something About The Way You Look Tonight&quot; by Elton John, which sold 4,770,000 copies.

==Best-selling singles by year==
==Best-selling singles by decade==
==See also==
* List of best-selling albums by year in the United Kingdom

==References==
;General (list positions)

;Specific
==Notes==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4436714" start="22" end="42" title="List of best-selling singles by year in the United Kingdom" label="best-selling singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="50" end="66" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="359" end="372" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q287817" start="377" end="390" title="Jason Donovan" label="Jason Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q991333" start="404" end="422" title="Especially for You" label="Especially for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449307" start="542" end="565" title="Candle in the Wind 1997" label="Candle in the Wind 1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408106" start="566" end="606" title="Something About The Way You Look Tonight" label="Something About The Way You Look Tonight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2808" start="616" end="626" title="Elton John" label="Elton John"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607468" start="741" end="798" title="List of best-selling albums by year in the United Kingdom" label="List of best-selling albums by year in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871349" wikidata="Q1129224" url="?curid=871349" title="Symphonic Game Music Concerts">
<text>The &quot;Symphonic Game Music Concerts (&quot;shortened to: &quot;Game Concerts&quot;) are a series of award-winning orchestral video game music concerts first performed in 2003 at the Gewandhaus in Leipzig, Germany, notable for being the longest running and the first of their kind outside Japan. They are produced by Thomas Böcker and performed by various orchestras conducted by Andy Brick (2003–2007), Arnie Roth (2008, 2009 and 2011), Niklas Willén (2010, 2012) and Eckehard Stier (from 2012).

In Leipzig, the &quot;Game Concerts&quot; series was held as &quot;GC in Concert&quot; from 2003 to 2007 as the official, annual opening ceremony of the &quot;GC – Games Convention&quot;. From 2008 to 2012, a cooperation with the &quot;WDR&quot; and its in-house orchestra, the WDR Funkhausorchester Köln, was established, with concerts primarily held at the Kölner Philharmonie. Since 2013, the events have been presented internationally, including performances with the London Symphony Orchestra at the Barbican Centre in London.

==Concerts in Leipzig (2003–2007)==

=== Development ===

Inspired by Far Eastern concerts with music from video games, in particular the &quot;Orchestral Game Music Concerts&quot; from the nineties, Thomas Böcker developed the concept for the first event of its kind outside Japan. Wanting to reach as many people in the demographic as possible, he planned the concert alongside an established industry event. In 2002, he submitted his idea to the Leipzig Trade Fair, and they agreed to present a video game music concert during the &quot;GC – Games Convention&quot;, the first video game fair in Europe. The Leipzig Trade Fair promoted &quot;GC in Concert&quot;, while Böcker acted as creative director and producer. This involved creating a concert programme and obtaining the permission of individual publishers to perform music from their game releases.

=== &quot;GC in Concert&quot; ===

On 20 August 2003, the first &quot;GC in Concert&quot; took place as part of the official opening ceremony of the &quot;GC – Games Convention&quot;, performed by the Czech National Symphony Orchestra. Four annual concerts with different programmes followed until 2007, from then on featuring the FILMharmonic Orchestra Prague. Böcker decided not to limit the selection of compositions for the &quot;GC in Concert&quot; series to European games and instead chose Asian, American and European titles, resulting in a variety of musical styles. The focus of the first concert was on music from publishers that had been recorded previously with live orchestras, which reduced the development phase to four months, starting in mid-April 2003.

After evaluating feedback from the audience, more music from classic games eventually found its way into the programmes. The following concerts had Böcker busy with the planning for one year each and increasingly included newly written and more experimental arrangements that were not merely orchestral versions of the original compositions, but personal interpretations by the arrangers. The pioneering work done by Böcker and his team paved the way for many comparable events.

All five concerts in Leipzig took place in front of sold-out audiences of around 2000 people each. In their role as official opening ceremonies of the &quot;GC – Games Convention&quot;, they also included various speeches by industry representatives and politicians such as Wolfgang Tiefensee. In addition, numerous composers took part, including Nobuo Uematsu, Yuzo Koshiro, Chris Hülsbeck, Rob Hubbard and Allister Brimble.

==Concerts in Cologne (2008–2012)==
Following an invitation by Thomas Böcker, Winfried Fechner, the manager of the WDR Funkhausorchester Köln, attended the fifth &quot;GC in Concert&quot; in Leipzig in the hope of introducing a new genre of music to his own ensemble. Impressed by the response of the audience there, he saw an opportunity to inspire young people with orchestral music and entered into a collaboration with Böcker&#x27;s &quot;Merregnon Studios&quot;, which soon led to the CD release , the first in-house concert including video game music titled &quot;PROMS That&#x27;s Sound, that&#x27;s Rhythm&quot; and, a little later, &quot;Symphonic Shades – Hülsbeck in Concert.&quot;

===&quot;Symphonic Shades – Hülsbeck in Concert&quot;===

In late 2007, Thomas Böcker announced his role as producer of &quot;Symphonic Shades&quot;, two concerts held on 23 August 2008 dedicated to the music of German composer Chris Hülsbeck. The premiere performance with the WDR Funkhausorchester Köln at the Funkhaus Wallrafplatz was the first game music concert to be broadcast live on the radio, &quot;WDR4&quot;.

On 4 August 2009, pieces from &quot;Symphonic Shades&quot; were performed by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra. They were part of the concert &quot;Sinfonia Drammatica&quot; at the Stockholm Concert Hall, which additionally featured tracks from &quot;drammatica -The Very Best of Yoko Shimomura&quot;. The Duisburg Philharmonic Orchestra&#x27;s 3rd Family Concert also featured arrangements from &quot;Symphonic Shades&quot;.

===&quot;Symphonic Fantasies – music from Square Enix&quot;===

&quot;Symphonic Fantasies – music from Square Enix&quot; took place on 12 September 2009 at the Kölner Philharmonie. Tickets for the event quickly sold out, necessitating a second concert on 11 September 2009 at the Rudolf Weber-Arena in Oberhausen. The concert at the Philharmonie was broadcast on WDR4 and for the first time available via video streaming on the Internet. This was to be the case for all &quot;Game Concerts&quot; until 2011.

&quot;Symphonic Fantasies&quot; is dedicated to Japanese game developer &quot;Square Enix&quot; and includes arrangements of pieces from &quot;Final Fantasy&quot;, &quot;Secret of Mana&quot;, &quot;Chrono Trigger,&quot; &quot;Chrono Cross&quot; and &quot;Kingdom Hearts.&quot;

In 2012, five more concerts were performed in Tokyo, Stockholm and again in Cologne, with an additional performance in 2016 at the Barbican Centre in London with the London Symphony Orchestra. Albums have been released of concert recordings from both Cologne (via &quot;Decca Records&quot;) and Tokyo (via &quot;X5Music&quot;/&quot;Merregnon Records&quot;).

===&quot;Symphonic Legends – Music from Nintendo&quot;===
After the positive feedback from attendees of &quot;Symphonic Fantasies&quot;, the &quot;WDR&quot; announced another game concert titled &quot;Symphonic Legends&quot;, which took place at the Kölner Philharmonie on 23 September 2010. The event featured music from Japanese game developer &quot;Nintendo&quot;, with titles such as &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot;, &quot;Donkey Kong&quot;, &quot;Metroid&quot;, &quot;F-Zero&quot; and &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; being performed. The symphonic poem of &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; made up the entire second half of &quot;Symphonic Legends.&quot;

The &quot;LEGENDS&quot; performance on 1 June 2011, presented by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra, was partly based on arrangements from &quot;Symphonic Legends&quot;. On 13 July 2014, the London Symphony Orchestra performed the symphonic poem for &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot; from this programme.

===&quot;Symphonic Odysseys – Tribute to Nobuo Uematsu&quot;===
With the reveal of &quot;Symphonic Legends&quot;, Winfried Fechner opened up in an interview that audiences could expect two game music concerts a year and announced &quot;Symphonic Odysseys – Tribute to Nobuo Uematsu&quot;, a homage to the Japanese composer Nobuo Uematsu. The programme, featuring arrangements from titles such as &quot;Lost Odyssey&quot;, &quot;Final Fantasy Legend,&quot; &quot;Blue Dragon&quot; and the &quot;Final Fantasy&quot; series, was performed twice at the Kölner Philharmonie on 9 July 2011.

&quot;Symphonic Odysseys&quot; was also performed by the London Symphony Orchestra in June 2017, on 18 June at the Philharmonie de Paris and on 20 June at the Barbican Centre. A recording of the concerts in Cologne was released as a double album on 28 December 2011 by &quot;Dog Ear Records&quot;, Uematsu&#x27;s own label.

== Concerts worldwide (from 2013) ==
=== &quot;Final Symphony – Music from Final Fantasy VI, VII and X&quot; ===

In May 2012, Thomas Böcker announced his tenth concert production titled &quot;Final Symphony&quot;, comprising music from &quot;Final Fantasy VI, VII&quot; and &quot;X&quot;, composed by Nobuo Uematsu and Masashi Hamauzu. The world premiere took place on 11 May 2013 and was performed by the Sinfonieorchester Wuppertal at the Stadthalle Wuppertal. Another performance took place on 30 May 2013 with the London Symphony Orchestra, the first concert of game music for the orchestra. The &quot;Final Symphony&quot; programme then went on a world tour with performances in Japan, Denmark, Sweden, Finland, the Netherlands, the USA, New Zealand, China, Austria, Australia and Poland.

A studio recording of &quot;Final Symphony&quot; was released on 23 February 2015 (via &quot;X5Music&quot;/&quot;Merregnon Records&quot;), performed by the London Symphony Orchestra at Abbey Road Studios.

=== &quot;Final Symphony II – Music from Final Fantasy V, VIII, IX and XIII&quot; ===
Plans for &quot;Final Symphony II&quot; were announced in March 2015. The world premiere with music from &quot;Final Fantasy V&quot;, &quot;VIII&quot;, &quot;IX&quot;, and &quot;XIII&quot; took place on 29 August 2015 at the Beethovenhalle in Bonn, performed by the Beethoven Orchester Bonn, followed by four performances in September and October 2015 by the London Symphony Orchestra in London, Osaka and twice in Yokohama. These performances marked the first time that a foreign orchestra gave concerts of game music in Japan. In addition to the events in Germany, the UK and Japan, &quot;Final Symphony II&quot; was also presented in Finland, Sweden and the Netherlands.

A studio recording of &quot;Final Symphony&quot; II was released on 4 August 2023 (via &quot;Merregnon Records&quot;), performed by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra at Konserthuset Stockholm.

=== &quot;Symphonic Memories – music from Square Enix&quot; ===
&quot;Symphonic Memories – Music from Square Enix&quot; was premiered by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra at the Stockholm Concert Hall on 9 June 2018. The concept of the production is to present popular scores from previous programmes such as &quot;Symphonic Fantasies&quot;, &quot;Final Symphony&quot; and &quot;Final Symphony II&quot;, and to combine some of them with new arrangements. In addition to music from &quot;Final Fantasy VI&quot;, &quot;VIII&quot; and the &quot;Chronos&quot; series, a suite of music from &quot;Final Fantasy XV&quot; was heard for the first time in Stockholm. Further events took place in Finland, Switzerland, Japan and Germany.

The concerts in Japan were recorded and published as a double album by &quot;Square Enix&quot;&#x27;s music label. In addition to arrangements from &quot;Final Fantasy VIII&quot; and &quot;Final Fantasy XV&quot;, the world premieres of &quot;Octopath Traveler&quot; and &quot;Xenogears&quot; are part of the release.

=== &quot;Skyrim 10th Anniversary Concert&quot; ===
In 2021, for the tenth anniversary of &quot;Bethesda Softworks&quot;&#x27; action role-playing game Skyrim, Thomas Böcker produced a concert film featuring the London Symphony Orchestra and the London Voices at Alexandra Palace in London.

The video was released on YouTube on 11 November 2021, shortly followed by a music album.

=== &quot;Starfield – A Night with the London Symphony Orchestra&quot; ===
In September 2023, Thomas Böcker produced another concert film, again for &quot;Bethesda Softworks&quot;, for the action role-playing game Starfield, which had just been released at the time. The recording took place with the London Symphony Orchestra at LSO St Luke&#x27;s. The video was published on YouTube on 13 September 2023.

==Chamber music and school concerts==
The &quot;Chamber Music Game Concerts&quot; performed by a string ensemble as well as the school concerts &quot;Heroes of Our Imagination&quot; and &quot;Super Mario Galaxy – A Musical Adventure&quot; were three sub-series of events also produced by Böcker.

A &quot;Chamber Music Game Concert&quot; in 2005 was held in conjunction with the gaming tournament GC-Cup at Augustusplatz in Leipzig, while two more of these performances were given in the context of a &quot;GC – Games Convention&quot; press conference and the exhibition &quot;Nintendo – Vom Kartenspiel zum Game Boy&quot; at the Landesmuseum Koblenz.

The four school concerts &quot;Heroes of our Imagination&quot; by the Elbland Philharmonie Sachsen in 2006 were conceived to demonstrate the differences and similarities between classical music and game music and to make orchestral concerts more accessible to a younger audience. Five more school concerts took place in January 2010. The &quot;Super Mario Galaxy – A Musical Adventure&quot; series was the spiritual successor to &quot;Heroes of Our Imagination&quot;. The concerts were officially licensed and sponsored by &quot;Nintendo&quot;. The music was accompanied with short narrations of the &quot;Super Mario Galaxy&quot; story.

==Awards==

* 2020 Best Album – Official Arranged Album: &quot;Symphonic Memories Concert – music from Square Enix&quot;, Annual Game Music Awards 2020
* 2015 Best Album – Arranged Album: &quot;Final Symphony – music from Final Fantasy&quot;, Annual Game Music Awards 2015
* 2013 Outstanding Production – Concert: &quot;Final Symphony London – music from Final Fantasy&quot;, Annual Game Music Awards 2013
* 2012 Outstanding Production – Concert: &quot;Symphonic Fantasies Tokyo – music from Square Enix&quot;, Annual Game Music Awards 2012
* 2011 Outstanding Production – Concert: &quot;Symphonic Odysseys – Tribute to Nobuo Uematsu&quot;, Annual Game Music Awards 2011
* 2011 Best Live Concert: &quot;Symphonic Odysseys – Tribute to Nobuo Uematsu&quot;, Annual Original Sound Version Awards 2011
* 2011 Best Live Concert: &quot;Symphonic Legends – music from Nintendo&quot;, Annual Original Sound Version Awards 2010
* 2010 Best Arranged Album – Solo / Ensemble: &quot;Symphonic Fantasies – music from Square Enix&quot;, Annual Game Music Awards 2010
* 2010 Best Concert: &quot;Symphonic Legends – music from Nintendo&quot;, Swedish LEVEL magazine

==External links==
*Game Concerts
*Symphonic Fantasies
*Final Symphony
*Personal website of Thomas Böcker

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1129224" start="4" end="39" title="Symphonic Game Music Concerts" label="&amp;quot;Symphonic Game Music Concerts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062702" start="129" end="145" title="video game music" label="video game music"/>
<link wikidata="Q519613" start="186" end="196" title="Gewandhaus" label="Gewandhaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788110" start="320" end="333" title="Thomas Böcker" label="Thomas Böcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q4760462" start="383" end="393" title="Andy Brick" label="Andy Brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2863313" start="407" end="417" title="Arnie Roth" label="Arnie Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q951891" start="441" end="454" title="Niklas Willén" label="Niklas Willén"/>
<link wikidata="Q608482" start="654" end="687" title="Games Convention" label="&amp;quot;GC – Games Convention&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q315384" start="731" end="746" title="WDR Fernsehen" label="&amp;quot;WDR&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q177368" start="860" end="879" title="Kölner Philharmonie" label="Kölner Philharmonie"/>
<link wikidata="Q155805" start="973" end="998" title="London Symphony Orchestra" label="London Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q653858" start="1006" end="1021" title="Barbican Centre" label="Barbican Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q678262" start="1483" end="1501" title="Leipzig Trade Fair" label="Leipzig Trade Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277548" start="2095" end="2128" title="Czech National Symphony Orchestra" label="Czech National Symphony Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q61386" start="3421" end="3439" title="Wolfgang Tiefensee" label="Wolfgang Tiefensee"/>
<link wikidata="Q312327" start="3494" end="3507" title="Nobuo Uematsu" label="Nobuo Uematsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q948524" start="3509" end="3521" title="Yuzo Koshiro" label="Yuzo Koshiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q64712" start="3523" end="3537" title="Chris Huelsbeck" label="Chris Hülsbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q599443" start="3539" end="3550" title="Rob Hubbard" label="Rob Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838355" start="3555" end="3571" title="Allister Brimble" label="Allister Brimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820016" start="4017" end="4034" title="Merregnon Studios" label="Merregnon Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661419" start="4221" end="4259" title="Symphonic Shades – Hülsbeck in Concert" label="Symphonic Shades – Hülsbeck in Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537026" start="4676" end="4680" title="WDR 4" label="WDR4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376146" start="4770" end="4808" title="Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q653773" start="4879" end="4901" title="Stockholm Concert Hall" label="Stockholm Concert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q317935" start="5004" end="5035" title="Duisburg Philharmonic" label="Duisburg Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q876436" start="5405" end="5423" title="Rudolf Weber-Arena" label="Rudolf Weber-Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q207784" start="5712" end="5723" title="Square Enix" label="Square Enix"/>
<link wikidata="Q12391356" start="5777" end="5790" title="Final Fantasy" label="Final Fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800173" start="5804" end="5818" title="Secret of Mana" label="Secret of Mana"/>
<link wikidata="Q761815" start="5832" end="5846" title="Chrono Trigger" label="Chrono Trigger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088142" start="5860" end="5872" title="Chrono Cross" label="Chrono Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q755167" start="5889" end="5903" title="Kingdom Hearts" label="Kingdom Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="6182" end="6195" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q14907316" start="6224" end="6231" title="X5 Music Group" label="X5Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8093" start="6623" end="6631" title="Nintendo" label="Nintendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168" start="6665" end="6682" title="Super Mario Bros." label="Super Mario Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q662004" start="6696" end="6707" title="Donkey Kong" label="Donkey Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q12397" start="6721" end="6728" title="Metroid" label="Metroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720878" start="6742" end="6748" title="F-Zero" label="F-Zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="6765" end="6784" title="The Legend of Zelda" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q271802" start="6812" end="6826" title="symphonic poem" label="symphonic poem"/>
<link wikidata="Q558753" start="7642" end="7654" title="Lost Odyssey" label="Lost Odyssey"/>
<link wikidata="Q643018" start="7668" end="7688" title="The Final Fantasy Legend" label="Final Fantasy Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471287" start="7702" end="7713" title="Blue Dragon (video game)" label="Blue Dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378907" start="7941" end="7962" title="Philharmonie de Paris" label="Philharmonie de Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288178" start="8101" end="8116" title="Dog Ear Records" label="Dog Ear Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q535940" start="8394" end="8410" title="Final Fantasy VI" label="Final Fantasy VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q214232" start="8412" end="8415" title="Final Fantasy VII" label="VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q223381" start="8432" end="8433" title="Final Fantasy X" label="X"/>
<link wikidata="Q719149" start="8471" end="8486" title="Masashi Hamauzu" label="Masashi Hamauzu"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="9132" end="9150" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q900305" start="9350" end="9365" title="Final Fantasy V" label="Final Fantasy V"/>
<link wikidata="Q245006" start="9379" end="9383" title="Final Fantasy VIII" label="VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q474573" start="9397" end="9399" title="Final Fantasy IX" label="IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q390595" start="9417" end="9421" title="Final Fantasy XIII" label="XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q317912" start="9464" end="9478" title="Beethovenhalle" label="Beethovenhalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q814134" start="9505" end="9529" title="Beethoven Orchester Bonn" label="Beethoven Orchester Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779100" start="10718" end="10734" title="Final Fantasy XV" label="Final Fantasy XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q40887608" start="11097" end="11114" title="Octopath Traveler" label="Octopath Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q583360" start="11131" end="11140" title="Xenogears" label="Xenogears"/>
<link wikidata="Q684425" start="11269" end="11287" title="Bethesda Softworks" label="Bethesda Softworks"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11325" end="11331" title="The Elder Scrolls V: Skyrim" label="Skyrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q9023617" start="11419" end="11432" title="London Voices" label="London Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q254650" start="11436" end="11452" title="Alexandra Palace" label="Alexandra Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q55286432" start="11770" end="11779" title="Starfield (video game)" label="Starfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594071" start="11886" end="11904" title="St Luke Old Street" label="LSO St Luke&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q170489" start="12156" end="12174" title="Super Mario Galaxy" label="Super Mario Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q880646" start="12371" end="12384" title="Augustusplatz" label="Augustusplatz"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871350" wikidata="Q537712" url="?curid=871350" title="Franciabigio">
<text>Franciabigio (1482 – 24 January 1525) was an Italian painter of the Florentine Renaissance. His true name may have been Francesco di Cristofano; he is also referred to as either Marcantonio Franciabigio or Francia Bigio.

==Life and career==
He was born in Florence, and initially worked under Albertinelli until about 1506. In 1505 he befriended Andrea del Sarto; and by the next year, the two painters set up common shop in the Piazza del Grano. Franciabigio paid much attention to anatomy and perspective, and to the proportions of his figures, though these are often squat in form. He had a large stock of artistic knowledge, and was at first noted for diligence. He was proficient in fresco and Vasari claimed that he surpassed all his contemporaries in this method. It is in his portraits, and not his religious paintings and frescoes, that his painting gathers naturalistic power.

As years went on, and he received frequent commissions for all sorts of public painting for festive occasions, his diligence seemed to wane.

In 1513, in the cloister of the Annunziata he frescoed the &quot;Marriage of the Virgin&quot;, part of a larger series mainly directed by Andrea del Sarto, and overshadowed by the latter&#x27;s masterpiece of &quot;Birth of the Virgin&quot;. Other artists working under Sarto at the cloister included Rosso Fiorentino, Pontormo, Francesco Indaco, and Baccio Bandinelli.

In 1514, he frescoed a Mantegnesque &quot;Last Supper&quot; for the Convento della Calza in Florence. In 1518-19, at the Convento della Salzo, in another series of frescoes on which Andrea was likewise employed, he executed the &quot;Departure of John the Baptist for the Desert&quot;, and the &quot;Meeting of the Baptist with Jesus&quot;.

In 1520–21, at the villa Medici at Poggio a Caiano he frescoed a turgid &quot;Triumph of Cicero&quot; on the walls of the salon, but again he is overshadowed by Potormo&#x27;s naturalistic lunette of &quot;Vertumnus and Pomona&quot;. The array of figures appears distraught rather than celebratory, the antique details are a melange of quotations, and the architect a fancy of Quattrocento style. He painted a &quot;St Job&quot; altarpiece (1516, Uffizi).

In the early 1520s, Franciabigio also painted &quot;Madonna and Christ Child&quot;, a composition that highlights Raphael Sanzio&#x27;s influence. Scholars note this painting&#x27;s significance in illustrating naturalism.

Various works which have been ascribed to Raphael are reasonably deemed to be by Franciabigio. Such as the &quot;Madonna del Pozzo&quot;, with its awkwardly muscular John the Baptist; and some of his portraits, including the half figure of a &quot;Young Man&quot;. These two works show a close analogy in style to another in the Pitti gallery, avowedly by Franciabigio, a &quot;Youth at a Window&quot;, and to some others—which bear this painter&#x27;s recognized monogram.

For a number of years, Franciabigio maintained the studio with Andrea. Together with Andrea’s student, Jacopo da Pontormo, they decorated the Medici villa at Poggio a Caiano, where Franciabigio’s Triumph of Caesar displays his talent for narrative painting. Andrea’s influence on Franciabigio may be seen in the dark, smoky background and the soft, dramatic lighting of the St. Job Altar (1516).

The series of portraits, taken collectively, placed beyond dispute the eminent and idiosyncratic genius of the master. Two other works of his, of some celebrity, are the &quot;Calumny of Apelles&quot;, in the Pitti Palace, and the &quot;Bath of Bathsheba&quot; (painted in 1523), in the Dresden gallery.

== Critical assessment and legacy ==

When compared to his younger contemporary colleague, del Sarto, Franciabigio appears more sculptural and less forward-looking. The Quattrocento monumentality (or stiffness) of posing is evident in his figures. Franciabigio attends more to linearity and balance in fresco recalling Massacio, while Sarto&#x27;s paintings reflect an understanding that characterizes Venetian work, and the development of sway that will &quot;mannerize&quot; art in the decades to come.

== Footnotes ==
== References ==
*

Attribution:

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q537712" start="0" end="12" title="Franciabigio" label="Franciabigio"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="45" end="52" title="italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="53" end="60" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="79" end="90" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q537712" start="120" end="143" title="Franciabigio" label="Francesco di Cristofano"/>
<link wikidata="Q537712" start="178" end="202" title="Franciabigio" label="Marcantonio Franciabigio"/>
<link wikidata="Q537712" start="206" end="219" title="Franciabigio" label="Francia Bigio"/>
<link wikidata="Q436823" start="294" end="306" title="Mariotto Albertinelli" label="Albertinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571" start="347" end="363" title="Andrea del Sarto" label="Andrea del Sarto"/>
<link wikidata="Q514" start="484" end="491" title="anatomy" label="anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="496" end="507" title="perspective (graphical)" label="perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q134194" start="689" end="695" title="fresco" label="fresco"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="700" end="706" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287001" start="1063" end="1073" title="Basilica della Santissima Annunziata di Firenze" label="Annunziata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291129" start="1096" end="1118" title="Marriage of the Virgin" label="Marriage of the Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q312617" start="1332" end="1348" title="Rosso Fiorentino" label="Rosso Fiorentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q207929" start="1350" end="1358" title="Pontormo" label="Pontormo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1360" end="1376" title="Francesco Indaco" label="Francesco Indaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q358348" start="1382" end="1399" title="Baccio Bandinelli" label="Baccio Bandinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681" start="1425" end="1437" title="Andrea Mantegna" label="Mantegnesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="1769" end="1775" title="Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q20387" start="1779" end="1794" title="Poggio a Caiano" label="Poggio a Caiano"/>
<link wikidata="Q12901746" start="1822" end="1839" title="Triumph of Cicero (Franciabigio and Allori)" label="Triumph of Cicero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237596" start="1944" end="1976" title="Vertumnus and Pomona (Pontormo)" label="&amp;quot;Vertumnus and Pomona&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q213523" start="2121" end="2133" title="Quattrocento" label="Quattrocento"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="2315" end="2322" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="2412" end="2422" title="Naturalism (arts)" label="naturalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="2467" end="2474" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q29286" start="3506" end="3518" title="Pitti Palace" label="Pitti Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q272277" start="3542" end="3551" title="Bathsheba" label="Bathsheba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="3584" end="3591" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q213523" start="3771" end="3783" title="Quattrocento" label="Quattrocento"/>
<link wikidata="Q5811" start="3921" end="3929" title="Massacio" label="Massacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131808" start="4063" end="4072" title="Mannerism" label="mannerize"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871354" wikidata="Q5367530" url="?curid=871354" title="Elsewhen">
<text>Elsewhen (1941) is a science fiction novella by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, concerning time travel and parallel universes. It was first published as Elsewhere in the September 1941 issue of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;, under the pen name Caleb Saunders, and was reprinted in the 1953 book &quot;Assignment in Eternity&quot;, with some minor changes, and an additional character and that character&#x27;s journey.

== Story ==
The story concerns five (originally four) diverse students who attend a philosophy seminar. The professor, Arthur Frost, explains that he learned how to use his mind to go back in time and correct a bad mistake in his life. Using hypnosis he lets them travel to alternate worlds of their choice. All the students disappear except one, Howard Jenkins. The hypnotic suggestions had no effect on him, because he could not at all believe that it was possible. He is distraught at the disappearances, but the professor assures him that they all received a hypnotic suggestion to come back in two hours.

After two hours the students start coming back, and they tell their stories. In each case, the subjective time elapsed was much longer than two hours. Some of them spent a whole lifetime in the alternate world.

The first one back is Martha Ross. She comes back as an angel. She lived as a missionary in the parallel world, died for her cause, and went to heaven. After telling her story, she disappears. (This section was not part of the original story.)

Next arrives Helen Fisher. She has traveled multiple, very improbable timelines. One of them was in prehistory, where she lived with an old Neanderthal. He was treating her fatherly, and she enjoyed the place, until she was assaulted by a young Neanderthal. Another timeline was in modern time New York City, but she entered the timeline backwards. For a short while there she moved backwards in time, until she fainted and got moved into a different timeline. Eventually she arrived in a place with an extra spatial dimension; there she realized she could see inside solid objects. She studied her own body, and performed appendectomy on herself with her nails.

After Helen finishes her story, Robert Monroe arrives. He has changed physically, having a shorter, stockier body; with this, and with his peaked hood, he calls to mind a gnome. He is seriously injured: his arm has been badly burned. He perceives his new timeline as his home. His name there is Igor and he has a sister. His world is at war with space invaders, and his sister is a military leader. The situation is dire and their side is losing. He refuses to go to hospital for his injury, so Fisher uses her knowledge of first aid to treat him. Fisher then chooses to return with him, and she helps him carry books and tools. They become a couple, though the story does not show any emotional buildup.

After a long wait it becomes apparent that Estelle Martin is not coming back. Frost attempts to find her by listening to the same hypnotic-suggestion recording that she had used and by thinking about her. Jenkins watches him disappear, so that he would start believing in this possibility, and be eventually able to travel between timelines. Frost arrives on a Flash Gordon–like planet, and finds Estelle to be a priestess with the name Star Light. She refuses to go back, because she considers her new reality to be real and the old one to be a dream. Frost goes back and returns with Jenkins. As they arrive, Jenkins has turned into a native. He is a soldier with a blaster, and he knows Estelle as Star Light.

Frost returns to the original timeline and is arrested on suspicion of kidnapping and possibly murdering his students. He knows that the authorities would not believe the truth, so he disappears into Robert Monroe&#x27;s timeline. He stays there for a while and discovers that his theoretical knowledge is not helpful with the war efforts. The books and tools that Fisher brought were helpful, but not enough, so he travels to Estelle&#x27;s and Jenkins&#x27; timeline, returning with Jenkins and his blaster. Jenkins explains the blaster&#x27;s functionality and leaves his as a model. Igor is certain that the blaster technology will enable them to win the war.

Frost escorts Jenkins back to Estelle&#x27;s timeline, and he decides to settle there. He plans to spend his time tutoring children and trying to develop a time theory that would explain the experiences of all five students.

== Characters ==
* Dr. Arthur Frost: University professor; instructor for Speculative Metaphysics course.
* Students taking Speculative Metaphysics course:
** Howard Jenkins: Engineering student. He is taking the class solely because of his feelings for Estelle.
** Helen Fisher: Adventurous; interested in gender equality.
** Robert Monroe/Igor:
** Estelle Martin/Star Light:
** Martha Ross: Very religious student. (Missing in the original version.)
* People in the main timeline:
** Izowski: Police sergeant guarding Dr. Frost
** Chief of police
* Prehistory (Helen Fisher&#x27;s travel):
** Old Man: A Neanderthal man who found Helen and took care of her
* The war world (Robert Monroe&#x27;s travel):
** Igor&#x27;s sister Margri, a group commander in the war against aliens

==References==
== External links ==
* Full text of on the Internet Archive (The original 1941 version)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="21" end="36" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="64" end="82" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q182154" start="95" end="106" title="time travel" label="time travel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="111" end="128" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="parallel universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="204" end="230" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808865" start="314" end="336" title="Assignment in Eternity" label="Assignment in Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8609" start="675" end="683" title="hypnosis" label="hypnosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12221140" start="707" end="723" title="Parallel universe (fiction)" label="alternate worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q235113" start="1312" end="1317" title="angel" label="angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="1400" end="1406" title="heaven" label="heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="1601" end="1611" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="1641" end="1652" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="1746" end="1757" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1795" end="1808" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q4440864" start="2010" end="2027" title="spatial dimension" label="spatial dimension"/>
<link wikidata="Q620840" start="2124" end="2136" title="appendectomy" label="appendectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q188215" start="2336" end="2341" title="gnome" label="gnome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447078" start="2511" end="2525" title="Alien invasion" label="space invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q92566" start="3232" end="3244" title="Flash Gordon" label="Flash Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42603" start="3284" end="3290" title="priest" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481679" start="3539" end="3546" title="Blaster (Star Wars)" label="blaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="4524" end="4533" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="4562" end="4573" title="Metaphysics" label="Metaphysics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023" start="4651" end="4662" title="Engineering" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="5315" end="5331" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871356" wikidata="Q107984545" url="?curid=871356" title="Sylheti">
<text>Sylheti may refer to:

* Sylhetis, an Indo-Aryan ethnocultural group in the Sylhet division and South Assam
* Sylheti language, a language of the Sylheti region
* Sylheti Nagri, a writing system of the Sylheti region

==See also==
* Sylhet (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q107984545" start="0" end="7" title="Sylheti" label="Sylheti"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071030" start="25" end="33" title="Sylhetis" label="Sylhetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044560" start="110" end="126" title="Sylheti language" label="Sylheti language"/>
<link wikidata="Q144128" start="163" end="176" title="Sylheti Nagri" label="Sylheti Nagri"/>
<link wikidata="Q304841" start="233" end="256" title="Sylhet (disambiguation)" label="Sylhet (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871358" wikidata="Q5617374" url="?curid=871358" title="Gulf (novella)">
<text>&quot;Gulf&quot; is a science fiction novella by American writer Robert A. Heinlein, originally published as a serial in the November and December 1949 issues of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; and later collected in &quot;Assignment in Eternity&quot;. It concerns a secret society of geniuses who act to protect humanity. The novel &quot;Friday&quot;, written in 1982, was loosely a sequel.

==Story==
The story postulates that humans of superior intelligence band together, and keeping themselves genetically separate, create a new species. In the process they develop into a hidden and benevolent &quot;ruling&quot; class. The story invokes the notions of the General Semantics of Alfred Korzybski and the work of Samuel Renshaw to explain the nature of thought and how people could be trained to think more rapidly and accurately. The material on human intelligence and self-guided evolution is intermixed with a more standard &quot;secret agent&quot; adventure story.

The &quot;nova effect&quot; can initiate a chain reaction that can consume an entire planet. Mrs. Keithley, one of the richest people in the Solar System, wants to use it to blackmail humanity, so she can rule from her home on the Moon.

&quot;Joe&quot; is a secret agent who is tasked with getting the microfilm containing the only documentation of the effect. Returning to Earth, he is captured and finds himself confined with a man who calls himself &quot;Kettle Belly&quot; Baldwin. Using only two packs of playing cards to encode words, they communicate while under observation and plot their escape. Afterward, Baldwin introduces Joe to his group of intellectually superior individuals and trains him in their advanced techniques of thought, even attempting telepathy. Baldwin reveals that he and his group work to keep dangerous science and technology out of the hands of normal humans. The nova effect was discovered by Baldwin and implemented by his own people as part of an attempt to prove it could not be done.

Joe meets Gail, another agent, with whom he falls in love. Baldwin receives a warning that the nova effect is set to be triggered on Earth, but the triggering device is on the Moon. Joe and Gail are sent to disable the trigger so the device on Earth can be neutralized. Gail has to get the remote control from Mrs. Keithley while Joe is charged with disabling the transmitter. The situation becomes desperate. Joe and Gail unexpectedly achieve telepathic rapport. Gail kills Mrs. Keithley, but is trapped with no escape route, while Joe is certain the transmitter is booby trapped. Knowing that they are both about to die, they telepathically recite their own private marriage vows.

==Characters==
One of the story&#x27;s key characters, Gregory &quot;Kettle Belly&quot; Baldwin (also known as Doctor Hartley M. Baldwin), appears as a much older man in the later novel &quot;Friday&quot;, there known mostly as &quot;Boss.&quot; (Boss briefly mentions &quot;Gulf&quot;&#x27;s protagonists Joe and Gail as examples of &quot;honorable hatchet men.&quot;) While the earlier version of the character had strongly argued that smarter people are, and ought to be, separate from the human race in general, Boss appears to categorically deny this premise. However, he prohibits Friday, in his Will, from receiving any inheritance from him if she chooses to emigrate to the planet &quot;Olympia&quot;, which the novel informs us is where the &quot;supermen&quot; went, indicating Baldwin broke from them at some point between the two stories.

The dialogue between the male and female leads, Joe and Gail, is reminiscent of the exchanges between the characters in Heinlein&#x27;s last five novels from 1980 through 1987. Gail is strongly evocative of the powerful, free-spirited female characters from these novels. Joe is quite similar to the more taciturn male heroes such as Zebadiah Carter and Richard Ames from, respectively, &quot;The Number of the Beast&quot; and &quot;The Cat Who Walks Through Walls&quot;.

==Origins==
This story was written for the &quot;time travel&quot; or &quot;prophecy&quot; issue of &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;. The issue was prompted by a letter from a reader (Richard A. Hoen of the University Club in Buffalo, New York) commenting on the stories in an issue, referring to the stories by author and title, and offering his respective praise and derision for those works. The magazine frequently received letters of this kind; however, in this case, the reader described an issue whose cover date was more than a year in the future, November, 1949. Editor John W. Campbell printed the letter in the November, 1948 issue, then set about making the predictions come true by arranging with the authors mentioned to write and submit stories with the given titles. &quot;Gulf&quot;, by Anson MacDonald (a Heinlein pseudonym), was one of the stories involved.

Heinlein has written that he had a different idea for the story originally, but decided that it was too large for a novella and could not be written in the time he had available. The idea later became one of the inspirations for his novel &quot;Stranger in a Strange Land&quot;. For the magazine, he decided that the gulf between man and superman would provide an adequate basis for the title. Since Heinlein was no longer using the MacDonald pseudonym by the time the story was published, it was published under his own name.

==See also==
* Speedtalk, a fictional constructed language spoken by the secret society

==External links==
*&quot;Gulf&quot; parts one and two on the Internet Archive
* Full text of story at Baen Ebooks</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5617374" start="6" end="10" title="Gulf (novella)" label="Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="22" end="37" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="38" end="45" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="65" end="83" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347298" start="111" end="117" title="Serial (literature)" label="serial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339847" start="147" end="151" title="1949 in literature" label="1949"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="168" end="194" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808865" start="230" end="252" title="Assignment in Eternity" label="Assignment in Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="274" end="288" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q185030" start="292" end="298" title="genius" label="genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641639" start="346" end="352" title="Friday (novel)" label="Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q83500" start="455" end="467" title="intelligence" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="541" end="548" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q385166" start="607" end="631" title="ruling class" label="&amp;quot;ruling&amp;quot; class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621039" start="670" end="687" title="General Semantics" label="General Semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q333402" start="691" end="707" title="Alfred Korzybski" label="Alfred Korzybski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3946639" start="724" end="738" title="Samuel Renshaw" label="Samuel Renshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="944" end="956" title="secret agent" label="secret agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641639" start="2881" end="2887" title="Friday (novel)" label="Friday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703133" start="3934" end="3957" title="The Number of the Beast (novel)" label="The Number of the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221113" start="3974" end="4005" title="The Cat Who Walks Through Walls" label="The Cat Who Walks Through Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="4120" end="4146" title="Analog Science Fiction and Fact" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179194" start="4529" end="4539" title="cover date" label="cover date"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="4599" end="4615" title="John W. Campbell" label="John W. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q929821" start="5143" end="5169" title="Stranger in a Strange Land" label="Stranger in a Strange Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q767782" start="5441" end="5450" title="Speedtalk" label="Speedtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="5577" end="5593" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841271" start="5618" end="5629" title="Baen Ebooks" label="Baen Ebooks"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871362" wikidata="Q309736" url="?curid=871362" title="Michelozzo">
<text>Michelozzo di Bartolomeo Michelozzi (; – 7 October 1472), known mononymously as Michelozzo, was an Italian architect and sculptor. Considered one of the great pioneers of architecture during the Renaissance, Michelozzo was a favored Medici architect who was extensively employed by Cosimo de&#x27; Medici. He was a pupil of Lorenzo Ghiberti in his early years, and later collaborated with Donatello.

Known primarily for designing Palazzo Medici Riccardi in Florence, he is often overshadowed by his contemporaries Donatello in sculpture and Brunelleschi in architecture.

==Life==

=== Early life ===
Michelozzo was born in Florence in 1396. He was the son of Bartolomeo di Gherardo Borgognone and Antonia. Borgognone was of French origin and arrived in Florence from Burgundy at an unknown date. Borgognone lived and worked in the Santa Croce quarter of Florence as a tailor, and was made a Florentine citizen on 9 April 1376. Michelozzo had three brothers named Leonardo (b. 1389/90), Zanobi (b. 1391), and Giovanni (b. 1403). By 1391, Michelozzo&#x27;s family had moved to the San Giovanni quarter, where they continued to live throughout his life.

Little is known about Michelozzo&#x27;s childhood, other than that he received a comprehensive education in reading, writing, and arithmetic, and that he began working as a die-engraver for the Florentine mint in 1410. As an engraver, Michelozzo learned how to cast, chase, and gild copper and bronze, two of the metals in which the Medieval and Renaissance goldsmith most commonly worked. He also gained immense precision of hand and a mastery of sculptural design in miniature.

Beginning in the early 1420s, Michelozzo became a member of the Arte dei Maestri di Pietra e Legname, one of the Guilds of Florence that represented the master stonemasons, wood-carvers, and sculptors. He later served as one of the consuls of the Guild in 1430.

Michelozzo&#x27;s father died sometime before 1427, and his mother passed sometime between 1433 and 1442. Michelozzo retained the family residence on Via Larga, which was near the Medici Palace and next door to the humanist Bartolomeo Scala. In addition, Michelozzo possessed a house and garden in S. Domino a Brozzi.

=== Apprenticeships ===
Beginning in 1420, Michelozzo studied under Lorenzo Ghiberti. Michelozzo&#x27;s first projects with Ghiberti was the North Door of the Baptistry between the years 1417 and 1423/4, in which Michelozzo&#x27;s responsibilities &quot;could only have been in the chasing and gilding of the panels, possibly in casting the four late reliefs...and in the frame...Most of his work on the doors is submerged, like that of the other assistants, in the force of Ghiberti&#x27;s design and personality.&quot; From this, Michelozzo learned how to run a closely supervised shop, how to organize it efficiently, how to train and control assistants, and how to deal shrewdly in business and financial affairs. &quot;He was exposed to Ghiberti&#x27;s use of antique motifs, he absorbed Ghiberti&#x27;s ability in juxtaposing antique and Gothic elements, and he was undoubtedly influenced by Ghiberti&#x27;s style and artistic concepts.&quot; While working under Ghiberti, Michelozzo created the statue of the young St. John over the door of the Duomo in Florence, opposite the Baptistery, along with the silver statuette of John the Baptist on the altar-frontal of San Giovanni. In his tax declaration of 1427 Michelozzo calls himself as &quot;in partnership&quot; with Ghiberti.

Under Donatello, Michelozzo assisted in the building of the sacristy of Santa Trinita, where &quot;Ghiberti [had] started to fuse together late-Gothic and antique forms.&quot; Both Donatello and Michelozzo began as sculptors with an uncompromising dedication to antiquity, and this was evident when Donatello enlisted Michelozzo&#x27;s help in the decoration of the tabernacle of St. Louis of Toulouse. Michelozzo also became the partner responsible for the architectural frames of Donatello&#x27;s sculptures such as the funerary monument of Antipope John XXIII. In 1428, together with Donatello, Michelozzo erected an open-air pulpit at an angle of the Cathedral of St. Stephen at Prato, designed for the regular public displays of their famous relic, the Girdle of Thomas (&quot;Sacra Cintola&quot;). Though Donatello is the more well-known of the two, &quot;it would be a mistake to underrate Michelozzo&#x27;s share in the work, for where Donatello appears as the sole designer of architectural ornament his style is quite different. He completely subordinates the architectural setting to his sculpture and makes architecture, so to speak, its handmaid. The beautiful ornamental sculpture in Brunelleschi&#x27;s Sagrestia Vecchia shows how far Donatello would go with his sculpture in order to provide it with an effective frame in the extraordinarily vigorous modelling of the broad, slanting surrounds of his overdoors and medallions.&quot;

== Influences and patronage ==

=== Cosimo dei Medici ===
Few historians have disputed Cosimo&#x27;s close relationship to Michelozzo, who was the Medici architect for nearly forty years. &quot;Michelozzo was more agreeable and accessible to the advice and desires of Cosimo than the turbulent Brunelleschi, and was willing to follow the strong personal tastes of his patron.&quot; Their relationship was best described by Angelo Fabroni in 1789, who said: &quot;Cosimo loved Michelozzo dearly and relied on him, not only because of his natural talents (he considered nobody, not even Brunelleschi, superior in all architectural judgments), but also because of his good qualities and worthy character.&quot;

Michelozzo enjoyed a close relationship to Cosimo dei Medici throughout his life, and according to Giorgio Vasari in &quot;The Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, from Cimabue to Our Times&quot;, was motivated by his great love and fidelity for Cosimo to accompany him into exile in Venice from 1433 to 1434. Historians have cited this as an unparalleled example of esteem between artist and patron. Vasari also claimed that Michelozzo built the library of San Giorgio Monastery in 1434 for Cosimo, though this claim contradicts the original description and documents of the library, which indicate that although the library&#x27;s construction was started by Cosimo, it was largely built under the direction of Medici bank manager Giovanni d&#x27;Orino Lanfredini between 1467 and 1478, which was well after Michelozzo&#x27;s departure from Venice.

The large Palazzo Medici in Florence, built by Cosimo, was designed by him; it is one of the noblest specimens of Italian fifteenth-century architecture, in which the great taste and skill of the architect has combined the delicate lightness of the earlier Italian Gothic with the massive stateliness of the classical style. With great engineering skill Michelozzo shored up, and partly rebuilt, the Palazzo Vecchio, then in a ruinous condition, and added to it many important rooms and staircases. When, in 1437, through Cosimo&#x27;s liberality, the monastery of San Marco at Florence was handed over to the Dominicans of Fiesole, Michelozzo was employed to rebuild the domestic part and remodel the church. For Cosimo he designed numerous other buildings, most of them of noteworthy importance. Among these were a guest-house at Jerusalem for the use of Florentine pilgrims, Cosimo&#x27;s summer villa at Careggi, and the fortified &quot;castello&quot; that he rebuilt from 1452 as the Villa Medicea di Cafaggiolo in Mugello. For Giovanni de&#x27; Medici, Cosimo&#x27;s son, he also built a very large villa at Fiesole. Between 1445 and 1451, he also expanded Villa San Girolamo next to Villa Medici at the behest of Cosimo.

=== Filippo Brunelleschi ===
According to &quot;Architecture in Italy, 1400-1500, Volume 53&quot;, Michelozzo&#x27;s architecture contrasts with Brunelleschi in its closer adherence to the &quot;immediately preceding Gothic tradition, the Gothic classicism which appears in the Loggia dei Lanzi or the monastery of S. Matteo.&quot; Ludwig Heydenreich and Paul Davies argue that all of Michelozzo&#x27;s buildings are &quot;works of considerable standing...the most independent architect after Brunelleschi.&quot;

== Personal life ==
Michelozzo married Francesca, daughter of Piero di Ambrogio Galligari, in late January or February 1441. At the time of their marriage, she was 20 years old, and he was 45. Francesca&#x27;s dowry of 425 florins was about average for an upper-middle-class family at that time. The size of her dowry indicates a considerable rise in Michelozzo&#x27;s social position.

In 1441, Michelozzo launched a legal complaint to remove himself from the responsibility of his two older brothers&#x27; debts. Andrea di Benozo, representative for Giovanni, Zanobi, and Michelozzo, elected arbitrators to weigh the complaints. After studying documents and proofs for six weeks, the arbitrators found that the two brothers were the cause behind most of Michelozzo&#x27;s debts, and they were required to relinquish their inheritance in partial compensation for the amounts they owed.

=== Children ===
Four boys and three girls resulted from Michelozzo&#x27;s marriage to Francesca, of whom five survived their father. Bartolomeo, who became a sculptor, was born in 1442; Piero in 1443; Antonia in 1445; Niccolo in 1447; Marietta in 1453; Bernardo in 1455; and Lisabetta in 1459.

Two of his sons, Niccolò and Bernardo, were partially educated by the Medici and may have lived in the Palazzo Medici during their youth. They later achieved success in the highest humanistic circles of Florence.

Bernardo became a member of the household of Lorenzo il Magnifico as the tutor of Piero de Medici. In 1500, he was made a Florentine canon and was employed by Giovanni de Medici, first as his Chamberlain and then as his Secretary and Referendary.

Like Bernardo, Niccolò studied with Ficino from a young age and took part in the Platonic Academy, where he formed friendships with other Florentine humanists who shared his love for antiquity. He excelled in literature and philosophy, and he later became secretary to Piero di Cosimo and continued in the post under Piero di Lorenzo. In 1469, Niccolò began his political career as a notary in the Florentine Cancelleria, and he was often sent on important missions as ambassador for the Florentine Republic between 1489 and 1494. Following the downfall of the Medici, he was imprisoned for a brief time before clearing his name in 1496 and becoming the precounsel of the Arte dei Giucidi e notai and later succeeded Niccolò Machiavelli as the Second Chancellor of the Republic in 1513.

== Works ==

=== Palazzo Medici ===
When Cosimo began building the Palazzo Medici in 1444, he passed over Brunelleschi and gave his preference to Michelozzo. Like the exterior of the Palazzo Comunale in Montefiascone, that of the Palazzo Medici follows the tradition of the Tuscan late-medieval palazzo, but without the more eye-catching symbols of civic power, which would have been incompatible with Cosimo&#x27;s role as &quot;primus inter pares&quot; and &quot;pater patriae&quot;. The palazzo&#x27;s exterior is not articulated by Vitruvian orders, and its big arches of its ground floor are not aligned with the windows of the upper stories. Instead, Michelozzo focused on the contrast between surface textures, such as the contrast between &quot;the natural rustication of the ground floor, the flat ashlared courses of the &quot;piano nobile&quot; and the smooth masonry of the upper storey.&quot; The exterior also differs from the palazzo in Montepulciano in its size, its more urbane character, and its massive classicizing cornice. &quot;In its succession of dentils, egg-and-dart and consoles, Michelozzo directly followed the Temple of Serapis in Rome.&quot;

Brunelleschi&#x27;s influence on Michelozzo is evident in the palazzo&#x27;s design, especially in the late-medieval bifora windows, the symmetry and the dominance of the entrance axis, and the combination of traditional and progressive elements. The arcades and entablature of the palazzo&#x27;s courtyard also follows the model of the loggia of the Spedale degli Innocenti, which is symptomatically Brunelleschi&#x27;s earliest and most un-Vitruvian building.

One of Michelozzo&#x27;s most well-known architectural projects, the palace led to the development of a new architectural type: the Florentine Renaissance palace. Among the many Michelozzo innovations on the facade, the most notable include: &quot;the use of bugnato digradante (large unevenly-cut stones which grow lighter as they ascend on the upper stories), the classical columns and fluted capitals in the bifore windows, the great classical cornice crowning the building and the small ones dividing the stories, the massive rectangular proportions of the block of square, and the regularity of the disposition of the windows, which, however, are asymmetrical in regard to the doors.&quot;

=== San Marco ===

The fundamental basis of all monastic compounds built by architects during the Renaissance, this was one of Michelozzo&#x27;s first and most influential architectural projects in Florence. Constructed at the expense of Cosimo dei Medici, the project began sometime between the years 1437 and 1438. Reconstruction included the church, sacristy, cloister, monastic living quarters, and the library. San Marco has been called the first Renaissance church, though it seems to be a compromise between the Trecento tradition and the Renaissance spirit. The plain white walls without frescos differ from the coloristic tradition of the Trecento and were essential to Michelozzo&#x27;s architectural concepts and preference for large, unadorned surfaces, subtly articulated by necessary structural members in grey pietra serena. Like many of his projects, San Marco was constructed with incredible rapidity. Unlike Brunelleschi, Michelozzo was able to finish what he started, largely due to Michelozzo&#x27;s efficiency and due to the availability of adequate financing from Cosimo throughout the campaign.

The first part undertaken by Michelozzo was &quot;the rebuilding of the old refectory, where a low vault, supported by consoles much like those in the sacristy at S. Trinita, was built to sustain the cells above. Work began on the church in 1438 and was probably completed three years later, though certainly by 1443 when it was consecrated by Pope Eugene. Using the perimeter of the former Trecento church, Michelozzo added a polygonal apse, similar in form to that at Bosco ai Frati; it was lighted by three long round arch pietra serena windows which can still be seen in the upper story of the convent. The pointed entrance arch rested on two pilasters with large, classical Corinthian capitals surmounted by a dado decorated with the Medici balls (also still visible). In front of the apse was the Capella Maggiore, covered with groin vaulting. The nave was a single open space without aisles, adorned with ediculas or altars (three on each side), and covered with a wooden beamed ceiling. Separating the nave and the Cappella Maggiore was a high wall (tramezzo) with two doors. In the later remodelling of the church, the wall was removed and the doors were transferred to the polygonal apse where they are now located. Their fluted pilasters are crowned with composite capitals identical to those in the Barbadori Chapel in S. Felicita by Brunelleschi, and above the architrave with classical mouldings, the frieze is decorated, like the capitals at Bosco ai Frati, with the Medici balls.&quot;

=== Choir of the Santissima Annunziata ===
Commissioned by Lodovico Gonzaga, lord of Mantua and general of the Florentine troops, the choir was created in commemoration of Gonzaga&#x27;s father and &quot;for the celebration of masses for his soul.&quot; Cosimo had already commissioned Michelozzo with the construction of the church&#x27;s vestibulum and atrium in order to continue Brunelleschi&#x27;s idea of a forum &quot;all&#x27;antica&quot;. In designing the Santissima Annunziata, Michelozzo followed the model of the Minerva Medica in Rome, making the inner plan round, creating a dome that was as hemispheric the Pantheon, and detailing it with a ten-sided exterior with deep, over-semicircular chapels. He also opted for a drum and a dome without ribs. Though the Santissima Annunziata was Michelozzo&#x27;s attempt to surpass Brunelleschi on his ground, &quot;a comparison of the two ground plans suffices to show how utterly superior Brunelleschi&#x27;s is.&quot;

=== Santa Croce ===
In the May 1966 issue of &quot;The Burlington Magazine&quot;, Howard Saalman wrote that &quot;the language of the details of the Ex-Dormitory and the Ex-Library wing points to Michelozzo. If Vasari is right and Michelozzo &quot;did&quot; work at Santa Croce (and there is no reason to doubt it in spite of the lack of documentation) then Michelozzo and his circle probably handled the entire operation as at San Marco, SS. Annunziata and elsewhere.&quot;

Michelozzo added various parts to the church and cloister of Santa Croce, including &quot;the loggia in front of the Ex-Dormitory and Library (octagonal columns with &quot;foglie d&#x27;acqua&quot; capitals) which originally extended across the cloister to the elevated loggia on the south side of the church, running along the eastern flank of the San Giuliano (Mellini) Chapel...which divided the first cloister into two parts before its destruction in the nineteenth century.&quot; Additionally, the Cerchi Chapel on &quot;the ground floor of the Ex-Library wing at the end adjacent to the Ex-Refectory is evidently inserted into older peripheral walls which survived the 1423 fire. The language of the details (pilasters flanking the opening into the little square choir, capitals of the lunette vaults of the hall in front of the choir - which overlap older windows in the side walls) is that of the Michelozzo circle.&quot;

=== Other notable works ===
From 1461 through 1464, he constructed the Walls of Ston in Ragusa, the largest medieval wall in Europe.

==Death and legacy==

In spite of Vasari&#x27;s statement that he died at the age of sixty-eight, he appears to have lived until 1472. He is buried in the monastery of San Marco, Florence.

One of the most influential, yet unknown, architects of the Early Renaissance, Michelozzo&#x27;s designs paved the way for the rapid development of the Central Italian Palazzo type. He developed the aisleless church and became the pioneer of a plan-type of sacred building, which is the most important in modern times. He transformed secular building and his adaptability in use of traditional forms enabled him to evolve good compromise solutions for distant regions, such as Lombardy and Dalmatia.

In his careful treatment of architectural ornament, &quot;Michelozzo was able to adopt ideas and turn them to good account as well as to transmit new ones. The styles of Manetti, Bernardo Rossellino, Giuliano da Maiano, and even of Giuliano da Sangallo are unimaginable without the support and influence of Michelozzo&#x27;s artistic idiom in addition to that of Brunelleschi, and later, of Donatello.&quot;

==See also==
*Tomb of Antipope John XXIII
*Tomb of Cardinal Rainaldo Brancacci
*Walls of Dubrovnik
*Palazzo dello Strozzino
*San Girolamo, Volterra
*Villa San Girolamo

==References==

==Further reading==
* Caplow, Harriet McNeal. &quot;Michelozzo&quot;, 2 vols. New York: Garland, 1977.
* Ferrara, Miranda, and Francesco Quinterio. &quot;Michelozzo di Bartolomeo&quot;. Florence: Salimbeni, 1984.
* Lightbown, Ronald W. &quot;Donatello and Michelozzo: an artistic partnership and its patrons in the early Renaissance&quot;. London: H. Miller, 1980.
* &quot;Michelozzo: scultore e architetto (1396–1472)&quot;. Florence: Centro Di, 1997.
* Carchio, Maria, and Roberto Manescalchi, &quot;La scoperta di un Michelozzo inedito: una scala dimenticata nel convento dell’Annunziata&quot;, Firenze: Ananke n°43, September 2004.

==External links==

*&quot;The Gubbio Studiolo and its conservation, volumes 1 &amp; 2&quot;, from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Michelozzo (see index)
* Firenze by Net
* Artist Biography site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q309736" start="0" end="35" title="Michelozzo" label="Michelozzo di Bartolomeo Michelozzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985549" start="64" end="71" title="mononym" label="mononym"/>
<link wikidata="Q309736" start="80" end="90" title="Michelozzo" label="Michelozzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="107" end="116" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="121" end="129" title="sculpture" label="sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="195" end="206" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q170022" start="233" end="239" title="House of Medici" label="Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q48544" start="282" end="304" title="Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q208125" start="324" end="340" title="Lorenzo Ghiberti" label="Lorenzo Ghiberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="389" end="398" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q911047" start="431" end="454" title="Palazzo Medici Riccardi" label="Palazzo Medici Riccardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="458" end="466" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="515" end="524" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="542" end="554" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044" start="625" end="633" title="Florence" label="Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173" start="769" end="777" title="Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q464780" start="1348" end="1363" title="Mint (facility)" label="Florentine mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1487" end="1495" title="Middle Ages" label="Medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692" start="1500" end="1511" title="Renaissance" label="Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2864845" start="1699" end="1735" title="Arte dei Maestri di Pietra e Legname" label="Arte dei Maestri di Pietra e Legname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049090" start="2048" end="2057" title="Via Camillo Cavour" label="Via Larga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3635458" start="2122" end="2138" title="Bartolomeo Scala" label="Bartolomeo Scala"/>
<link wikidata="Q208125" start="2285" end="2301" title="Lorenzo Ghiberti" label="Lorenzo Ghiberti"/>
<link wikidata="Q191739" start="3269" end="3274" title="Santa Maria del Fiore" label="Duomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q732511" start="3301" end="3311" title="Baptistery (Florence)" label="Baptistery"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="3348" end="3364" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q37562" start="3511" end="3520" title="Donatello" label="Donatello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062114" start="3577" end="3590" title="Santa Trinita" label="Santa Trinita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3947514" start="3885" end="3906" title="Saint Louis of Toulouse (Donatello)" label="St. Louis of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q294599" start="4048" end="4067" title="Antipope John XXIII" label="Antipope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236622" start="4160" end="4184" title="cathedral of St. Stephen, Prato" label="Cathedral of St. Stephen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13377" start="4188" end="4193" title="Prato" label="Prato"/>
<link wikidata="Q187616" start="4252" end="4257" title="relic" label="relic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3461031" start="4263" end="4279" title="Girdle of Thomas" label="Girdle of Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q578805" start="4723" end="4740" title="Sagrestia Vecchia" label="Sagrestia Vecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48544" start="5707" end="5724" title="Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Cosimo dei Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="5763" end="5777" title="Giorgio Vasari" label="Giorgio Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645493" start="5787" end="5881" title="Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects" label="The Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, from Cimabue to Our Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320338" start="6150" end="6171" title="San Giorgio Monastery" label="San Giorgio Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q911047" start="6554" end="6568" title="Palazzo Medici" label="Palazzo Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="6809" end="6815" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q271928" start="6944" end="6959" title="Palazzo Vecchio" label="Palazzo Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="7154" end="7164" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q82670" start="7168" end="7175" title="Fiesole" label="Fiesole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="7376" end="7385" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q368346" start="7443" end="7459" title="Villa Medici at Careggi" label="villa at Careggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1808591" start="7533" end="7560" title="Villa Medicea di Cafaggiolo" label="Villa Medicea di Cafaggiolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q283034" start="7564" end="7571" title="Mugello region" label="Mugello"/>
<link wikidata="Q981561" start="7577" end="7601" title="Giovanni di Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Giovanni de&amp;#x27; Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q206365" start="7649" end="7665" title="Villa Medici in Fiesole" label="villa at Fiesole"/>
<link wikidata="Q3670573" start="7707" end="7725" title="Church of San Girolamo" label="Villa San Girolamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q206365" start="7734" end="7746" title="Villa Medici in Fiesole" label="Villa Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q177854" start="9730" end="9750" title="Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Lorenzo il Magnifico"/>
<link wikidata="Q299663" start="9767" end="9782" title="Piero di Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Piero de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q49237" start="9844" end="9862" title="Pope Leo X" label="Giovanni de Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q192374" start="9969" end="9975" title="Marsilio Ficino" label="Ficino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579791" start="10014" end="10030" title="Platonic Academy (Florence)" label="Platonic Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q299663" start="10202" end="10217" title="Piero di Cosimo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Piero di Cosimo"/>
<link wikidata="Q262212" start="10250" end="10266" title="Piero di Lorenzo de&amp;#x27; Medici" label="Piero di Lorenzo"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10605" end="10629" title=":it:Arte dei Giudici e Notai" label="Arte dei Giucidi e notai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399" start="10650" end="10669" title="Niccolò Machiavelli" label="Niccolò Machiavelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q911047" start="10788" end="10802" title="Palazzo Medici Riccardi" label="Palazzo Medici"/>
<link wikidata="Q174330" start="10827" end="10839" title="Filippo Brunelleschi" label="Brunelleschi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3889916" start="10904" end="10920" title="Palazzo Comunale, San Gimignano" label="Palazzo Comunale"/>
<link wikidata="Q176142" start="10924" end="10937" title="Montefiascone" label="Montefiascone"/>
<link wikidata="Q91217" start="11673" end="11686" title="Montepulciano" label="Montepulciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q281132" start="11861" end="11878" title="Temple of Serapis" label="Temple of Serapis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291476" start="12012" end="12018" title="Bifora (architecture)" label="bifora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257947" start="12246" end="12269" title="Ospedale degli Innocenti" label="Spedale degli Innocenti"/>
<link wikidata="Q13453381" start="13470" end="13479" title="San Marco, Florence" label="San Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388051" start="13879" end="13892" title="pietra serena" label="pietra serena"/>
<link wikidata="Q167561" start="14517" end="14528" title="Pope Eugene IV" label="Pope Eugene"/>
<link wikidata="Q969770" start="15735" end="15751" title="Ludovico III Gonzaga, Marquis of Mantua" label="Lodovico Gonzaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411575" start="16201" end="16215" title="Temple of Minerva Medica (nymphaeum)" label="Minerva Medica"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="16219" end="16223" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q99309" start="16298" end="16306" title="Pantheon, Rome" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434339" start="18131" end="18144" title="Walls of Ston" label="Walls of Ston"/>
<link wikidata="Q208169" start="18148" end="18154" title="Republic of Ragusa" label="Ragusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q128027" start="18228" end="18234" title="Vasari" label="Vasari"/>
<link wikidata="Q13453381" start="18362" end="18371" title="San Marco, Florence" label="San Marco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133779" start="18444" end="18461" title="Early Renaissance" label="Early Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210" start="18861" end="18869" title="Lombardy" label="Lombardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q528042" start="18874" end="18882" title="Dalmatia" label="Dalmatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280593" start="19308" end="19335" title="Tomb of Antipope John XXIII" label="Tomb of Antipope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635998" start="19337" end="19372" title="Tomb of Cardinal Rainaldo Brancacci" label="Tomb of Cardinal Rainaldo Brancacci"/>
<link wikidata="Q931733" start="19374" end="19392" title="Walls of Dubrovnik" label="Walls of Dubrovnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q514448" start="19394" end="19417" title="Palazzo dello Strozzino" label="Palazzo dello Strozzino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689562" start="19419" end="19441" title="San Girolamo, Volterra" label="San Girolamo, Volterra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3670573" start="19443" end="19461" title="Church of San Girolamo" label="Villa San Girolamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18935179" start="19694" end="19714" title="Ronald Lightbown" label="Lightbown, Ronald W."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871363" wikidata="Q5614408" url="?curid=871363" title="Ronald McNeill, 1st Baron Cushendun">
<text>Ronald John McNeill, 1st Baron Cushendun, PC (30 April 1861 – 12 October 1934), was a British Conservative politician and writer.

==Background and education==
McNeill was born in Torquay. He was the son of Edmund McNeill, DL, JP and Sheriff of County Antrim, and his wife Mary (née Miller). He was educated at Harrow and Christ Church, Oxford, graduating in 1886. McNeill was called to the bar in 1888 and started work as editor of &quot;The St James&#x27;s Gazette&quot; (1900–04), as well as assistant editor of the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; (1906–10).

==Political career==
Having unsuccessfully contested the seats of West Aberdeenshire (1906), Aberdeen South (1907 and Jan. 1910) and Kirkcudbrightshire (Dec. 1910), McNeill was elected as Unionist Member of Parliament for the St Augustine&#x27;s division of Kent in 1911. Seven years later he became representative for Canterbury and in 1922 was appointed Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, a post he held, with a short interval for the first Labour Government of 1924, until 1925.

After serving as Financial Secretary to the Treasury for two years, McNeill was made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster with a seat in the cabinet in 1927. The same year he was also sworn of the Privy Council and, in November 1927, raised to the peerage as Baron Cushendun of Cushendun in the County of Antrim. Acting Foreign Secretary in 1928 and twice chief British representative to the League of Nations, Lord Cushendun signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact in August that year. He retired from office in 1929.

==Cushendun and Glenmona House==

From 1910, McNeill resided, when not in London, at Glenmona House in Cushendun, the coastal village in the Glens of Antrim in County Antrim from which he later took his title. He was burnt out of the house in 1922, having a replacement built that was designed by Clough Williams-Ellis. The village also contains buildings designed by Williams-Ellis, built in memory of Lord Cushendun&#x27;s Cornish wife, Maud, who died in 1925.

==Family==
In 1884, the future Lord Cushendun married Elizabeth Maud Bolitho (sister of William Bolitho), a Cornishwoman and Christian Scientist. They had three daughters: Esther Rose, Loveday Violet, and Mary Morvenna Bolitho (who married Major Philip Le Grand Gribble, military correspondent and memoirist). After Elizabeth&#x27;s death in 1925 he married Catherine Sydney Louisa Margesson in 1930. She survived him, dying in 1939. Lord Cushendun died in Cushendun in October 1934, aged 73, when the barony became extinct.

==References==
== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5614408" start="0" end="40" title="Ronald McNeill, 1st Baron Cushendun" label="Ronald John McNeill, 1st Baron Cushendun"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="42" end="44" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="94" end="106" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q209055" start="180" end="187" title="Torquay" label="Torquay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3023512" start="223" end="225" title="Deputy Lieutenant" label="DL"/>
<link wikidata="Q329455" start="227" end="229" title="Justice of the Peace" label="JP"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="245" end="258" title="County Antrim" label="County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247373" start="311" end="317" title="Harrow School" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q745967" start="322" end="343" title="Christ Church, Oxford" label="Christ Church, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1865205" start="391" end="394" title="Bar association" label="bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593471" start="443" end="466" title="St James&amp;#x27;s Gazette" label="St James&amp;#x27;s Gazette"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="525" end="548" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984229" start="633" end="651" title="West Aberdeenshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="West Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q299997" start="660" end="674" title="Aberdeen South (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Aberdeen South"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821086" start="676" end="680" title="1907 Aberdeen South by-election" label="1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q6415634" start="700" end="718" title="Kirkcudbrightshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Kirkcudbrightshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917892" start="744" end="751" title="1911 St Augustine&amp;#x27;s by-election" label="elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="755" end="763" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Unionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592531" start="793" end="812" title="St Augustine&amp;#x27;s (UK Parliament constituency)" label="St Augustine&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="825" end="829" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070055" start="886" end="896" title="Canterbury (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883047" start="923" end="967" title="Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs" label="Under-Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5453246" start="1021" end="1046" title="Labour Government 1924" label="Labour Government of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449647" start="1078" end="1113" title="Financial Secretary to the Treasury" label="Financial Secretary to the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q162754" start="1146" end="1182" title="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" label="Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1258" end="1271" title="Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Most Honourable Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q641920" start="1339" end="1348" title="Cushendun" label="Cushendun"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="1356" end="1372" title="County Antrim" label="County of Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="1381" end="1398" title="Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="1453" end="1470" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q205073" start="1498" end="1517" title="Kellogg-Briand Pact" label="Kellogg-Briand Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q641920" start="1675" end="1684" title="Cushendun" label="Cushendun"/>
<link wikidata="Q912837" start="1713" end="1728" title="Glens of Antrim" label="Glens of Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q189592" start="1732" end="1745" title="County Antrim" label="County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840051" start="1789" end="1819" title="Destruction of Irish country houses (1919–1923)" label="burnt out of the house in 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230582" start="1869" end="1890" title="Clough Williams-Ellis" label="Clough Williams-Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="1997" end="2004" title="Cornish people" label="Cornish"/>
<link wikidata="Q66545558" start="2124" end="2139" title="William Bolitho (cricketer)" label="William Bolitho"/>
<link wikidata="Q222175" start="2144" end="2156" title="Cornish people" label="Cornishwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567154" start="2161" end="2180" title="Christian Scientist" label="Christian Scientist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871365" wikidata="Q6684135" url="?curid=871365" title="Lost Legacy">
<text>Lost Legacy (1941) is a novella by science fiction writer Robert A. Heinlein. Originally published in the November 1941 issue of &quot;Super Science Stories&quot;, it was collected in the book &quot;Assignment in Eternity&quot; (1953).

The novella is an exploration of the possibilities that humans, with the proper training, have the potential to make use of a wide range of telepathic and telekinetic abilities. It is based on the presumption that most, if not all, humans have innate psychic abilities, but simply do not know it and therefore do not make use of them. This ignorance is encouraged by a mysterious and powerful cabal which benefits from keeping people unaware of their abilities.

==Plot summary==
No date is given for the events, but they are in &quot;a near future America&quot; from the publishing date of 1941. Europe and Asia have suffered a &quot;collapse&quot; and the only significant technological advances mentioned are Picturephones and a &quot;pocketphone&quot;. 

The story begins with the rediscovery of innate human psychic powers by three friends, all from a California university: Joan a grad student; Ben, a surgeon and instructor at the medical school; and Phil a psychology professor. There are attempts by a corrupt elite to silence their discoveries, so they take a road trip to cool off and talk things over.

The road trip lands them near Mount Shasta around nightfall. In their tent, Joan declares that she wants to hike around the mountain the following day. Ben and Phil gallantly refuse to let her do so alone. After a good day hiking, Phil falls over a fern and breaks his fibula. He is rescued by Ambrose Bierce, the famous writer who disappeared and was declared dead in 1913 at age 71–72. This fictional Bierce is now over 100 years old but is as strong and robust as an outdoorsy fortysomething. This story&#x27;s Bierce says he dropped out of society because he saw WWI and other troubles coming. Bierce causes Phil&#x27;s fibula to heal overnight via hypnosis.

Bierce is revealed as one of a group of individuals who have developed their telepathic powers and all now live in secrecy on Mount Shasta in an elaborate cave structure. The caves are over 100 meters long with generous side rooms including a library filled with powerful ancient knowledge. The caves were discovered in modern times around 1782 by Junípero Serra two years before Serra &quot;surrendered his soul to rest&quot;. The caves were then known to local First Nations people who showed them to Serra only after he swore an oath that he was a medicine man. 

The current residents of the caves have learned to tap into an inner power that is a lot like The Force in &quot;Star Wars&quot; with less focus on fighting and more focus on art. Unlike Luke Skywalker whose talent with The Force seems to be a family trait, the abilities suggested in &quot;Lost Legacy&quot; are supposed to be in every human, needing only instruction and practice to master.

The people living in the cave claim that Mark Twain was one of them, as well as Walt Whitman and Oliver Wendell Holmes. As part of their program to protect America as a bastion of freedom they also invited Abraham Lincoln to join. 
According to records found by the good adepts, humanity reached a high level of development in a Golden Age, but when their leaders decide to move on to a new plane of existence, a sub group decided to stay behind and use their skills to become dominant. After a great war humanity was thrown back to a Stone Age, there to start over.

After rescue by Bierce the three main characters are introduced to the residents of the cave and after a few weeks are invited to stay and receive further training. They accept. They then begin to spread information on how to use these psychic powers, particularly training Boy Scouts. After the evil cabal tries to stop them, battles occur between the two groups with the good adepts emerging victorious. 

The story ends with a lyrical description of an empty Earth, since the human race has now evolved to a new plane of existence. An ape is beginning the long climb of his species to intelligence and psychic ability.

==Characters==
* Dr. Philip Huxley: Professor of Psychology at Western University.
* Dr. Ben Coburn: Neurosurgeon at Western University.
* Joan Freeman: Student of Psychology at Western University.
* Dr. Brinckley: President of Western University.
* Residents of Mt. Shasta
** Ambrose Bierce
** Charles: Painter.
** Mrs. Draper: Mood composer.
** Ephraim Howe: &quot;Senior&quot; of the council of elders.
** Master Ling
* Ferguson: D.A. office representative.
* Senator Moulton
* Arthurson
* Agnes: Televangelist.
* Weems
* Hanson
* Chief
* Brother Artemis: Televangelist.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="24" end="31" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="35" end="50" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="58" end="76" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7642742" start="135" end="156" title="Super Science Stories" label="Super Science Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808865" start="199" end="221" title="Assignment in Eternity" label="Assignment in Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="377" end="387" title="telepathic" label="telepathic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="392" end="403" title="telekinetic" label="telekinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917466" start="488" end="495" title="psychic" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871041" start="949" end="961" title="Picturephone" label="Picturephone"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="1050" end="1057" title="parapsychology" label="psychic"/>
<link wikidata="Q748355" start="1382" end="1394" title="Mount Shasta" label="Mount Shasta"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="1621" end="1627" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q191050" start="1646" end="1660" title="Ambrose Bierce" label="Ambrose Bierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="2364" end="2378" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q266750" start="2567" end="2579" title="medicine man" label="medicine man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093766" start="2677" end="2686" title="The Force" label="The Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="2696" end="2705" title="Star Wars" label="Star Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51746" start="2770" end="2784" title="Luke Skywalker" label="Luke Skywalker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="3018" end="3028" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="3057" end="3069" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="3074" end="3095" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="3183" end="3198" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q238526" start="3306" end="3316" title="Golden Age" label="Golden Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q247700" start="3368" end="3386" title="plane of existence" label="plane of existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q11759" start="3512" end="3521" title="Stone Age" label="Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q872181" start="3819" end="3829" title="Scouting" label="Boy Scouts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191050" start="4445" end="4459" title="Ambrose Bierce" label="Ambrose Bierce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871369" wikidata="Q6184613" url="?curid=871369" title="Jerry Was a Man">
<text>&quot;Jerry Was a Man&quot; (1947) is a short story by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It is about an attempt by a genetically modified chimpanzee to achieve human rights. The main theme of the story is civil liberties, in this case extended towards a group of genetically enhanced chimpanzees to allow them equal rights under the law.

The story was originally published in &quot;Thrilling Wonder Stories&quot;, October 1947, and is collected in the book &quot;Assignment in Eternity&quot;.

==TV version==
&quot;Jerry Was a Man&quot; was adapted for television and aired as part of the anthology series &quot;Masters of Science Fiction&quot;, on U.S. network ABC during the summer of 2007. The episode was filmed in Vancouver, Canada at Simon Fraser University. 

The TV version has manufactured &quot;anthropoid workers&quot;, produced through a combination of biological growth and engineering, ready made with some innate abilities and training to perform their allotted tasks. When the so-called &quot;Joes&quot; wore out or their jobs were completed, they were recycled into products such as dogfood.

Heinlein&#x27;s original work depicted Jerry as an aging domestic worker, whereas the television version depicted Jerry as an explosive ordnance disposal technician or &quot;minesweeper&quot;. In it, Jerry demonstrates his humanity to the court by singing the song &quot;Old Folks at Home (Swanee River)&quot;, an old slave ballad, in front of the jury. In the TV version, Jerry&#x27;s level of self-awareness is minimal, but his lawyer demonstrates his humanity through three traits: first, his fondness for singing &quot;Jingle Bells&quot;; second, his ability to tell a lie in order to obtain a cigarette; third (and most significant) his sense of self-preservation, which is demonstrated through video footage of Jerry cutting away from where a mine is so a fellow minesweeper gets blown up instead.

==See also==

*&quot;Les Animaux dénaturés&quot; by Jean Bruller.
*Monkey selfie
*Great ape personhood

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6184613" start="6" end="21" title="Jerry Was a Man" label="Jerry Was a Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q49084" start="40" end="51" title="short story" label="short story"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="71" end="89" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q159236" start="119" end="139" title="genetically modified" label="genetically modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q4126704" start="140" end="150" title="Common chimpanzee" label="chimpanzee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="162" end="174" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="207" end="222" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416790" start="312" end="324" title="Social equality" label="equal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2706756" start="385" end="409" title="Thrilling Wonder Stories" label="Thrilling Wonder Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808865" start="466" end="488" title="Assignment in Eternity" label="Assignment in Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q973399" start="615" end="641" title="Masters of Science Fiction" label="Masters of Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="665" end="668" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q834609" start="1384" end="1416" title="Old Folks at Home" label="Old Folks at Home (Swanee River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230575" start="1939" end="1960" title="Les Animaux dénaturés" label="Les Animaux dénaturés"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1985" end="1998" title="Animal-made art#.22Monkey selfie.22 case" label="Monkey selfie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600327" start="2000" end="2020" title="Great ape personhood" label="Great ape personhood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871371" wikidata="Q1138378" url="?curid=871371" title="Hollywood Hills">
<text>The Hollywood Hills is a residential neighborhood in the central region of Los Angeles, California. It borders Studio City, Universal City and Burbank on the north, Griffith Park on the north and east, Los Feliz on the southeast, Hollywood on the south and Hollywood Hills West on the west. It includes Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery, the Hollywood Reservoir, the Hollywood Sign, the Hollywood Bowl and the John Anson Ford Theater.

==Geography==
The Hollywood Hills straddle the Cahuenga Pass within the Santa Monica Mountains. It is bisected southeast–northwest by US 101. The neighborhood is bounded on the northwest and north by the Los Angeles city line, on the east by a fireroad through Griffith Park, continuing on Western Avenue, on the south by Franklin Avenue and on the west by an irregular line that includes Outpost Drive.

Bedrock of the Hills is a complex association of granitic and metamorphic rock plus interbedded sandstone and shale on which brown loamy soil, often shallow and with abundant stones, has developed.

==Neighborhoods==

Hollywood Hills comprises several neighborhoods:

*Laurel Canyon (incl. Mount Olympus)
*Beachwood Canyon
*The Bird Streets
*Cahuenga Pass
* Franklin Village
*Hollywood Dell
* Hollywood Heights
* Hollywoodland
*Outpost Estates
*Whitley Heights
==Demographics==

According to the 2000 U.S. census, 21,588 people lived in the neighborhood&#x27;s 7.05 square miles, averaging 3,063 people per square mile. It is among the lowest population densities in the city and county. The population was estimated at 22,988 in 2008. The median age for residents was 37, considered old for the city and the county. The percentages of residents aged 19 to 64 were among the county&#x27;s highest.

The neighborhood has a diversity index of 0.433, and the percentage of Non-Hispanic Whites is 74.1%. Latinos make up 9.4%, Asians are at 6.7%, African American at 4.6% and others at 5.3%. In 2000, Mexico (7.9%) and the United Kingdom (7.8%) were the most common places of birth for the 22.8% of the residents who were born abroad, which was considered a low percentage of foreign-born when compared with the city or county as a whole.

The median household income in 2008 dollars was $69,277, considered high for the city but about average for the county. The percentage of households earning $125,000 or more was high, compared to the county at large. The average household size of 1.8 people was relatively low. Renters occupied 56.5% of the housing units, and homeowners the rest.

In 2000, there were 270 families headed by single parents, or 6.9%, a rate that was low in both the county and the city.

==Arts and culture==

The neighborhood of Hollywood Hills includes the Hollywood Bowl and Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills) as well as three private and two public schools. The neighborhood includes:

* The John Anson Ford Amphitheatre
* A portion of Griffith Park, including Hollywoodland Camp
*Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery

==Education==

In 2000, 54.8% of residents aged 25 and older held a four-year degree, considered high when compared with the city and the county as a whole.

There are five secondary or elementary schools within the neighborhood&#x27;s boundaries:

* Immaculate Heart High and Middle School, private, 5515 Franklin Avenue
* Valley View Elementary School, LAUSD, 6921 Woodrow Wilson Drive
* The Neilson Academy, private, 2528 Canyon Drive
* Cheremoya Avenue Elementary School, LAUSD, 6017 Franklin Avenue
* The Oaks, private elementary, 6817 Franklin Avenue

The American Film Institute is at 2021 North Western Avenue.

==Notable people==

==See also==

* Lloyd G. Davies, Los Angeles City Council member, 1943–51, active against gravel extraction in the hills
* P-22, a mountain lion known to reside in the Hollywood Hills

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1138378" start="4" end="19" title="Hollywood Hills" label="Hollywood Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191180" start="57" end="71" title="Central Los Angeles" label="central region"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="75" end="86" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143067" start="111" end="122" title="Studio City, California" label="Studio City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376480" start="124" end="138" title="Universal City, California" label="Universal City"/>
<link wikidata="Q39561" start="143" end="150" title="Burbank, California" label="Burbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340614" start="165" end="178" title="Griffith Park" label="Griffith Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682727" start="202" end="211" title="Los Feliz, Los Angeles" label="Los Feliz"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="230" end="239" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995694" start="257" end="277" title="Hollywood Hills West" label="Hollywood Hills West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302545" start="303" end="328" title="Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills)" label="Forest Lawn Memorial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923684" start="330" end="364" title="Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882896" start="370" end="389" title="Hollywood Reservoir" label="Hollywood Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q180376" start="395" end="409" title="Hollywood Sign" label="Hollywood Sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q976218" start="415" end="429" title="Hollywood Bowl" label="Hollywood Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219159" start="438" end="461" title="John Anson Ford Amphitheatre" label="John Anson Ford Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982040" start="511" end="524" title="Cahuenga Pass" label="Cahuenga Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229470" start="536" end="558" title="Santa Monica Mountains" label="Santa Monica Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q400444" start="598" end="604" title="U.S. Route 101 in California" label="US 101"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308569" start="680" end="689" title="city limits" label="city line"/>
<link wikidata="Q898256" start="708" end="716" title="fireroad" label="fireroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987603" start="754" end="768" title="Western Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Western Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q938144" start="786" end="801" title="Franklin Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Franklin Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995951" start="918" end="926" title="granitic" label="granitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q47069" start="931" end="942" title="metamorphic" label="metamorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="965" end="974" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q751300" start="979" end="984" title="shale" label="shale"/>
<link wikidata="Q462539" start="1138" end="1151" title="Laurel Canyon, Los Angeles" label="Laurel Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922581" start="1159" end="1172" title="Mount Olympus, Los Angeles" label="Mount Olympus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875891" start="1175" end="1191" title="Beachwood Canyon, Los Angeles" label="Beachwood Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982040" start="1211" end="1224" title="Cahuenga Pass" label="Cahuenga Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882678" start="1245" end="1259" title="Hollywood Dell, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood Dell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882751" start="1262" end="1279" title="Hollywood Heights, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7112843" start="1297" end="1312" title="Outpost Estates, Los Angeles" label="Outpost Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996570" start="1314" end="1329" title="Whitley Heights, Los Angeles" label="Whitley Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="1512" end="1532" title="population density" label="population densities"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="1674" end="1684" title="Los Angeles County" label="the county"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230601" start="1791" end="1806" title="diversity index" label="diversity index"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048763" start="1839" end="1858" title="Non-Hispanic Whites" label="Non-Hispanic Whites"/>
<link wikidata="Q58669" start="1869" end="1876" title="Hispanic and Latino Americans" label="Latinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q727928" start="1891" end="1897" title="Asian American" label="Asians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1911" end="1927" title="African American" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1965" end="1971" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1987" end="2001" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q976218" start="2746" end="2760" title="Hollywood Bowl" label="Hollywood Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302545" start="2765" end="2808" title="Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Hollywood Hills" label="Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6219159" start="2892" end="2920" title="John Anson Ford Amphitheatre" label="John Anson Ford Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340614" start="2936" end="2949" title="Griffith Park" label="Griffith Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923684" start="2981" end="3015" title="Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery" label="Mount Sinai Memorial Park Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320340" start="3372" end="3377" title="LAUSD" label="LAUSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="3579" end="3602" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987603" start="3620" end="3634" title="Western Avenue (Los Angeles)" label="Western Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662424" start="3673" end="3688" title="Lloyd G. Davies" label="Lloyd G. Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q115751436" start="3780" end="3784" title="P-22 (mountain lion)" label="P-22"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871373" wikidata="Q6225461" url="?curid=871373" title="John Casken">
<text>John Arthur Casken (born 15 July 1949) is an English composer.

Casken was born in Barnsley, West Riding of Yorkshire, England. While at Barnsley Grammar School in the 1960s his music teacher played a recording of Berg&#x27;s Violin Concerto, which had a lasting influence. 
He studied composition at the University of Birmingham with John Joubert and Peter Dickinson. He attended the Warsaw Academy of Music between 1971 and 1972, where he studied with Andrzej Dobrowolski but also met and became friends with Witold Lutosławski. He has lectured at the universities of Birmingham (from 1973) and Durham (from 1981), and between 1992 and 2008 he was Professor of Music at the University of Manchester. Casken&#x27;s students include Michael Alcorn, David Jennings and James MacMillan.

Casken lives in Northumberland. He has acknowledged the landscape as a significant influence on his work. Works such as the orchestral &quot;Orion Over Farne&quot; (1984), the unaccompanied choral work &quot;To Fields We Do Not Know&quot; (1985), (described as &quot;a Northumbrian elegy&quot;), the orchestral song-cycle &quot;Still Mine&quot; (1992), the ensemble piece &quot;Winter Reels&quot; (2010) and the choral &quot;Uncertain Sea&quot; (2014) have all drawn inspiration from Northumberland. Casken has also composed two operas: &quot;Golem&quot; (1988), which has been revived frequently, and &quot;God&#x27;s Liar&quot; (2000), the latter based on Tolstoy&#x27;s novella &quot;Father Sergius&quot;.

His Cello Concerto of 1991 was written for Heinrich Schiff. The Violin Concerto was premiered at the 1995 Proms with Dmitri Sitkovetsky as soloist, and the Oboe Concerto &quot;Apollinaire’s Bird&quot; (written for Stéphane Rancourt) and Trombone Concerto &quot;Madonna of Silence&quot; (written for Katy Jones) were premiered by the Hallé Orchestra in 2014 and 2019 respectively. There is also the Symphony &quot;Broken Consort&quot; (2004), performed at the 2004 Proms, a Concerto for Orchestra (2007), and a Double Concerto for Violin, Viola and Orchestra &quot;That Subtle Knot&quot; (2013).

Casken has written much chamber music, including three string quartets, the first in 1982. 
The Piano Trio (2003) uses themes from the opera &quot;God&#x27;s Liar&quot; as its source material. He wrote &quot;Rest-ringing&quot;, unusually scored for string quartet and orchestra, for the Lindsay Quartet in 2005.

Recent work has shown a renewal of interest in musical theatre, with the melodrama &quot;Deadly Pleasures&quot; for narrator and small ensemble, based a poem by D M Thomas concerning the life of Cleopatra, and a monodrama, &quot;Kokoschka’s Doll&quot;, premiered at the Cheltenham Festival in 2017, about Alma Mahler&#x27;s relationship with the painter Oskar Kokoschka. A CD of &quot;Kokoschka’s Doll&quot; was released in 2020.

==References==
==External links==
*John Casken at Schott Music Limited
*John Casken website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6225461" start="0" end="18" title="John Casken" label="John Arthur Casken"/>
<link wikidata="Q54212" start="83" end="91" title="Barnsley" label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="93" end="117" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25786" start="214" end="241" title="Violin Concerto (Berg)" label="Berg&amp;#x27;s Violin Concerto"/>
<link wikidata="Q223429" start="305" end="329" title="University of Birmingham" label="University of Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q456588" start="335" end="347" title="John Joubert (composer)" label="John Joubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173663" start="352" end="367" title="Peter Dickinson (musician)" label="Peter Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622143" start="454" end="473" title="Andrzej Dobrowolski" label="Andrzej Dobrowolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q156472" start="511" end="529" title="Witold Lutosławski" label="Witold Lutosławski"/>
<link wikidata="Q230899" start="676" end="700" title="University of Manchester" label="University of Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828159" start="733" end="747" title="Michael Alcorn" label="Michael Alcorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874643" start="749" end="763" title="David Jennings (composer)" label="David Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q714541" start="768" end="783" title="James MacMillan" label="James MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65086049" start="1323" end="1340" title="Golem (Casken opera)" label="&amp;quot;Golem&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="1444" end="1451" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q771376" start="1473" end="1487" title="Father Sergius" label="Father Sergius"/>
<link wikidata="Q662066" start="1539" end="1554" title="Heinrich Schiff" label="Heinrich Schiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046677" start="1602" end="1607" title="Proms" label="Proms"/>
<link wikidata="Q344063" start="1613" end="1631" title="Dmitri Sitkovetsky" label="Dmitri Sitkovetsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q262431" start="1829" end="1844" title="Hallé Orchestra" label="Hallé Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q204610" start="2379" end="2394" title="Lindsay Quartet" label="Lindsay Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969995" start="2566" end="2576" title="D M Thomas" label="D M Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q635" start="2600" end="2609" title="Cleopatra" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q154260" start="2759" end="2774" title="Oskar Kokoschka" label="Oskar Kokoschka"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871378" wikidata="Q6307573" url="?curid=871378" title="Julian Slade">
<text>Julian Penkivil Slade (28 May 1930 – 17 June 2006) was an English writer of musical theatre, best known for the show &quot;Salad Days&quot;, which he wrote in six weeks in 1954, and which became the UK&#x27;s longest-running show of the 1950s, with over 2,288 performances.

==Biography ==
Born in London, England, in 1930, he moved with his family in 1940 to Painswick, Gloucestershire, where he spent his formative years, becoming a young member of the village dramatic society. He was educated at Eton College and Trinity College, Cambridge, where he was the first Footlights Vice President. After leaving Cambridge he went on to the drama school at the Bristol Old Vic.

During his time at the Old Vic, Slade wrote incidental music for several productions including &quot;Two Gentlemen of Verona&quot; and &quot;The Duenna&quot;. In 1954, he was asked to write a musical for the Old Vic Summer Season. It was then that he came up with &quot;Salad Days&quot; with Dorothy Reynolds. The show was such a success that it moved to London, where it ran for over 2,288 performances - a record at the time. It was in London that a young Cameron Mackintosh saw the show with his aunt and decided to become a theatrical producer. Slade and Mackintosh stayed close friends throughout his life.

Slade&#x27;s second most successful musical was &quot;Free as Air&quot;, written with Dorothy Reynolds, which opened at the Opera House in Manchester in 1957, before moving to the Savoy Theatre, London, where it ran for 417 performances.

==Personal life==
He had two brothers, Adrian Slade CBE (Liberal Party President) and Sir Christopher Slade (Lord Justice of Appeal, 1982–1991), and a sister. Julian and Sandy, the polari-speaking homosexual thespians of the radio show &quot;Round the Horne&quot;, were named after Slade and fellow musical playwright Sandy Wilson.

Slade died of cancer on 17 June 2006, aged 76.

==Shows==
* &quot;Christmas in King Street&quot; (1952)
* &quot;The Merry Gentleman&quot; (1953)
* &quot;Salad Days&quot; (1954)
*&quot;The Comedy of Errors&quot; (1954 television, 1956 stage)
* &quot;Free As Air&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Hooray For Daisy&quot; (1959)
* &quot;Follow That Girl&quot; (1960), adapted from &quot;Christmas in King Street&quot;
* &quot;Wildest Dreams&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; (1962)
* &quot;Nutmeg and Ginger&quot; (1963)
*&quot;The Pursuit of Love&quot; (1967)
*&quot;Winnie the Pooh (&quot;1970)
* &quot;Trelawny&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Out Of Bounds&quot; (1973)

==References==
==External links==
*JULIAN SLADE - the new authorised 2009 website
*Footlights Website
*Salad Days Original London Cast Recording on Amazon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6307573" start="0" end="21" title="Julian Slade" label="Julian Penkivil Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="76" end="91" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403382" start="123" end="133" title="Salad Days (musical)" label="Salad Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="298" end="304" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235905" start="360" end="369" title="Painswick" label="Painswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="500" end="512" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="517" end="543" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q857679" start="568" end="593" title="Footlights Vice President" label="Footlights Vice President"/>
<link wikidata="Q917960" start="657" end="672" title="Bristol Old Vic" label="Bristol Old Vic"/>
<link wikidata="Q232042" start="776" end="799" title="Two Gentlemen of Verona" label="Two Gentlemen of Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731154" start="816" end="826" title="The Duenna" label="The Duenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403382" start="945" end="955" title="Salad Days (musical)" label="Salad Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298609" start="967" end="983" title="Dorothy Reynolds" label="Dorothy Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q712928" start="1133" end="1151" title="Cameron Mackintosh" label="Cameron Mackintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759246" start="1203" end="1222" title="theatrical producer" label="theatrical producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500184" start="1342" end="1353" title="Free as Air" label="Free as Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685357" start="1566" end="1582" title="Adrian Slade" label="Adrian Slade CBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241338" start="1584" end="1607" title="President of the Liberal Party" label="Liberal Party President"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101772" start="1613" end="1634" title="Christopher Slade" label="Sir Christopher Slade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679476" start="1636" end="1658" title="Lord Justice of Appeal" label="Lord Justice of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307709" start="1686" end="1702" title="Julian and Sandy" label="Julian and Sandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359130" start="1708" end="1714" title="polari" label="polari"/>
<link wikidata="Q654213" start="1845" end="1857" title="Sandy Wilson" label="Sandy Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="1874" end="1880" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403382" start="2013" end="2023" title="Salad Days (musical)" label="Salad Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500184" start="2109" end="2120" title="Free as Air" label="Free As Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464716" start="2180" end="2196" title="Follow That Girl" label="Follow That Girl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871380" wikidata="Q7428743" url="?curid=871380" title="Sawyer River Railroad">
<text>The Sawyer River Railroad was a lumber railroad that operated along the Sawyer River in Livermore, New Hampshire from 1877 until 1928, when all rail traffic ceased.

By comparison with other logging roads of the day in the White Mountains, this was a small one, running only eight or so miles up the narrow valley of the Sawyer River above Bartlett at the south end of Crawford Notch. It connected to the Portland and Ogdensburg Railway below Crawford Notch.

==History==
The Sawyer River Railroad was chartered by the Saunders family in 1875. The Saunders owned the vast old-growth forest in the Sawyer River valley, and had just founded the new village of Livermore with a large sawmill. The railway bought its first locomotive new in late 1876.

Construction began in 1877, beginning with the 2 miles between Livermore and the Portland and Ogdensburg Railway. The railway was expanded into the woods beginning in 1880 to bring fresh cut logs to the mill. The railway never had a passenger car, but Livermore&#x27;s residents would ride on the locomotive&#x27;s slopeback tender.

As was typical for logging railways of the era, the construction was cheap and accidents were frequent. The lone locomotive on the line suffered 33 derailments and repeatedly needed a new cab or a new tender. In 1920, an especially bad fall into the river occurred and the locomotive was replaced.

The railway lasted a long time for a logging line, until a major flood destroyed all but 4 miles in 1927. By that time, the valley had been heavily logged out anyway. All rail traffic ceased in 1928. The railway was disassembled in the mid 1930s by the Civilian Conservation Corps.

==Locomotives==

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7428743" start="4" end="25" title="Sawyer River Railroad" label="Sawyer River Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428742" start="72" end="84" title="Sawyer River" label="Sawyer River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558066" start="88" end="112" title="Livermore, New Hampshire" label="Livermore, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1556007" start="223" end="238" title="White Mountains (New Hampshire)" label="White Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q809447" start="340" end="348" title="Bartlett, New Hampshire" label="Bartlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156105" start="369" end="383" title="Crawford Notch" label="Crawford Notch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105191" start="405" end="436" title="Portland and Ogdensburg Railway" label="Portland and Ogdensburg Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427473" start="519" end="534" title="Saunders family" label="Saunders family"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="572" end="589" title="old-growth forest" label="old-growth forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428742" start="597" end="609" title="Sawyer River" label="Sawyer River"/>
<link wikidata="Q505213" start="681" end="688" title="sawmill" label="sawmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105191" start="830" end="861" title="Portland and Ogdensburg Railway" label="Portland and Ogdensburg Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q749311" start="1074" end="1080" title="tender (rail)" label="tender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094508" start="1635" end="1662" title="Civilian Conservation Corps" label="Civilian Conservation Corps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871381" wikidata="Q6153099" url="?curid=871381" title="Janesville Country Club">
<text>The Janesville Country Club is a private golf and social club located in the Town of Janesville, just outside the northwest city limits of Janesville, Wisconsin. Founded in 1894 by Alexander Galbraith who brought golf clubs and balls back to Janesville from Scotland, it is the first golf club in Wisconsin, the second in the Midwest and the sixth in the U.S.

==References==
==External links==
* Janesville Country Club official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6153099" start="4" end="27" title="Janesville Country Club" label="Janesville Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="41" end="45" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q17148672" start="50" end="61" title="social club" label="social club"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004508" start="77" end="95" title="Janesville (town), Wisconsin" label="Town of Janesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q257536" start="139" end="160" title="Janesville, Wisconsin" label="Janesville, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="258" end="266" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="297" end="306" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186545" start="326" end="333" title="Midwest" label="Midwest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871382" wikidata="Q5744120" url="?curid=871382" title="Herringbone">
<text>Herringbone may refer to:

*Herring-Bone (card game), a game of patience
*Herringbone (cloth), a woven pattern of tweed or twill cloth
*Herringbone (formation), a type of military formation
*Herringbone (horse) (1940–1961), a Thoroughbred racehorse
*Herringbone cross-stratification, a sedimentary structure in geology that is formed from back-and-forth tidal water flow
*Herringbone gear, a type of gear
*Herringbone pattern, a pattern of floor tiling or paving
*Herringbone seating, a pattern of airliner seating
*A bonding pattern of brickwork, also known as opus spicatum
*Herringbone stitch
*A type of braided hairstyle, which is also known as a fishtail braid
*A distortion pattern from deinterlacing video called mouse teeth
*A method of counting used with the unary numeral system
*A technique of moving one&#x27;s skis while cross-country skiing
*Herringbone milking shed
*Herringbone, another name for the medical condition scintillating scotoma
*&quot;Herringbone&quot;, a song by Department of Eagles from &quot;In Ear Park&quot;, 2008

==See also==
*Herring, the fish whose bones are the namesake of the &quot;herringbone&quot; pattern</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5744120" start="0" end="11" title="Herringbone" label="Herringbone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7739509" start="28" end="52" title="Herring-Bone (card game)" label="Herring-Bone (card game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q14271241" start="74" end="93" title="Herringbone (cloth)" label="Herringbone (cloth)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744131" start="136" end="159" title="Herringbone (formation)" label="Herringbone (formation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983963" start="191" end="210" title="Herringbone (horse)" label="Herringbone (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744137" start="250" end="282" title="Herringbone cross-stratification" label="Herringbone cross-stratification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11681610" start="372" end="388" title="Herringbone gear" label="Herringbone gear"/>
<link wikidata="Q626958" start="406" end="425" title="Herringbone pattern" label="Herringbone pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q17078006" start="464" end="483" title="Herringbone seating" label="Herringbone seating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027789" start="562" end="575" title="opus spicatum" label="opus spicatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744147" start="577" end="595" title="Herringbone stitch" label="Herringbone stitch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="651" end="665" title="French braid#Variations" label="fishtail braid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183336" start="720" end="731" title="mouse teeth" label="mouse teeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860391" start="735" end="753" title="Tally marks" label="method of counting"/>
<link wikidata="Q724775" start="768" end="788" title="unary numeral system" label="unary numeral system"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544844" start="834" end="854" title="cross-country skiing" label="cross-country skiing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="856" end="880" title="Dairy farming#Herringbone and parallel parlors" label="Herringbone milking shed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637106" start="934" end="955" title="scintillating scotoma" label="scintillating scotoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252664" start="1024" end="1035" title="In Ear Park" label="In Ear Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127419" start="1063" end="1070" title="Herring" label="Herring"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871387" wikidata="Q7332802" url="?curid=871387" title="Ridgeville, Ontario">
<text>Ridgeville is a community within the town of Pelham, Ontario, in Canada. It borders the western limit of Fonthill. It derives its name from its location on the south western ridge of the Fonthill Kame. It has a post office, a rural mail route named &quot;Ridgeville&quot;, a small number of shops found along Canboro Road, including a bakery, chocolate shop and specialty home and bath shops, the local high school, Gwennol Organic Blueberry Farm and the Ridge Berry Farm Tea Room.

It is located on what was formerly known as traditional Neutral, Haudenosaunee, and Anishnaabe territory.

== Climate ==
The climate is warm-summer humid continental (Köppen: &quot;Dfb&quot;). The community serves as the basis for Pelham&#x27;s normals.

== References==
==External links==
*Ridgeville at Geographical Names of Canada</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7332802" start="0" end="10" title="Ridgeville, Ontario" label="Ridgeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q448041" start="45" end="51" title="Pelham, Ontario" label="Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="53" end="60" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="65" end="71" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465187" start="105" end="113" title="Fonthill, Ontario" label="Fonthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107496" start="187" end="200" title="Fonthill Kame" label="Fonthill Kame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816665" start="539" end="546" title="Neutral Nation" label="Neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q68518" start="548" end="561" title="Haudenosaunee" label="Haudenosaunee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956640" start="567" end="577" title="Anishinaabe" label="Anishnaabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="619" end="648" title="Humid continental climate" label="warm-summer humid continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q448041" start="714" end="727" title="Pelham, Ontario" label="Pelham&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871392" wikidata="Q17107496" url="?curid=871392" title="Fonthill Kame">
<text>The Fonthill Kame is a geological feature in the Niagara Peninsula in Pelham, Ontario, Canada. A &quot;kame&quot; is a moraine in the form of a large, isolated hill. It is composed of sand and gravel deposited by the retreating glaciers of the last ice age. The Fonthill Kame rises about above the surrounding land (290 m above sea level) and is the highest elevation in the region. Some sources say that the kame is no longer the highest point owing to the removal of sand and gravel.
Despite what some sources may say, the kame is simply the highest natural geographic feature in Niagara and the highest point would remain on the kame. 
There is some debate about the actual highest point though because locals seem to remember a plaque in a farmers field, south of Tice Road and East on Effingham Road, on un-excavated land that marked the highest point.

The kame is east to west and north to south. It slopes gradually on the west side, more steeply on the south and east and merges with the Short Hills Provincial Park area of the Niagara Escarpment on the north.

The Fonthill Kame has considerable influence on the climate of Pelham by sheltering it from the winds from the southwest. This provides good growing conditions for fruit crops, including the vines that supply the local wine industry. It is also mined for sand and gravel.

Research on the kame centres on its hydrogeological features, which are important to the Niagara Peninsula. The Government of Ontario Ministry of the Environment has committed $85,000 toward the study of groundwater flow, discharge, and baseflow measurements.

The original town of Fonthill is perched on the moraine, although it has spread beyond the hill. Lookout Point on the north side of the kame commands a view of about one-quarter of the circle of the horizon. Taking advantage of the views, the Lookout Point Country Club, a private golf course, occupies much of the viewing area. For more about the golf club, see Pelham, Ontario.

==References==

*Bramble, Linda (2004). &quot;Touring Niagara Wine Country&quot;. James Lorimer &amp; Company. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17107496" start="4" end="17" title="Fonthill Kame" label="Fonthill Kame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147919" start="49" end="66" title="Niagara Peninsula" label="Niagara Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q448041" start="70" end="76" title="Pelham, Ontario" label="Pelham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="78" end="85" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q663753" start="103" end="107" title="kame" label="kame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2610088" start="119" end="126" title="moraine" label="moraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="184" end="188" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="193" end="199" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="228" end="235" title="glacier" label="glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q49367" start="249" end="256" title="ice age" label="ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q7501804" start="997" end="1024" title="Short Hills Provincial Park" label="Short Hills Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q826965" start="1037" end="1055" title="Niagara Escarpment" label="Niagara Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q917284" start="1262" end="1266" title="vine" label="vine"/>
<link wikidata="Q179509" start="1380" end="1395" title="hydrogeology" label="hydrogeological"/>
<link wikidata="Q6867681" start="1478" end="1505" title="Ministry of the Environment (Ontario)" label="Ministry of the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465187" start="1626" end="1634" title="Fonthill, Ontario" label="Fonthill"/>
<link wikidata="Q448041" start="1968" end="1983" title="Pelham, Ontario" label="Pelham, Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871394" wikidata="Q232735" url="?curid=871394" title="Elisabeth of Romania">
<text>Elisabeth of Romania (Elisabeth Charlotte Josephine Alexandra Victoria; , , : &quot;Elisábet&quot;; 12 October 1894 – 14 November 1956) was the second child and eldest daughter of King Ferdinand I and Queen Marie of Romania. She was Queen of the Hellenes from 27 September 1922 until 25 March 1924 as the wife of King George II.

Elisabeth was born when her parents were crown prince and crown princess of Romania. She was raised by her great-uncle and great-aunt, King Carol I and Queen Elisabeth. Princess Elisabeth was an introvert and socially isolated. She became crown princess of Greece when she married George in 1921, but she felt no passion for him and underwent the political turmoil in her adopted country after World War I. When her husband succeeded to the Greek throne in 1922, Elisabeth was involved in assisting refugees who arrived to Athens after the disaster of the Greco-Turkish War. The rise of the revolutionary climate, however, affected her health and with great relief she left the Kingdom of Greece with her husband in December 1923. The royal couple then settled in Bucharest, and George was deposed on 25 March 1924, upon the abolition of the Greek monarchy.

In Romania, Elisabeth and George&#x27;s relationship deteriorated, and they divorced in 1935. Very close to her brother Carol II of Romania, the former queen amassed an important fortune, partly due to financial advice given by her lover, the banker Alexandru Scanavi. After the death of her mother in 1938 and the abdication of King Carol II in 1940, Elisabeth took up the role of First Lady of Romania. At the end of World War II, she established close links with the Romanian Communist Party and openly conspired against her nephew, the young King Michael I, earning the nickname of &quot;Red Aunt&quot; of the sovereign. However, her communist links did not prevent her from being expelled from the country when the Romanian People&#x27;s Republic was proclaimed in 1947. Elisabeth moved to Switzerland and then to Cannes, in southern France. She had a romantic relationship with Marc Favrat, a would-be artist almost thirty years younger, whom she finally adopted just before her death in 1956.
==Early years==
Second child and first daughter of Crown Prince Ferdinand and Crown Princess Marie of Romania, Elisabeth (nicknamed &quot;Lisabetha&quot; or &quot;Lizzy&quot; by her family) was born on 12 October 1894 at Peleş Castle, Sinaia. Named after her paternal great-aunt, Queen Elisabeth of Wied, shortly after birth she was removed from her parents, as King Carol I and Queen Elizabeth thought Crown Prince Ferdinand and Crown Princess Marie were too young, liberate and inexperienced to give their own children a real, proper, royal upbringing. With her older brother Prince Carol, she was raised by King Carol I and his wife. In her memoirs, Marie described her eldest daughter as &quot;a lovely solemn-faced child who had a strong sense of rectitude.&quot; Over the years, Elisabeth developed a cold character and a volatile temperament which socially isolated her. Considered &quot;vulgar&quot; by her mother, she was, however, considered a classic beauty.

==Marriage==
===An undesired engagement===

In 1911, Prince George of Greece, then second-in-line to the throne and his future wife&#x27;s second cousin, met Elisabeth for the first time. After the Balkan Wars, during which Greece and Romania were allied, the Greek prince asked for the hand of Elisabeth, but, advised by her great-aunt, she declined the offer, saying that her suitor was too small and too English in his manners. Disdainful, the princess even said on the occasion, that &quot;God began the prince but forgot to finish him&quot; (1914).

During World War I, Elisabeth was involved in helping wounded soldiers. She made daily visits to the hospitals and distributed cigarettes and comforting words to the victims of the fighting.

In 1919, Elisabeth and her sisters Maria and Ileana accompanied their mother, now Queen Marie, to Paris at the Peace Conference. The sovereign hoped that during her stay there she could find suitable husbands for her daughters, especially Elisabeth, already aged twenty-five. After a few months in France, the Queen and her daughters decided to return to Romania in early 1920. On the way back, they made a brief stop in Switzerland, where they found the Greek royal family, who lived in exile since the deposition of King Constantine I during the Great War. Elisabeth then met again Prince George (now &quot;Diadochos&quot; and heir of the throne), who asked again her hand. Now more aware of her own imperfections (her mother described her as fat and of very limited intelligence), Elisabeth decided to accept the marriage. However, at that time the future of the &quot;Diadochos&quot; was far from certain: displaced from the throne with his father and replaced by his younger brother, now King Alexander I, George was forbidden to stay in his country, penniless and without any prospects.

Nevertheless, the engagement satisfied both Elisabeth and George&#x27;s parents. Delighted to have finally found a husband for her eldest daughter, the Queen of Romania soon invited the prince to travel to Bucharest in order to publicly announce the engagement. George agreed but soon after his arrival in the country of his fiancée, he learned of the accidental death of Alexander I and the ensuing political turmoil that erupted in Greece.

===Life in Greece===

====Restoration of the Greek royal family. Wedding of George and Elisabeth====

On 5 December 1920 a referendum of disputed results called the Greek royal family to return home. King Constantine I, Queen Sophia and &quot;Diadochos&quot; George therefore returned to Athens on 19 December. Their return was accompanied by a significant jubilation. A huge crowd surrounded the sovereign and the heir to the throne through the streets of the capital. Once at the palace, they appeared repeatedly on the balcony to greet the people who cheered them.

===Wedding===
However, a few weeks later George returned to Romania to marry Elisabeth. The wedding took place with great pomp in Bucharest on 27 February 1921. Shortly after on March 10, Crown Prince Carol of Romania, Elisabeth&#x27;s elder brother, married George&#x27;s younger sister, Princess Helen of Greece.&gt;

====Crown princess====
In Greece, Elisabeth had great difficulty integrating into the royal family, and her relationship with Queen Sophia was particularly awkward. From an introverted temperament that could be mistaken as arrogance, Elisabeth felt displaced by her in-laws, who regularly spoke in Greek in her presence, because she had not yet mastered the language. Only King Constantine I and his sister, the Grand Duchess Maria Georgievna of Russia, found favor in her eyes. Indeed, even the shy &quot;Diadochos&quot; disappointed his wife, who wanted to share with him a more passionate relationship.

Regretting not having her own home and being forced to constantly live with her in-laws, Elisabeth spent the already little revenues of her husband into redecorating their apartments. In addition, her family delayed in paying her dowry and the savings that she left in Romania were soon lost because of the poor investments made by the manager of her fortune.

Facing a very difficult political situation, due to the Greco-Turkish War, Elisabeth quickly understood that her space to maneuver was limited in her new country. However, she integrated the Red Cross, which was overwhelmed by the arrival of wounded coming from Anatolia. The Crown Princess also occupied her free time practicing gardening, painting and drawing. She illustrated a book of poems written by the Belgian author Emile Verhaeren. She also liked writing and producing some new books of low value. Finally, she spent long hours studying the Modern Greek, a language that was extremely hard for her to learn.

Disappointed by the mediocrity of her daily routine, Elisabeth began to nourish jealousy for her sister Maria, married to King Alexander I of Yugoslavia, and her sister-in-law Helen of Greece, wife of her brother Crown Prince Carol of Romania. With the war and the revolution, the everyday life of the Greek royal family was indeed increasingly difficult, and the pension received by the &quot;Diadochos&quot; George didn&#x27;t allow her to buy the clothes and jewelry that she wanted.

Already strained by the war, the relations of the &quot;Diadochos&quot; and his wife were clouded by their inability to give an heir to the Kingdom of Greece. Elisabeth became pregnant a few months after her marriage, but she suffered a miscarriage during an official trip to Smyrna. Deeply affected by her miscarriage, the crown princess became sick with typhoid soon followed by pleurisy and worsened by depression. She found refuge with her family in Bucharest, but despite the efforts of her mother and husband, neither Elisabeth&#x27;s health nor her marriage fully recovered from the loss of her child.

====Queen of the Hellenes====
Meanwhile, the disaster of the Greco-Turkish War forced King Constantine I to abdicate, which pushed George on to the throne (27 September 1922). The new king, however, had no power, and he and his queen were unable to resolve the repression organized by revolutionaries who took power against the representatives of the old regime. The new royal couple saw with anguish the near execution of Prince Andrew (the king&#x27;s uncle) at the Trial of the Six.

Despite this difficult context, Elisabeth tried to make herself useful to her adopted country. To respond to the influx of refugees originating from Anatolia, the Queen had built shacks on the outskirts of Athens. To carry out her projects, she mobilized her family and asked her mother, Queen Marie, to send wood and other materials.

However, Elisabeth found it increasingly difficult to cope with Greece and its revolutionary climate. Her love for George II was over, and her letters to her mother show how much she worried for her future. Her correspondence also revealed that she had no desire to have children.

After an attempted monarchist coup d&#x27;état in October 1923, the situation of the royal couple became even more precarious. On 19 December 1923 King George II and his wife were forced into exile by the revolutionary government. With Prince Paul (the king&#x27;s brother and heir-presumptive to the throne), they then departed for Romania, where they learned of the proclamation of the Second Hellenic Republic on 25 March 1924.

==Return to Romania==

===Queen in exile===

In Romania, George II and Elizabeth moved to Bucharest, where King Ferdinand I and Queen Marie gave to them a wing of Cotroceni Palace. After a few weeks, the couple moved to a modest villa in the Calea Victoriei. Regular guests of the Romanian sovereigns, the exiled Greek royal couple participated in court ceremonies. But despite the kindness shown by his mother-in-law, the exiled King of Greece in Bucharest felt aimless and barely concealed the boredom that he felt at the Romanian court.

Unlike her husband, Elisabeth was delighted with her return to Romania. Her relationship with her mother was sometimes stormy, even if their literary collaborations were successful. In the mid 1920s, Elisabeth illustrated the latest work of her mother, &quot;The Country That I Love&quot; (1925). The links with Crown Princess Helen of Romania (wife of Crown Prince Carol of Romania and sister of King George II of Greece) remained complicated due to the jealousy that the exiled Queen of the Hellenes still continued to feel against her sister-in-law.

Exacerbated by the humiliations of exile, financial difficulties and the lack of offspring, the relations between George II and Elisabeth deteriorated. After initially alleviating her weariness with too much rich food and gambling, the former Queen of the Hellenes began a series of extramarital relationships with several married men. She even flirted with her brother-in-law King Alexander I of Yugoslavia when she visited her sister Queen Maria during an illness in Belgrade. Later, she entered into an affair with the banker of her husband, a Greek-Romanian named Alexandru Scanavi, who was appointed her chamberlain to cover up the scandal. However, Elisabeth was not the only one responsible for the failure of her marriage: over the years, George II spent less time with his wife and gradually settled his residence in the United Kingdom, where he also entered into an adulterous relationship.

In May 1935, Elisabeth heard from a Greek diplomat that the Second Hellenic Republic was on the verge of collapse and that the restoration of the monarchy was imminent. Frightened by this news, the exiled Queen of the Hellenes then launched divorce proceedings without informing her husband. Charged with &quot;desertion from the family home&quot;, George II saw his marriage dissolved by a Bucharest court without being really invited to speak on the matter (6 July 1935).

====An ambitious princess====

After the death of King Ferdinand I in 1927, Romania began a period of great instability. After Crown Prince Carol renounced his rights to be able to live with his mistress Magda Lupescu, his son ascended to the throne as King Michael I under the direction of a Council of Regency. Nevertheless, a significant part of the population supported the rights of Carol, who finally managed to take the crown in 1930. Very close to her brother, Elisabeth actively supported his return to Romania. She kept him daily informed of the country&#x27;s political life during his years of exile.

Once on the throne, Carol II maintained stormy relations with the members of his family but retained his confidence in Elisabeth, who was the only member of the royal family who accepted his mistress. Thanks to the inheritance received from her father, the financial advice of her lover, the banker Alexandru Scanavi, and her good relations with her brother, the princess managed to live in great style in Romania. In March 1935, she acquired the large domain of Banloc, near the border with Yugoslavia, a mansion in Sinaia and an elegant villa of Italian style, called Elisabeta Palace, located in the Șoseaua Kiseleff in Bucharest.

After the death of the Queen Mother Marie in 1938 and the deposition of Carol II in 1940, Elisabeth played the role of First Lady of Romania. Ambitiously, the princess had indeed no remorse to follow her brother&#x27;s policy, even when she showed herself tyrannical with other members of the royal family. After the return to the throne of Michael I and the establishment of the dictatorship of Marshal Ion Antonescu, Elisabeth stayed out of politics. However, from 1944, she forged links with the Romanian Communist Party and openly conspired against her nephew, who now considered her a spy. In early 1947, she received in her domain of Banloc the Marshal Tito, who deposed another of her nephews, the young King Peter II of Yugoslavia. Finally, through Alexandru Scanavi, the Princess participated in the financing of the guerrilla who fought against her former brother-in-law, the now King Paul I, in Greece.

However, Elisabeth wasn&#x27;t the only member of the Romanian royal family who had friendly relations with the communists: her sister Ileana did the same in the hope of putting her eldest son, Archduke Stefan of Austria, on the throne. For these reasons, the two princesses then received the nickname of &quot;Red Aunts&quot; of King Michael I.

==Last years==

Despite her links with the Romanian Communist Party, Elisabeth was forced to leave the country after the proclamation of the Romanian People&#x27;s Republic, on 30 December 1947. The new regime gave her three days to pack her belongings and the Elisabeta Palace was ransacked. However, before she went into exile, the princess had time to burn her archives in the domain of Banloc. On 12 January 1948 she left Romania with her sister Ileana aboard a special train provided by the Communists. The Scanavi family accompanied them, but both princesses lost much of their property after being expelled from the country.

Elisabeth settled firstly in Zürich and then in Cannes, at the &quot;Villa Rose Alba&quot;. In France, she met a handsome young seducer and would-be artist named Marc Favrat. Having fallen in love with the young man, the princess wished to marry him and asked her cousin, Frederick, Prince of Hohenzollern, to bestow a title on him, but Frederick refused. The princess then decided to adopt her lover; which she did three months before her death. She died at her home on 14 November 1956.

The body of the princess was transferred to the Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen crypt, the &quot;Hedinger Kirche&quot; of Sigmaringen.

==Archives==

Young Princess Elisabeth&#x27;s letters to her grandfather, Leopold of Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen, are preserved in the Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen family archive, which is in the State Archive of Sigmaringen (Staatsarchiv Sigmaringen) in the town of Sigmaringen, Baden-Württemberg, Germany.

==Ancestry==
==Arms and monogram==
==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* Queen Marie of Romania, &quot;Însemnari zilnice&quot;, vol. 3, Editura Historia, 2006
* Hannah Pakula, &quot;The Last Romantic: A Biography of Queen Marie of Roumania&quot;, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson History, 1996 
* John Wimbles, &quot;Elisabeta of the Hellenes: Passionate Woman, Reluctant Queen - Part 1: Crown Princess&quot;, Royalty Digest, vol. 12#5, no 137, November 2002, pp. 136–144 ISSN 0967-5744
* John Wimbles, &quot;Elisabeta of the Hellenes: Passionate Woman, Reluctant Queen - Part. 2: Crown Princess&quot;, Royalty Digest, vol. 12#6, no 138, December 2002, pp. 168–174 ISSN 0967-5744
* John Wimbles, &quot;Elisabeta of the Hellenes: Passionate Woman, Reluctant Queen - Part. 3: Exile at Home&quot; 1924–1940, Royalty Digest, vol. 12#7, no 139, January 2003, pp. 200–205 ISSN 0967-5744
* John Wimbles, &quot;Elisabeta of the Hellenes: Passionate Woman, Reluctant Queen - Part. 4: Treachery and Death&quot; , Royalty Digest, vol. 13#1, no 145, July 2003, pp. 13–16 ISSN 0967-5744
* Ivor Porter, &quot;Michael of Romania: The King and the Country&quot;, Sutton Publishing Ltd, 2005 
* Jean-Paul Besse, &quot;Ileana: l&#x27;archiduchesse voilée&quot;, Versailles, Via Romana, 2010 
* The Romanovs: The Final Chapter (Random House, 1995) by Robert K. Massie, pgs 210–212, 213, 217, and 218ISBN 0-394-58048-6 and 
* Ileana, Princess of Romania. I Live Again. New York: Rinehart, 1952. First edition.
* Lillian Hellman: A Life with Foxes and Scoundrels (2005), by Deborah Martinson, PhD. (Associate Professor and Chair of English Writing at Occidental College)

==External links==

* Elisabeta de România, prinţesa capricioasă care s-a retras la conacul din Banloc, article by Ștefan Both in &quot;Adevărul&quot;, 2013
* Ileana of Romania Is Dead at 82; Princess Founded Convent in U.S., article by Eric Pace in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 1991</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232735" start="0" end="20" title="Elisabeth of Romania" label="Elisabeth of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="180" end="196" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="King Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="201" end="223" title="Queen Marie of Romania" label="Queen Marie of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031678" start="233" end="254" title="Queen of Greece" label="Queen of the Hellenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q152935" start="313" end="327" title="King George II of Greece" label="King George II"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="465" end="477" title="King Carol I" label="King Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q57629" start="482" end="497" title="Elisabeth of Wied" label="Queen Elisabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="724" end="735" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q131017" start="870" end="878" title="Population exchange between Greece and Turkey" label="disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="886" end="903" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)" label="Greco-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="1094" end="1103" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="1309" end="1328" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1608" end="1620" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="1659" end="1683" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="1735" end="1749" title="King Michael I" label="King Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="1909" end="1940" title="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Romanian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1984" end="1995" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="2008" end="2014" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="2028" end="2034" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="2240" end="2262" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Crown Prince Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="2267" end="2298" title="Crown Princess Marie of Romania" label="Crown Princess Marie of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q917702" start="2410" end="2422" title="Peleş Castle" label="Peleş Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q213296" start="2424" end="2430" title="Sinaia" label="Sinaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q57629" start="2475" end="2492" title="Elisabeth of Wied" label="Elisabeth of Wied"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="2774" end="2779" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol"/>
<link wikidata="Q57146" start="2804" end="2811" title="Carol I of Romania" label="Carol I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152935" start="3220" end="3236" title="George II of Greece" label="George of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="3358" end="3369" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q209065" start="3384" end="3390" title="Kingdom of Greece (Glücksburg)" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="3395" end="3402" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3722" end="3733" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q167387" start="3942" end="3947" title="Maria of Yugoslavia" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q235595" start="3952" end="3958" title="Princess Ileana of Romania" label="Ileana"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="4018" end="4034" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="4328" end="4339" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q910261" start="4455" end="4464" title="Greece during World War I" label="Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151742" start="4905" end="4916" title="Alexander I of Greece" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="5207" end="5216" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566090" start="5567" end="5577" title="1920 Greek referendum" label="referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q155822" start="5670" end="5676" title="Sophia of Prussia" label="Sophia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="6201" end="6230" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Crown Prince Carol of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q162177" start="6311" end="6326" title="Helen of Greece and Denmark" label="Helen of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q232732" start="6745" end="6785" title="Princess Maria of Greece and Denmark" label="Grand Duchess Maria Georgievna of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q87138" start="7357" end="7374" title="Greco-Turkish War (1919–22)" label="Greco-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="7492" end="7501" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="7563" end="7571" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q124946" start="7631" end="7640" title="gardening" label="gardening"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="7642" end="7650" title="painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q93184" start="7655" end="7662" title="drawing" label="drawing"/>
<link wikidata="Q193680" start="7726" end="7741" title="Emile Verhaeren" label="Emile Verhaeren"/>
<link wikidata="Q36510" start="7852" end="7864" title="Modern Greek" label="Modern Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q167387" start="8024" end="8029" title="Maria of Yugoslavia" label="Maria"/>
<link wikidata="Q207384" start="8047" end="8072" title="Alexander I of Yugoslavia" label="Alexander I of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="8684" end="8690" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q83319" start="8764" end="8771" title="typhoid" label="typhoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="8789" end="8797" title="pleurisy" label="pleurisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="8814" end="8824" title="Major depressive disorder" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q156531" start="9441" end="9454" title="Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark" label="Prince Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629002" start="9486" end="9502" title="Trial of the Six" label="Trial of the Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="9711" end="9717" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998931" start="10142" end="10169" title="Leonardopoulos–Gargalidis coup d&amp;#x27;état attempt" label="monarchist coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q155394" start="10359" end="10370" title="Paul of Greece" label="Prince Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="10456" end="10463" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q265824" start="10511" end="10535" title="Second Hellenic Republic" label="Second Hellenic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="10645" end="10654" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q733838" start="10718" end="10734" title="Cotroceni Palace" label="Cotroceni Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933758" start="10797" end="10812" title="Calea Victoriei" label="Calea Victoriei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="12119" end="12127" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="12259" end="12270" title="Chamberlain (office)" label="chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="12480" end="12494" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="13285" end="13294" title="Michael I of Romania" label="Michael I"/>
<link wikidata="Q806854" start="14104" end="14110" title="Banloc" label="Banloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="14133" end="14143" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213296" start="14158" end="14164" title="Sinaia" label="Sinaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356931" start="14211" end="14227" title="Elisabeta Palace" label="Elisabeta Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658483" start="14244" end="14260" title="Șoseaua Kiseleff" label="Șoseaua Kiseleff"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="14312" end="14317" title="Marie of Romania" label="Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q152030" start="14680" end="14693" title="Ion Antonescu" label="Ion Antonescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="14775" end="14799" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="14935" end="14939" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q223183" start="14992" end="15014" title="Peter II of Yugoslavia" label="Peter II of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155394" start="15171" end="15177" title="Paul of Greece" label="Paul I"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="16200" end="16206" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="16219" end="16225" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="Q66642" start="16443" end="16476" title="Frederick, Prince of Hohenzollern" label="Frederick, Prince of Hohenzollern"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685912" start="16556" end="16571" title="Adult adoption" label="adopt her lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="16776" end="16787" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82858" start="17050" end="17061" title="Sigmaringen" label="Sigmaringen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="17180" end="17196" title="Marie of Romania" label="Marie of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q426356" start="18881" end="18889" title="Adevărul" label="Adevărul"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="19001" end="19019" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871396" wikidata="Q176126" url="?curid=871396" title="Philip Kaufman">
<text>Philip Kaufman (born October 23, 1936) is an American film director and screenwriter who has directed fifteen films over a career spanning nearly five decades. He has received numerous accolades including a BAFTA Award along with nominations for an Academy Award, and a Primetime Emmy Award. He has been described as a &quot;maverick&quot; and an &quot;iconoclast,&quot; notable for his versatility and independence, often directing eclectic and controversial films. He is considered an &quot;auteur&quot; whose films have always expressed his personal vision. Kaufman&#x27;s works have included genres such as realism, horror, fantasy, erotica, western, and crime.

Kaufman earned his breakthrough for the film &quot;The Unbearable Lightness of Being&quot; (1988) which earned him the BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay as well as a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay. He is noted for directing such films as &quot;The Wanderers&quot; (1979), &quot;Rising Sun&quot; (1993), the remake of &quot;Invasion of the Body Snatchers&quot; (1978), &quot;Henry &amp; June&quot; (1990), and &quot;Quills&quot; (2000). He gained prominence for &quot;The Right Stuff&quot; (1983), which received eight Academy Award nominations, including Best Picture. He is also known for directing the HBO film &quot;Hemingway &amp; Gellhorn&quot; (2012), for which he received a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Dramatic Special nomination.

==Early life and education ==
Kaufman was born in Chicago in 1936, the only son of Elizabeth (née Brandau), a housewife, and Nathan Kaufman, a produce businessman. He was the grandson of German Jewish immigrants. One of his grammar and high school friends was William Friedkin, who also became a director. He developed an early love of movies, and during his youth he would often go to double features.

He attended the University of Chicago where he received a degree in history, and then enrolled at Harvard Law School where he spent a year. He returned to Chicago for a postgraduate degree, hoping to become a professor of history.

Before graduating Kaufman became involved in the counterculture movement and in 1960 moved to San Francisco. He took various jobs there, including postal worker, and befriended a number of influential people, such as writer Henry Miller. He and his wife then decided to travel and live in Europe for a while where he would teach. After spending time working on a kibbutz in Israel, he taught English and math for two years in Greece and Italy. During his travels he also met author Anaïs Nin, whose relationship with her lover, Henry Miller, later became the inspiration and subject for Kaufman&#x27;s film &quot;Henry &amp; June&quot; (1990).

He met Saugus, Massachusetts-born Rose Fisher in 1957, when he was 21 and she was 18, and both were undergraduates at the University of Chicago. A year later, in 1958, they married. They had one son, Peter. Rose Kaufman was also a screenwriter and had bit roles in two of her husband&#x27;s films. After backpacking in Europe with his wife and their young son, they returned to the United States. His time in Europe heavily influenced Kaufman&#x27;s decision to become a filmmaker, when he and his wife would wander into small movie theaters showcasing the works of experimental new filmmakers such as John Cassavetes and Shirley Clarke, among others. He recalls the effect of being exposed to those filmmakers as the &quot;start of something new&quot; which would later inspire the European flavor of many of his films: &quot;I could feel the cry of America, the sense of jazz ... So I came back to Chicago in 1962 and set about trying to learn as much as I could, seeing every foreign movie I could.&quot;

==Career==
=== 1964–1977 ===
;&quot;Goldstein&quot; (1964)
Kaufman returned to Chicago, ready to make his first feature film. He went around town looking for funding for his directorial debut, &quot;Goldstein&quot; (1964), co-written and co-directed with Benjamin Manaster. Kaufman initially conceived of the story in an unfinished novel, but at the urging of Anaïs Nin he then made it into a &quot;mystical comedy&quot; film. It was inspired by a story from Martin Buber&#x27;s &quot;Tales of the Hasidim&quot;, and was filmed on location in Chicago with a cast composed of local actors from The Second City comedy troupe.

The film won the Prix de la Nouvelle Critique (New Critics Prize) at the 1964 Cannes Film Festival, with French director Jean Renoir calling it the best American film he had seen in 20 years. François Truffaut, another leading French director, was visiting Chicago when the film premiered and he came to the opening. Kaufman recalled that Truffaut &quot;leaped to his feet&quot; in the middle of the screening and began applauding.

;&quot;Fearless Frank&quot; (1967)
Two years later, Kaufman went on to direct &quot;Fearless Frank&quot; (1967), a comic book/counterculture fable, which he wrote, produced, and directed. It costarred Jon Voight in his film debut. Kaufman spent four years trying to find a distributor, but the film was a box-office failure when it finally played. While the movie did not gain as much attention as &quot;Goldstein&quot;, it did help Kaufman land a contract in Universal Studios&#x27; Young Directors Program in 1969.

;&quot;The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid&quot; (1972)
In 1972, Kaufman wrote and directed &quot;The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid&quot; starring Robert Duvall as Jesse James, in what was his first commercial film after the previous two independent ones. He spent a lot of time researching the real life characters when writing the screenplay, although the film took some liberties portraying some of the factual details. The &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; wrote that &quot;Kaufman is not an angry revisionist, but seems to be trying to tell it like it must have been, with an amused detachment, which sees the events as something close to an absurd spectacle.&quot;

;&quot;The White Dawn&quot; (1974)
Kaufman directed &quot;The White Dawn&quot; in 1974, a drama based on the novel of the same name by James Houston. Shot in documentary style, a story about whalers, played by Warren Oates, Louis Gossett Jr., and Timothy Bottoms, stranded in the Arctic at the turn of the century. To survive they battle polar bears and take advantage of the Eskimos who had originally saved them.

;&quot;The Outlaw Josey Wales&quot; (1976)
Kaufman wrote and began directing &quot;The Outlaw Josey Wales&quot; in 1975, but was fired as director after artistic differences with its star Clint Eastwood, who then directed the film himself. The enmity between Kaufman and Eastwood also stemmed from their mutual pursuit of actress Sondra Locke, then 32 and married to Gordon Leigh Anderson.

=== 1978–1983 ===
;&quot;Invasion of the Body Snatchers&quot; (1978)
Kaufman directed the science fiction thriller, &quot;Invasion of the Body Snatchers&quot; in 1978, which became his first box office hit. It was a remake of the 1956 version. In this version, Kaufman moved the setting to San Francisco and recreated the alien threat as more a horror film than science fiction, and in a way that was disturbing, humorous, and believable. Critic Pauline Kael said &quot;It may be the best movie of its kind ever made.&quot; Critics from the San Francisco Chronicle stated that unlike other Hollywood depictions of San Francisco, this representation was &quot;geographically correct to the Powell Street line.&quot;

;&quot;The Wanderers&quot; (1979)
In 1979, he directed &quot;The Wanderers&quot;, based on comic novel by Richard Price. The direction of the film illustrated Kaufman&#x27;s mastery of genre quite different from his previous films. It is the story of a benign Italian gang of teenagers in the Bronx of 1963, with Ken Wahl and Karen Allen. It was Wahl&#x27;s debut film, and Allen&#x27;s second role, and the film has become a cult favorite.

;&quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot; (1981) co-writer
In 1981, Kaufman became involved with the first Indiana Jones film, &quot;Raiders of the Lost Ark&quot;, for which he received story credit. The character of Indiana Jones was created by George Lucas and Kaufman came up with the story about the pursuit of the Ark of the Covenant.

;&quot;The Right Stuff&quot; (1983)
In 1983, Kaufman directed and wrote the screenplay for the critically acclaimed film, &quot;The Right Stuff&quot;, an adaptation of the best-selling book of the same name by Tom Wolfe. The story is based on the events and lives of the original test pilots who were selected to become the first U.S. astronauts. The film helped launch or boost the careers of numerous little-known actors, including Ed Harris, Scott Glenn, Fred Ward and Dennis Quaid.

Kaufman hired William Goldman to write the screenplay, but after a number of disputes about the focus of the story, Goldman quit and Kaufman wrote the screenplay himself. Goldman wanted the story to portray patriotism and center mostly on the astronauts, whereas Kaufman wanted much of the story to focus on Chuck Yeager (played by Sam Shepard), whom Goldman&#x27;s script left out completely. Goldman writes in his memoirs, &quot;Phil&#x27;s heart was with Yeager.&quot; And Shepard&#x27;s biographer, Don Shewey, explains that &quot;though its chief subject is the astronauts, Yeager is the apple of Kaufman&#x27;s heroic eye.&quot; Critic David Thomson agrees:

Historian Michael Barson considers it one of the more ambitious pictures of the 1980s. Roger Ebert said the film was &quot;impressive,&quot; noting that the way Kaufman had organized the material into one of the &quot;best recent American movies, is astonishing.&quot; The film was nominated for eight Academy Awards (including Best Picture) and won four, yet failed at the box office. Kaufman earned the Writers Guild and Directors Guild nomination for his satiric adaptation of the astronaut program. &quot;It may be the last movie of the heroic 1970s,&quot; writes Thomson.

=== 1988–2000 ===
;&quot;The Unbearable Lightness of Being&quot; (1988)
&quot;The Unbearable Lightness of Being&quot; was directed and co-written by Kaufman in 1988. The film is based on the novel by Milan Kundera which takes place during the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968. Kaufman was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay.

;&quot;Henry &amp; June&quot; (1990)
In 1990, he wrote and directed &quot;Henry &amp; June&quot;, a re-creation of the affairs among and between Henry Miller, June Miller, and Anais Nin in 1931 Paris. The film created some controversy when it was released. It was the first film to be given an NC-17 rating by the MPAA.

;&quot;Rising Sun&quot; (1993)
Kaufman directed &quot;Rising Sun&quot; in 1993, an adaptation of Michael Crichton&#x27;s thriller which takes place in Los Angeles. The film starred Sean Connery and Wesley Snipes. Crichton angrily withdrew early on as a result of Kaufman softening the book&#x27;s more anti-Japan posturing.

In 1995, Kaufman narrated &quot;China: The Wild East&quot; a documentary directed by his son, Peter Kaufman.

;&quot;Quills&quot; (2000)
In 2000, Kaufman directed &quot;Quills&quot;, a film about the increasingly desperate efforts of the Marquis de Sade&#x27;s jailers to censor his licentious works, starring Geoffrey Rush, Joaquin Phoenix, Kate Winslet and Michael Caine.

=== 2004–2012 ===
;&quot;Twisted&quot; (2004)
In 2003, he directed &quot;Twisted&quot;, a thriller about a young policewoman whose casual sex partners are murdered while she herself suffers alcoholic blackouts. It starred Ashley Judd, Samuel L. Jackson and Andy Garcia.

;&quot;Hemingway &amp; Gellhorn&quot; (2012)
In 2012, eight years after his previous film, Kaufman directed an HBO biopic about Ernest Hemingway and his relationship with Martha Gellhorn entitled &quot;Hemingway &amp; Gellhorn&quot;. It starred Clive Owen and Nicole Kidman. The film had been planned for many years, but languished as a project so he could care for Rose, who was fighting a cancer which would prove terminal. Kidman read the script and told him, &quot;I want to do it ... no matter how long it takes. I&#x27;m in.&quot; The film was nominated for 15 Primetime Emmy Awards, including one for Kaufman for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie, or Dramatic Special.

=== Unproduced films ===
==Personal life==
Kaufman lives in San Francisco, where he also runs his production company, Walrus and Associates. In 1958, Kaufman met Rose Fisher and the couple married the following year. Their only son, Peter, was born in March 1960. Rose, who made appearances in bit roles in &quot;Henry &amp; June&quot; and &quot;Invasion of the Body Snatchers&quot;, died in 2009, aged 70, from cancer. She co-wrote the screenplays of &quot;The Wanderers&quot; and &quot;Henry &amp; June&quot;. Peter Kaufman was the producer of &quot;Henry &amp; June&quot;, &quot;Rising Sun&quot;, &quot;Quills&quot;, &quot;Twisted&quot;, and &quot;Hemingway &amp; Gellhorn&quot;. Peter is married to Christine Pelosi, daughter of Paul and Nancy Pelosi, the former Speaker of the United States House of Representatives, and they have a daughter, Isabella, born in 2009.

== Filmography ==
=== Film ===

Also credited as &quot;Based on characters created by&quot; for post-&quot;Raiders Indiana Jones&quot; films and video games.

=== Television ===
 Appearances 
== Awards and nominations ==
== Legacy ==
According to film historian Annette Insdorf, &quot;no other living American director has so consistently and successfully made movies for adults, tackling sensuality, artistic creation, and manipulation by authorities.&quot; Other critics note that Kaufman&#x27;s films are &quot;strong on mood and atmosphere,&quot; with powerful cinematography and a &quot;lyrical, poetic style&quot; to portray different historic periods. His later films have a somewhat European style, but the stories always &quot;stress individualism and integrity, and are clearly American.&quot;

==References==
==External links==
* 
* video: Philip Kaufman on Charlie Rose, talking about &quot;Hemingway and Gelhorn&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q176126" start="0" end="14" title="Philip Kaufman" label="Philip Kaufman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="54" end="67" title="film director" label="film director"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="72" end="84" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="207" end="218" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="249" end="262" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="270" end="290" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="487" end="505" title="Auteur theory#Origin" label="&amp;quot;auteur&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="611" end="618" title="Realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="620" end="626" title="horror films" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="628" end="635" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181001" start="637" end="644" title="erotica" label="erotica"/>
<link wikidata="Q21590660" start="646" end="653" title="Westerns" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q5937792" start="659" end="664" title="Crime fiction" label="crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122571" start="718" end="751" title="The Unbearable Lightness of Being (film)" label="The Unbearable Lightness of Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q739694" start="786" end="825" title="BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="BAFTA Award for Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="858" end="899" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q688743" start="947" end="960" title="The Wanderers (1979 film)" label="The Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217573" start="981" end="991" title="Rising Sun (film)" label="Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q598818" start="1020" end="1062" title="Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1978 film)" label="&amp;quot;Invasion of the Body Snatchers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q582138" start="1077" end="1093" title="Henry &amp;amp; June" label="Henry &amp;amp; June"/>
<link wikidata="Q761302" start="1118" end="1124" title="Quills (film)" label="Quills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197185" start="1170" end="1185" title="The Right Stuff (film)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="1221" end="1234" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q102427" start="1258" end="1270" title="Academy Award for Best Picture" label="Best Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1307" end="1310" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061772" start="1322" end="1346" title="Hemingway &amp;amp; Gellhorn" label="Hemingway &amp;amp; Gellhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403229" start="1385" end="1477" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Dramatic Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1541" end="1548" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330" start="1678" end="1691" title="German Jewish" label="German Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q51582" start="1751" end="1767" title="William Friedkin" label="William Friedkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251417" start="1877" end="1891" title="double feature" label="double feature"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="1911" end="1932" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="1993" end="2011" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="2176" end="2199" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q187765" start="2351" end="2363" title="Henry Miller" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q161387" start="2490" end="2497" title="kibbutz" label="kibbutz"/>
<link wikidata="Q220018" start="2609" end="2618" title="Anaïs Nin" label="Anaïs Nin"/>
<link wikidata="Q187765" start="2655" end="2667" title="Henry Miller" label="Henry Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q582138" start="2740" end="2756" title="Henry &amp;amp; June" label="Henry &amp;amp; June"/>
<link wikidata="Q257438" start="2779" end="2800" title="Saugus, Massachusetts" label="Saugus, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2894" end="2915" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q51488" start="3374" end="3389" title="John Cassavetes" label="John Cassavetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q774517" start="3394" end="3408" title="Shirley Clarke" label="Shirley Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580346" start="3980" end="3989" title="Goldstein (film)" label="Goldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q220018" start="4141" end="4150" title="Anaïs Nin" label="Anaïs Nin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84423" start="4240" end="4252" title="Martin Buber" label="Martin Buber"/>
<link wikidata="Q12363521" start="4266" end="4286" title="Tales of the Hasidim" label="Tales of the Hasidim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="4374" end="4389" title="The Second City" label="The Second City"/>
<link wikidata="Q42369" start="4484" end="4504" title="Cannes Film Festival" label="Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q50713" start="4527" end="4538" title="Jean Renoir" label="Jean Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q53002" start="4598" end="4615" title="François Truffaut" label="François Truffaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5439479" start="4923" end="4937" title="Fearless Frank" label="Fearless Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q167520" start="5040" end="5050" title="Jon Voight" label="Jon Voight"/>
<link wikidata="Q168383" start="5299" end="5316" title="Universal Pictures" label="Universal Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737869" start="5455" end="5490" title="The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid" label="The Great Northfield Minnesota Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="5506" end="5519" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q213626" start="5523" end="5534" title="Jesse James" label="Jesse James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554338" start="6085" end="6099" title="The White Dawn" label="The White Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128810" start="6162" end="6175" title="James Archibald Houston" label="James Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q709133" start="6237" end="6249" title="Warren Oates" label="Warren Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q329719" start="6251" end="6268" title="Louis Gossett Jr." label="Louis Gossett Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1305044" start="6274" end="6289" title="Timothy Bottoms" label="Timothy Bottoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q477630" start="6526" end="6548" title="The Outlaw Josey Wales" label="The Outlaw Josey Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="6631" end="6645" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q284166" start="6773" end="6785" title="Sondra Locke" label="Sondra Locke"/>
<link wikidata="Q598818" start="6956" end="6986" title="Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1978 film)" label="Invasion of the Body Snatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q436910" start="7280" end="7292" title="Pauline Kael" label="Pauline Kael"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="7371" end="7398" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="the San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q688743" start="7611" end="7624" title="The Wanderers (1979 film)" label="The Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374243" start="7656" end="7669" title="Richard Price (writer)" label="Richard Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334766" start="7863" end="7871" title="Ken Wahl" label="Ken Wahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q229137" start="7876" end="7887" title="Karen Allen" label="Karen Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2562640" start="8094" end="8107" title="Indiana Jones" label="Indiana Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q174284" start="8120" end="8143" title="Raiders of the Lost Ark" label="Raiders of the Lost Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q38222" start="8233" end="8245" title="George Lucas" label="George Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q131316" start="8306" end="8325" title="Ark of the Covenant" label="Ark of the Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197185" start="8456" end="8471" title="The Right Stuff (film)" label="The Right Stuff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3301814" start="8513" end="8534" title="The Right Stuff (book)" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q216195" start="8538" end="8547" title="Tom Wolfe" label="Tom Wolfe"/>
<link wikidata="Q104791" start="8762" end="8771" title="Ed Harris" label="Ed Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q114179" start="8773" end="8784" title="Scott Glenn" label="Scott Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q350714" start="8786" end="8795" title="Fred Ward" label="Fred Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q200768" start="8800" end="8812" title="Dennis Quaid" label="Dennis Quaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q506885" start="8829" end="8844" title="William Goldman" label="William Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="9123" end="9135" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q294583" start="9147" end="9158" title="Sam Shepard" label="Sam Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176847" start="9457" end="9470" title="David Thomson (film critic)" label="David Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122571" start="10136" end="10169" title="The Unbearable Lightness of Being (film)" label="The Unbearable Lightness of Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q93166" start="10258" end="10271" title="Milan Kundera" label="Milan Kundera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="10301" end="10334" title="Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107258" start="10373" end="10414" title="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay" label="Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay"/>
<link wikidata="Q582138" start="10491" end="10507" title="Henry &amp;amp; June" label="Henry &amp;amp; June"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987792" start="10711" end="10716" title="NC-17" label="NC-17"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217573" start="10792" end="10802" title="Rising Sun (film)" label="Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q172140" start="10835" end="10851" title="Michael Crichton" label="Michael Crichton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573" start="10919" end="10931" title="Sean Connery" label="Sean Connery"/>
<link wikidata="Q189694" start="10936" end="10949" title="Wesley Snipes" label="Wesley Snipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q761302" start="11232" end="11238" title="Quills (film)" label="Quills"/>
<link wikidata="Q166272" start="11373" end="11386" title="Geoffrey Rush" label="Geoffrey Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q185140" start="11388" end="11403" title="Joaquin Phoenix" label="Joaquin Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="11405" end="11417" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q123351" start="11422" end="11435" title="Michael Caine" label="Michael Caine"/>
<link wikidata="Q701896" start="11511" end="11518" title="Twisted (2004 film)" label="Twisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="11820" end="11823" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="11837" end="11853" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q120085" start="11880" end="11895" title="Martha Gellhorn" label="Martha Gellhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061772" start="11911" end="11935" title="Hemingway &amp;amp; Gellhorn" label="Hemingway &amp;amp; Gellhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q183178" start="11954" end="11964" title="Clive Owen" label="Clive Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q37459" start="11969" end="11982" title="Nicole Kidman" label="Nicole Kidman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338977" start="12276" end="12297" title="64th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403229" start="12329" end="12395" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie or a Dramatic Special" label="Outstanding Directing for a Miniseries, Movie, or Dramatic Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q582138" start="12711" end="12727" title="Henry &amp;amp; June" label="Henry &amp;amp; June"/>
<link wikidata="Q598818" start="12744" end="12774" title="Invasion of the Body Snatchers (1978 film)" label="Invasion of the Body Snatchers"/>
<link wikidata="Q688743" start="12856" end="12869" title="The Wanderers (1979 film)" label="The Wanderers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217573" start="12980" end="12990" title="Rising Sun (film)" label="Rising Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q761302" start="13004" end="13010" title="Quills (film)" label="Quills"/>
<link wikidata="Q701896" start="13024" end="13031" title="Twisted (2004 film)" label="Twisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061772" start="13049" end="13073" title="Hemingway &amp;amp; Gellhorn" label="Hemingway &amp;amp; Gellhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111145" start="13101" end="13117" title="Christine Pelosi" label="Christine Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152909" start="13131" end="13135" title="Paul Pelosi" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q170581" start="13140" end="13152" title="Nancy Pelosi" label="Nancy Pelosi"/>
<link wikidata="Q912994" start="13165" end="13218" title="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives" label="Speaker of the United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q50334353" start="13533" end="13548" title="Annette Insdorf" label="Annette Insdorf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871397" wikidata="Q882499" url="?curid=871397" title="Millard Caldwell">
<text>Millard Fillmore Caldwell (February 6, 1897 – October 23, 1984) was an American politician, lawyer, and jurist. He was the 29th governor of Florida (1945–1949) and served in all three branches of government at various times in his life, including as a U.S. representative and Florida Supreme Court justice.

==Early life==
Caldwell was born in the rural area of Beverly, Tennessee, outside Knoxville. There he attended public schools and attended Carson-Newman College, the University of Mississippi, and the University of Virginia. During World War I, Caldwell enlisted in the U.S. Army on April 3, 1918. He was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Field Artillery, and was discharged on January 11, 1919. Caldwell moved to Milton, Florida in 1924, practicing law there.

==Career==
=== Early career ===
In 1926, Caldwell began serving as prosecutor and county attorney of Santa Rosa County; in 1929, he was elected as a Democrat to the state House, where he was a member until 1932.

=== US Congress and gubernatorial interim ===
Caldwell would enter the 1932 Democratic primary late for Florida&#x27;s 3rd Congressional District. In the end he would end up defeating Tom Yon and in congress he would serve as a member on two committees: Foreign Affairs and Appropriations. While serving in Congress he would urge that the US be self-sufficient for its war resources by 1934. He would unsuccessfully try to place an embargo on shipments to Japan and he did advocate for expanding both the Navy and Army. He would retire from Congress on January 1, 1941, and move to Tallahassee where he would practice law along with operate a dairy and raise cattle.

=== Governorship ===
In 1944, Caldwell was elected governor of Florida. Taking office in 1945, Caldwell&#x27;s term is noted for his segregationist beliefs, as well as his support for road construction projects and the establishment of the Educational Minimum Foundation Program, which gave education funds to rural counties. One of the more colorful aspects of Caldwell&#x27;s term came on August 10, 1945, during the surrender of Japan in World War II, when Caldwell issued a proclamation urging bars and other alcohol-selling establishments to close in order to prevent a frenzy of drunken celebration in the streets.

Caldwell would support Harry S. Truman&#x27;s run for president in 1948 as many Southern Democrats had left the party.

=== Post-governorship activities ===
After leaving office in 1949, Caldwell was appointed the administrator of the Federal Civil Defense Administration by then-President Harry S. Truman in 1950. After leaving this post in 1952, Caldwell served as a justiceand later chief justiceon the State Supreme Court from 1962 to 1969.

On May 14, 1953, Caldwell was initiated as an honorary brother in the Alpha Phi chapter of Alpha Kappa Psi at the University of Florida

==Death==
Caldwell died in Tallahassee on October 23, 1984. He is interred at Blackwood-Harwood Plantations Cemetery in Leon County in Tallahassee, Florida.

== Personal life ==
Caldwell was married to Mary Harwood Caldwell; the couple&#x27;s three children were Susan, Millard, and Sally.

During his life, Caldwell was a member of the Newcomen Society, Freemasons, Shriners, Elks, and Knights of Pythias. He was also a member of Kappa Sigma and Phi Alpha Delta.

==See also==
* List of governors of Florida

==References==
==External links==
* Biographical Directory of the United States Congress


|-




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q882499" start="0" end="25" title="Millard Caldwell" label="Millard Fillmore Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q878313" start="123" end="147" title="List of governors of Florida" label="29th governor of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="252" end="271" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. representative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001105" start="276" end="297" title="Florida Supreme Court" label="Florida Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="371" end="380" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q185582" start="390" end="399" title="Knoxville, Tennessee" label="Knoxville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445010" start="447" end="468" title="Carson-Newman College" label="Carson-Newman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="474" end="499" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213439" start="509" end="531" title="University of Virginia" label="University of Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="540" end="551" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="578" end="587" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="631" end="648" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q962936" start="731" end="737" title="Milton, Florida" label="Milton"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="739" end="746" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q494500" start="880" end="897" title="Santa Rosa County, Florida" label="Santa Rosa County"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="928" end="936" title="United States Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q909020" start="944" end="955" title="Florida House of Representatives" label="state House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439459" start="1176" end="1183" title="Tom Yon" label="Tom Yon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973577" start="1246" end="1261" title="United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q10863020" start="1266" end="1280" title="United States House Committee on Appropriations" label="Appropriations"/>
<link wikidata="Q59816" start="1793" end="1807" title="segregationist" label="segregationist"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="2079" end="2113" title="Victory over Japan Day" label="surrender of Japan in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q641983" start="2517" end="2553" title="Federal Civil Defense Administration" label="Federal Civil Defense Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2562" end="2571" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="2572" end="2587" title="Harry S. Truman" label="Harry S. Truman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735065" start="2819" end="2834" title="Alpha Kappa Psi" label="Alpha Kappa Psi"/>
<link wikidata="Q501758" start="2842" end="2863" title="University of Florida" label="University of Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q37043" start="2892" end="2903" title="Tallahassee, Florida" label="Tallahassee"/>
<link wikidata="Q488576" start="2985" end="2996" title="Leon County, Florida" label="Leon County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7017639" start="3202" end="3218" title="Newcomen Society" label="Newcomen Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="3220" end="3230" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934902" start="3232" end="3240" title="Ancient Arabic Order of the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine" label="Shriners"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895789" start="3242" end="3246" title="Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks" label="Elks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777154" start="3252" end="3270" title="Knights of Pythias" label="Knights of Pythias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6367086" start="3296" end="3307" title="Kappa Sigma" label="Kappa Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181498" start="3312" end="3327" title="Phi Alpha Delta" label="Phi Alpha Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q878313" start="3345" end="3373" title="List of governors of Florida" label="List of governors of Florida"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871398" wikidata="Q645280" url="?curid=871398" title="Is There Anybody Out There? The Wall Live 1980–81">
<text>Is There Anybody Out There? The Wall Live 1980–81 is a live album released by Pink Floyd in 2000. It is a live rendition of &quot;The Wall&quot;, produced and engineered by James Guthrie, with tracks selected from the August 1980 and June 1981 performances at Earls Court in London. The album was first released in the United Kingdom on 27 March 2000, and a US/Canadian release by Columbia Records on 18 April.

The shows involved the construction of a wall on stage throughout the first half of the show. Once complete, members of the band performed in small openings in, atop, in front of, or even behind the wall. The album artwork featured the life-masks of the four band members in front of a black wall; the masks were worn by the &quot;surrogate band&quot; during the song &quot;In the Flesh&quot;. &quot;Goodbye Blue Sky&quot; and parts of &quot;Run Like Hell&quot; were taken from the 17 June 1981 show, the very last performance by the four-man Pink Floyd until the 2005 Live 8 concert.

The album was remastered and re-released in February 2012 as part of The Wall’s ‘Immersion’ boxset. Despite this, it remained absent from most music streaming platforms—except for YouTube—until December 2024, when it was finally added to the Apple Music catalog (only in USA). However, it continues to be unavailable on other major streaming services, including Spotify. The addition to Apple Music was likely due to Sony Music Entertainment’s acquisition of Pink Floyd’s music rights in October 2024, which may have facilitated the album’s availability on the platform.

==Content==
&quot;Is There Anybody Out There?&quot; contains live versions of all the original songs along with two additional songs: &quot;What Shall We Do Now?&quot; and &quot;The Last Few Bricks&quot;. &quot;What Shall We Do Now?&quot; was planned for the original album but removed just before release. (It remained on the lyric sheet for the original LP, but excised from future CD re-releases.) &quot;The Last Few Bricks&quot; was an instrumental bridge between &quot;Another Brick in the Wall (Part III)&quot; and &quot;Goodbye Cruel World&quot;, and contained themes from &quot;The Happiest Days of Our Lives&quot;, &quot;Don&#x27;t Leave Me Now&quot;, &quot;Young Lust&quot;, &quot;Empty Spaces&quot; and &quot;What Shall We Do Now?&quot;, all transposed to D minor. It was played to allow the bricklayers to almost completely seal off the stage before Roger Waters appeared in the last brick-wide space in the wall to sing &quot;Goodbye Cruel World&quot;, ending the first set of the show. This music never had an official title before the release of the live album. Fans named the track &quot;Almost Gone&quot; on some bootleg albums of the shows, but the official name was suggested by producer James Guthrie during the mixing of the live album. The album also contained two spoken tracks titled &quot;MC: Atmos&quot; (&quot;Master of Ceremonies&quot; for the first North American release), which served as introductions to the songs &quot;In the Flesh?&quot; and &quot;In the Flesh&quot;, respectively. These were performed by Gary Yudman, MC for the Earls Court and Nassau Coliseum shows. Yudman&#x27;s performance for &quot;In the Flesh&quot; (nearing just past the middle of the second act) had him dressed in white &quot;zombie&quot; make-up and he pretended to speak like a tape recording being played back at a slower speed. It&#x27;s a common misconception that these are actual recordings of the first intro at the beginning of the concert. In fact the words from both of his performances at the beginning of the show and then towards the end never actually match at all. Every performance was different and was used by many bootleg collectors to identify which concert they were listening to (&quot;The band is about ready to begin, I think ... No, not quite yet&quot;) of waiting for the band to start.

The tracks differed slightly from the studio album, primarily in terms of longer intros and extended solos. Due to the constraints of vinyl records, the band had been forced to severely edit many songs for the album, removing whole sections, many of which were restored in concert. For example, &quot;The Show Must Go On&quot; had an extra verse that was deleted from the original studio recording (but included in the lyric sheet, even on the latest CD releases.) &quot;Outside the Wall&quot; was longer and re-arranged with mandolin, accordion, clarinet, acoustic guitars, tambourines and more natural-sounding vocal harmonies from the quartet of Joe Chemay, Jim Farber, Jim Haas, and Jon Joyce. (This would be the third official version of &quot;Outside the Wall&quot; available to the listener, following the extended orchestral version from the 1982 film.)

== Release ==
The album was released to commemorate the 20th anniversary of &quot;The Wall&quot; and The Wall Tour.

&quot;Is There Anybody Out There?&quot; was re-issued in the US and Canada in July 2005, remastered by James Guthrie, Joel Plante and Kim Richards. The booklet features some songwriting updates and mentions that the MC: Atmos on disc one used a sample of &quot;We&#x27;ll Meet Again&quot; by Vera Lynn.

==Track listing==


==Personnel==
Pink Floyd
*David Gilmour – electric guitar and acoustic guitars, vocals, mandolin on &quot;Outside the Wall&quot;, musical director
*Roger Waters – vocals, bass guitar, acoustic guitar on &quot;Mother&quot;, clarinet on &quot;Outside the Wall&quot;
*Nick Mason – drums, percussion, acoustic guitar on &quot;Outside the Wall&quot;
*Richard Wright – piano, organ, synthesizer, accordion on &quot;Outside the Wall&quot; (During the tour, Wright was no longer part of the band, but hired as a session musician. Despite this, he was listed as a band member in the tour program and the album credits)

Additional personnel

*Peter Wood – keyboards, acoustic guitar on &quot;Outside the Wall&quot;
*Snowy White – guitars (1980 shows)
*Andy Roberts – guitars (1981 shows)
*Andy Bown – bass guitar, acoustic guitar on &quot;Outside the Wall&quot;
*Willie Wilson – drums, percussion (Except for the 14 June 1981 Show)
*Clive Brooks – drums, percussion (14 June 1981 Show) 
*Joe Chemay – backing vocals
*Stan Farber – backing vocals
*Jim Haas – backing vocals
*Jon Joyce – backing vocals
*Gary Yudman – MC

==Charts and certifications==



===Certifications===


==References==

== External links ==
*- Site containing transcripts of Waters&#x27; speeches before Run Like Hell</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="78" end="88" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q925427" start="106" end="120" title="Pink Floyd live performances" label="live rendition"/>
<link wikidata="Q151114" start="130" end="138" title="The Wall" label="The Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338747" start="173" end="186" title="James Guthrie (record producer)" label="James Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500662" start="214" end="256" title="The Wall Tour (1980-1981 concert tour by Pink Floyd)" label="the August 1980 and June 1981 performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130746" start="260" end="271" title="Earls Court Exhibition Centre" label="Earls Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="275" end="281" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q183387" start="381" end="397" title="Columbia Records" label="Columbia Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q960719" start="786" end="798" title="In the Flesh (Pink Floyd song)" label="In the Flesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q193892" start="981" end="987" title="Live 8" label="Live 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="1178" end="1185" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q20056642" start="1240" end="1251" title="Apple Music" label="Apple Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q689141" start="1360" end="1367" title="Spotify" label="Spotify"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="1415" end="1439" title="Sony Music Entertainment" label="Sony Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629935" start="1748" end="1767" title="The Last Few Bricks" label="The Last Few Bricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629935" start="1977" end="1996" title="The Last Few Bricks" label="The Last Few Bricks"/>
<link wikidata="Q567940" start="2044" end="2080" title="Another Brick in the Wall" label="Another Brick in the Wall (Part III)"/>
<link wikidata="Q151114" start="2097" end="2116" title="Goodbye Cruel World (Pink Floyd song)" label="Goodbye Cruel World"/>
<link wikidata="Q637965" start="2156" end="2186" title="The Happiest Days of Our Lives" label="The Happiest Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574842" start="2200" end="2223" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Leave Me Now (Pink Floyd song)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Leave Me Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q596981" start="2237" end="2247" title="Young Lust (song)" label="Young Lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q815323" start="2323" end="2333" title="transposition (music)" label="transposed"/>
<link wikidata="Q283903" start="2337" end="2344" title="D minor" label="D minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q180861" start="2432" end="2444" title="Roger Waters" label="Roger Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q497240" start="2907" end="2927" title="Master of Ceremonies" label="Master of Ceremonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="4423" end="4431" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="4433" end="4442" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="4444" end="4452" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="4454" end="4469" title="acoustic guitar" label="acoustic guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287472" start="4546" end="4556" title="Joe Chemay" label="Joe Chemay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4558" end="4568" title="Jim Farber" label="Jim Farber"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195360" start="4570" end="4578" title="Jim Haas" label="Jim Haas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4584" end="4593" title="Jon Joyce" label="Jon Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q213683" start="4752" end="4756" title="Pink Floyd – The Wall" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q229330" start="5169" end="5178" title="Vera Lynn" label="Vera Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q178517" start="5227" end="5240" title="David Gilmour" label="David Gilmour"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="5243" end="5258" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="5263" end="5279" title="acoustic guitars" label="acoustic guitars"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="5281" end="5287" title="vocals" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="5289" end="5297" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q180861" start="5349" end="5361" title="Roger Waters" label="Roger Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="5372" end="5383" title="bass guitar" label="bass guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8343" start="5424" end="5432" title="clarinet" label="clarinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q192936" start="5466" end="5476" title="Nick Mason" label="Nick Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="5479" end="5484" title="drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="5486" end="5496" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190251" start="5547" end="5561" title="Richard Wright (musician)" label="Richard Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="5564" end="5569" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="5571" end="5576" title="organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="5578" end="5589" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="5591" end="5600" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="5848" end="5857" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q450815" start="5908" end="5919" title="Snowy White" label="Snowy White"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761240" start="5944" end="5956" title="Andy Roberts (musician)" label="Andy Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q525467" start="5981" end="5990" title="Andy Bown" label="Andy Bown"/>
<link wikidata="Q12010708" start="6055" end="6068" title="Willie Wilson (drummer)" label="Willie Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134512" start="6125" end="6137" title="Clive Brooks" label="Clive Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287472" start="6180" end="6190" title="Joe Chemay" label="Joe Chemay"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="6193" end="6207" title="backing vocals" label="backing vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6195360" start="6239" end="6247" title="Jim Haas" label="Jim Haas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871400" wikidata="Q1742559" url="?curid=871400" title="Nabob (disambiguation)">
<text>A [[nabob]], an English form of &quot;nawab&quot;, is a merchant-leader of high social status and wealth.

Nabob may also refer to:
*Nabob (coffee), a brand of coffee in Canada
*HMS &quot;Nabob&quot; (D77), a Bogue-class escort aircraft carrier
*Nabob, Wisconsin, an unincorporated community
*Nawab, the provincial governor or viceroy in the Mughal empire
*&quot;The Nabob&quot;, a play by the 18th-century English playwright Samuel Foote.

==See also==
* Nabab (disambiguation)
* Navvab (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1742559" start="2" end="11" title="Nabob (disambiguation)" label="[[nabob]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q1742559" start="107" end="112" title="Nabob (disambiguation)" label="Nabob"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956983" start="133" end="147" title="Nabob (coffee)" label="Nabob (coffee)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226460" start="178" end="205" title="HMS Nabob (D77)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Nabob&amp;quot; (D77)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956979" start="246" end="262" title="Nabob, Wisconsin" label="Nabob, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23017648" start="293" end="298" title="Nawab" label="Nawab"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752999" start="363" end="372" title="The Nabob" label="The Nabob"/>
<link wikidata="Q27078588" start="456" end="478" title="Nabab (disambiguation)" label="Nabab (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982591" start="481" end="504" title="Navvab (disambiguation)" label="Navvab (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871403" wikidata="Q81925" url="?curid=871403" title="Lancashire Fusiliers">
<text>The Lancashire Fusiliers was a line infantry regiment of the British Army that saw distinguished service through many years and wars, including the Second Boer War, and the First and Second World Wars. It had many different titles throughout its 280 years of existence. 

In 1968 the regiment was amalgamated with the other regiments of the Fusilier Brigade – the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers, Royal Warwickshire Fusiliers and the Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment) – to form the current Royal Regiment of Fusiliers.

==History==
===17th–19th century===

====Peyton&#x27;s Regiment of Foot (1688–1740)====

By a commission dated 20November 1688, the regiment was formed in Torbay, Devon under Sir Richard Peyton as Peyton&#x27;s Regiment of Foot. (Until 1751 the regiment&#x27;s name changed according to the name of the colonel commanding.) The regiment served in the Glorious Revolution under King William III, and at the Battle of the Boyne in July 1690 and the Battle of Aughrim in 1691. During the War of the Spanish Succession (1701–1714), it aided in the capture of Spanish galleons at Battle of Vigo Bay in 1702.

==== Bligh&#x27;s Regiment of Foot (1740–1746) ====
Under the command of Thomas Bligh, the regiment distinguished itself at the Battle of Dettingen in June 1743 and at the Battle of Fontenoy in May 1745. Under the command of Edward Cornwallis, the regiment also served at the Battle of Culloden in April 1746 during the Jacobite rising of 1745. In December 1748, Cornwallis established a Freemason&#x27;s Lodge for the regiment, on the registry of the Grand Lodge of Ireland.

====20th Regiment of Foot (1751–1782)====
In 1751, the regiment became the 20th Regiment of Foot, often written in Roman numerals &#x27;XX Foot&#x27;, (hence the nickname &quot;The Two Tens&quot;). During the Seven Years&#x27; War the regiment earned honour at the Battle of Minden on 1 August 1759, when, as an infantry formation, they stood fast and broke a French cavalry charge. During the American Revolutionary War, the regiment was sent to Quebec in April 1776 and assisted in the relief of Quebec in May 1776. Serving under General John Burgoyne for the remainder of the Canadian campaign, they later surrendered along with General Burgoyne at Saratoga.

====20th (East Devonshire) Regiment of Foot (1782–1881)====

The 20th Regiment of Foot was designated the 20th (East Devonshire) Regiment of Foot in 1782. The regiment embarked for Holland in August 1799 to take part in the Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland. It fought at the Battle of Krabbendam in September 1799 and the Battle of Alkmaar in October 1799. It departed for Egypt in spring 1801 and saw action at the Battle of Alexandria in March 1801, during the French Revolutionary Wars. After moving to Calabria, it took part in the Battle of Maida in July 1806 during the War of the Third Coalition.

The regiment embarked for Portugal in 1808 for service in the Peninsular War. It saw action at the Battle of Vimeiro in August 1808 and the Battle of Corunna in January 1809 before being evacuated home later that month. The regiment returned to the Peninsula and fought at the Battle of Vitoria in June 1813, where it formed part of the &quot;backbone&quot; of the Duke of Wellington&#x27;s forces. It then pursued the French Army into France and took part in the Battle of the Pyrenees in July 1813, the Battle of Nivelle in November 1813, and the Battle of Orthez in February 1814, as well the Battle of Toulouse in April 1814.

During the Crimean War, the regiment took part in the Battle of Alma in September 1854 and the Battle of Inkerman in November 1854. The 2nd Battalion was raised in 1858.

====Lancashire Fusiliers (1881–1908)====

The regiment was not superficially affected by the Cardwell Reforms of the 1870s – as it already possessed two battalions, there was no need for it to amalgamate with another regiment. However, in setting its depot at Wellington Barracks in Bury from 1873, it lost its West Country affiliations. This was exacerbated by the Childers reforms of 1881. Under the reforms the regiment became The Lancashire Fusiliers on 1 July 1881. 

Under the new arrangements, each county regiment had two Militia battalions attached to it: these were found by the 7th Royal Lancashire Militia (Rifles), raised in 1855 and recruited from Bury, Manchester and Salford. This formed the 3rd and 4th Battalions of the Lancashire Fusiliers. In addition, Rifle Volunteer Corps were attached to their local regiments. In 1883 the 8th Lancashire Rifle Volunteers (raised at Bury on 22 August 1859) became the 1st Volunteer Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers, and the 12th Lancashire Rifle Volunteers (originally the 24th, raised at Rochdale in February 1860) became the 2nd Volunteer Battalion. In 1886 the 56th Lancashire Rifle Volunteers (raised at Salford on 5 March 1860) was transferred from the Manchester Regiment to become the 3rd Volunteer Battalion.

In common with other regiments recruited from populous urban areas, the Lancashire Fusiliers raised two further regular battalions, the 3rd in 1898, and the 4th in March 1900. This necessitated adjustments to the numbers of the Militia battalions, which became the 5th and 6th battalions. However, the 3rd and 4th Regular battalions were disbanded in 1906.

The 1st Battalion was stationed in Ireland from 1881 to September 1885, and again from April 1891 to 1897. In 1899 it was posted to Crete, and from 1901 at Malta.

The 2nd Battalion was stationed in British India from 1881 to 1898. It was sent to Africa to take part in Kitchener&#x27;s campaign to reconquer the Sudan and fought at the Battle of Omdurman. 

After a year at Malta, the battalion was posted to South Africa in December 1899, following the outbreak of the Second Boer War two months earlier.

During the Second Boer War, the 2nd Battalion saw action at the Battle of Spion Kop in January 1900 and took part in the Relief of Ladysmith in February 1900. The battalion served in South Africa throughout the war, which ended with the Peace of Vereeniging in June 1902. 

About 570 officers and men left Cape Town on the SS &quot;Britannic&quot; in October that year. They were stationed at Aldershot after their return to the United Kingdom. The 5th and 6th (Militia) Battalions also served in South Africa, the 6th leaving with 650 men on 10 February 1900, and later being involved in a sharp action at Luckhoff. The 5th battalion served in the last year of the war. The battalions were awarded the battle honours South Africa 1900–01 (for the 6th) and South Africa 1901–02 (for the 5th). All three Volunteer Battalions also found &#x27;service companies&#x27; of volunteers who served alongside the Regulars, and gained the battle honour South Africa 1900–1902 for their battalions.

====Haldane Reforms====
Under the Haldane Reforms of 1908, the Militia were redesignated Special Reserve, with the dual wartime role of Home Defence and providing drafts for the Regular Battalions. The Lancashire Fusiliers&#x27; militia became 3rd (Reserve) Battalion and 4th (Extra Reserve) Battalion, both based at Bury. The volunteers now became the Territorial Force (TF), with battalions numbered in sequence after the militia. Thus the 1st Volunteer Battalion at Castle Armoury in Bury became 5th Battalion, 2nd Volunteer Battalion at Baron Street in Rochdale became the 6th Battalion, and the 3rd Volunteer Battalion formed the 7th and 8th battalions both based at Cross Lane in Salford. These four battalions formed the Lancashire Fusiliers Brigade, in the East Lancashire Division of the TF, on the eve of the First World War.

===First World War===
====Regular Army====
The 1st Battalion, which was based in Karachi in the early months of the war, returned to the United Kingdom in January 1915. It was prominent at the landing at Cape Helles on 25 April 1915 during the Gallipoli Campaign as part of the 86th Brigade in the 29th Division. The shore had been silent but as the first boat landed, Ottoman small-arms fire swept the British and caused many casualties. Six Victoria Crosses were awarded to the 1st Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers – &#x27;the six VCs before breakfast&#x27;. The landing spot (&quot;W Beach&quot;) was later known as &#x27;Lancashire Landing&#x27;. The battalion were evacuated in January 1916 and landed at Marseille in March 1916. It saw action on the Western Front.

The 2nd Battalion landed at Boulogne as part of the 12th Brigade in the 4th Division in August 1914 and also saw action on the Western Front. Between November 1915 and February 1916, the brigade was part of 36th (Ulster) Division before returning to the 4th Division.

====Special Reserve====
The 3rd (Reserve) and 4th (Extra Reserve) Battalions spent the whole war in England, the 3rd Bn in the Humber Garrison and the 4th initially at Barrow-in-Furness and later in the Severn Garrison. They fulfilled their dual role of coast defence and preparing reinforcement drafts of regular reservists, special reservists, recruits and returning wounded for the regular battalions serving overseas. Thousands of men would have passed through their ranks during the war. While at Hull, the 3rd Battalion assisted in the formation of 13th (Reserve) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers, from Kitchener&#x27;s Army volunteers.

====Territorial Force====
Soon after the outbreak of war, the formation of Reserve or 2nd Line units for each existing TF unit was authorised. These units took the &#x27;prefix &#x27;2/&#x27; while the parent battalions took &#x27;1/&#x27;. Eventually, both 1st and 2nd Line battalions went overseas and 3rd Line battalions were raised to supply recruits.

The 1/5th Battalion, 1/6th Battalion, 1/7th Battalion and 1/8th Battalion all landed at Cape Helles, as part of the 125th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade, in early May 1915. They took part in the Second Battle of Krithia (6–8 May) under command of the 29th Division. The brigade later rejoined the 42nd (East Lancashire) Division for the Third Battle of Krithia and Battle of Krithia Vineyard. 

Evacuated from Gallipoli in December 1915, these four battalions landed on Moudros and proceeded to Egypt. From there they were transferred to Marseille in February 1917 for service on the Western Front.

The 2/5th Battalion landed at Boulogne as part of the 3rd Highland Brigade in the Highland Division in May 1915 for service on the Western Front. The 2/6th Battalion, 2/7th Battalion and 2/8th Battalion all landed at Le Havre as part of the 197th Brigade in the 66th (2nd East Lancashire) Division in February 1917 also for service on the Western Front. The 3/5th Battalion landed at Le Havre as part of same brigade in March 1917 also for service on the Western Front. 

After the losses incurred during the German spring offensive in March 1918, the remains of the 2/7th Bn were reduced to a cadre and used to train newly arrived US Army units for trench warfare. The cadre returned to England and was reconstituted as 24th Battalion. This was a training unit based at Cromer until the end of the war.

====New Army Battalions====
The 9th (Service) Battalion waded ashore in deep water and darkness at Suvla Bay on the night of 6/7 August 1915, as part of 34th Brigade of 11th (Northern) Division, and were pinned down on the beach losing their commanding officer, Lieutenant-Colonel H. M. Welstead, and a number of officers. Evacuated from Gallipoli in December 1915, it moved to Egypt and was then transferred to France in July 1916 for service on the Western Front.

The 10th (Service) Battalion landed at Boulogne as part of the 52nd Brigade in the 17th (Northern) Division in July 1915 for service on the Western Front. The 11th (Service) Battalion landed at Boulogne in September 1915 as part of the 74th Brigade of the 25th Division; the famous fantasy author J. R. R. Tolkien served with this battalion until contracting trench fever during the Battle of the Somme in October 1916.

The 12th (Service) Battalion landed at Boulogne as part of the 65th Brigade in the 22nd Division in September 1915 but moved with the Division to Salonika, arriving in November 1915 before moving to France for service on the Western Front in July 1918. The 15th (Service) Battalion (1st Salford) and 16th (Service) Battalion (2nd Salford) landed at Boulogne as part of the 96th Brigade in the 32nd Division in November 1915 also for service on the Western Front. The 17th (Service) Battalion (1st South East Lancashire) and 18th (Service) Battalion (2nd South East Lancashire) landed at Le Havre as part of the 104th Brigade in the 35th Division in January 1916 also for service on the Western Front. The 19th (Service) Battalion (3rd Salford) (Pioneers) landed at Le Havre as part of the 96th Brigade in the 32nd Division in November 1915 also for service on the Western Front. The 20th (Service) Battalion (4th Salford) landed at Le Havre as part of the 104th Brigade in the 35th Division in January 1916 also for service on the Western Front.

====War memorial====
A war memorial to the regiment, commissioned in honour of its First World War casualties, was erected outside Wellington Barracks in Bury, opposite the regimental headquarters. With the demolition of the barracks, the memorial was relocated to Gallipoli Garden in the town. It was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens, famous for the Cenotaph in London, whose father and great uncle served in the Lancashire Fusiliers. After the amalgamation into the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers, the memorial was re-dedicated to all fusiliers killed in service.

===Second World War===
====Regular Army battalions====
After recovering its numbers from the First World War, the 1st Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers spent the interwar period based in various garrisons around the British Empire. In 1939, upon the outbreak of the Second World War, the battalion was based in British India. During the Burma Campaign, the 1st Battalion fought with various units until 1943 when it became a Chindits formation with the 77th Indian Infantry Brigade, which was commanded by Brigadier Orde Wingate. The battalion was involved in both major Chindit operations, suffering many casualties before the war ended.

From the outbreak of war in 1939 to 1940, the 2nd Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers was deployed with the 11th Infantry Brigade, alongside the 1st East Surreys and 1st Oxford and Bucks Light Infantry (later replaced by the 5th Northants). The brigade was part of the 4th Infantry Division and was sent overseas in October 1939 to join the British Expeditionary Force (BEF). The 2nd Battalion fought against the German Army in the battles of Belgium and France, until being forced to retreat to Dunkirk and were evacuated back to the United Kingdom, where they stayed until late 1942, anticipating a German invasion. In June 1942, the 11th Brigade, of whom the 2nd Lancashire Fusiliers were a part, was transferred to the newly created 78th Infantry Division. They then served in the final stages of the North African Campaign, the Tunisian Campaign, where the 78th &quot;Battleaxe&quot; Division gained an excellent reputation, Medjez El Bab, Sicily, and the Italian Campaign (as part of the Gothic Line). During the fighting in Italy, Fusilier Frank Jefferson was awarded the Victoria Cross.

A former member of the battalion, Wallace Jackson, died on Thursday, 12 November 2009 aged 89 years.
====Territorial Army battalions====
The 1/5th Battalion was a 1st-Line Territorial Army (TA) unit serving in the 42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division with the 1/6th and 1/8th battalions in the 125th Infantry brigade. They were sent to France in April 1940 to join the rest of the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) and fought in the Battle of Dunkirk and were evacuated to Britain. In 1941, the battalion was converted to armour as the 108th Regiment Royal Armoured Corps (Lancashire Fusiliers). Units converted in this way continued to wear their infantry cap badge on the black beret of the Royal Armoured Corps.

The 1/6th Battalion served alongside the 1/5th Battalion in France in April–June 1940 and were driven back to Dunkirk. In 1941, this 1st-Line TA Battalion was converted, like the 1/5th Battalion, to armour as 109th Regiment Royal Armoured Corps.

In 1936, the 7th Battalion was converted into 39th (The Lancashire Fusiliers) Anti-Aircraft Battalion, Royal Engineers, based in Salford. After mobilising in August 1939 to defend potential targets such as the Manchester Ship Canal and Barton Power Station during the Phoney War, it served in the Orkney Islands, guarding the Scapa Flow naval base. It returned to Lancashire in early 1941 to defend Liverpool during the May Blitz. In the summer of 1940, while serving in 53 Anti-Aircraft Brigade, covering the North Midlands, it was transferred as a Searchlight Regiment to the Royal Artillery (the day of the actual transfer, 1 August (Minden Day), was considered auspicious by the battalion). In May 1943, the regiment was reduced to a cadre under its old title of 7th Bn LF and took no further part in the war, but several of its batteries continued an independent existence, continuing to wear the Lancashire Fusiliers badge and to celebrate Minden Day. 354th and 357th Searchlight Batteries (the latter converted into 414th Light Anti-Aircraft Battery) defended Southern England against V-1 flying bomb attacks in the summer of 1944 (&#x27;Operation Diver&#x27;). 356th Searchlight Battery took part in D-Day and was later converted into a &#x27;Moonlight Battery&#x27; to provide &#x27;movement light&#x27; or &#x27;Monty&#x27;s moonlight&#x27; to assist 21st Army Group&#x27;s night operations during the campaign in North West Europe.

The 1/8th Battalion began the war in 125th Brigade with the 1/5th and 1/6th Battalions, but while in France with the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) it exchanged with the 1st Battalion, Border Regiment into the 4th Infantry Brigade part of the 2nd Infantry Division, as part of official BEF policy to mix the Regular and Territorial armies. During the Battle of France, the 1/8th Lancashire Fusiliers, along with the 1st Battalion, Royal Scots and the 2nd Battalion Royal Norfolk Regiment, were overrun on 26–27 May 1940 around the village of Locon, 2 kilometres north of Bethune, by advancing German troops. Several massacres of Allied prisoners took place shortly thereafter, such as the Le Paradis massacre, primarily by the German SS Totenkopf Division. Later, the battalion fought in the Burma Campaign and participated in many famous battles, such as the Battle of Kohima, serving in the British Fourteenth Army under Bill Slim.

The 2/5th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers was formed in 1939 as a duplicate of the 1/5th. It was part of the 197th Infantry Brigade, the 2nd-Line duplicate of the 1st-Line 125th Infantry Brigade. It served with the 66th Infantry Division until 23 June 1940, when the division disbanded. The brigade was then transferred to the 59th (Staffordshire) Infantry Division. They landed in Normandy as part of Operation Overlord on 29 June 1944 and first saw action in early July at Malon on the North West outskirts of Caen as part of Operation Charnwood, where they suffered 121 casualties. They also took part in Operation Pomegranate and the battles on the Orne River. Of all the companies in this battalion, B Company stood out for the highest number of officers killed (in just two months, B Company lost three commanding officers, and all officers on a company attack just outside Vendes). On 21 August 1944, the divisional commander, Major-General Lewis Lyne, late of the regiment, visited the battalion and informed them that the 59th Division was to be disbanded, due to a severe shortage of infantryman at the time, in order to provide replacements for other infantry units, and most had been battered during the recent heavy fighting. As a result, on 26 August, the battalion was officially disbanded and the companies were dispatched to different British battalions and divisions in the 21st Army Group. A Company was sent to 7th Royal Welch Fusiliers (53rd (Welsh) Division), B Company to 2nd Gordon Highlanders (15th (Scottish) Division), C Company to 2nd Glasgow Highlanders (15th (Scottish) Division) and D Company to 1st East Lancashire Regiment (53rd (Welsh) Division). The 59th Division was considered by General Sir Bernard Montgomery to be one of the best and most reliable divisions in his 21st Army Group; it was only chosen for disbandment because it was the youngest British division in France. The Battalion War Diary claimed it to be &quot;A sad day. 5 years of training for 8 weeks fighting, and unfortunately the break up of the battalion leaves the Regiment without representative in this Theatre of War&quot;.

The 2/6th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers came into being as a 2nd Line duplicate of the 1/6th Battalion. Like the 2/5th Battalion, the 2/6th Battalion was also part of 197th Infantry Brigade in the 66th Infantry Division and was also transferred to 59th (Staffordshire) Infantry Division after 66th Division disbanded. However, in October 1942, the battalion was transferred elsewhere when it was replaced in the 197th Brigade by the 1/7th Battalion, Royal Warwickshire Regiment. The 2/6th Battalion remained in the United Kingdom throughout the war, serving with many different brigades, including the 211th infantry Brigade (part of the 80th Infantry (Reserve) Division) from October 1942 to October 1943. From July 1944, the battalion served with the 203rd Infantry Brigade, part of the 77th Holding Division, and acted in a training role for the rest of the war.
This 2/8th Battalion was formed as a duplicate of the 1/8th Battalion and began the war in the 199th Infantry Brigade, alongside the 6th and 7th Manchester Regiment, part of the 66th Infantry Division and later was transferred to the 55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division when the 66th Division was disbanded in July 1940. It did not leave the United Kingdom and was disbanded in October 1944.
====Hostilities-only battalions====
The 9th (Service) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers was a hostilities-only battalion raised in June 1940 The battalion, commanded initially by Lieutenant Colonel Lewis Lyne, was very briefly assigned to the 208th Independent Infantry Brigade (Home) until December, when it was reassigned to the 125th Infantry Brigade, part of 42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division, alongside the 1/5th and 1/6th Lancashire Fusiliers. Both the brigade and division had seen active service earlier in the year in Belgium, France and Dunkirk. In late 1941, the 9th Battalion was converted to armour as 143rd Regiment Royal Armoured Corps. However, the regiment was disbanded in 1943.

The 10th (Service) Battalion was also raised in 1940 and served for a year in 208th Independent Infantry Brigade (Home), alongside the 9th Battalion, 13th King&#x27;s Regiment (Liverpool) and 22nd Royal Fusiliers. In 1942, it was shipped to India and fought in the Arakan Campaign 1942–1943 as part of 7th Indian Infantry Division, with 23rd Indian Infantry Brigade. The battalion was disbanded on 31 October 1945.

The 11th (Service) Battalion was a hostilities-only battalion raised in 1940, originally as the 50th (Holding) Battalion, whose role was to temporarily &#x27;hold&#x27; men who were medically unfit, awaiting orders, on courses or returning from abroad. In October 1940, the battalion was redesignated the 11th Battalion. The 11th Battalion served in the garrison of Malta during the Siege with the 233rd Infantry Brigade. In July 1944, it was to be disbanded but instead it was transferred to the 66th Infantry Brigade, serving alongside the 2nd Battalion, Royal Scots, a Regular unit, and 1st Battalion, Hertfordshire Regiment, a Territorial. The brigade became part of 1st Infantry Division, which was serving in the Italian Campaign, where it took part in the fighting on the Gothic Line, suffering severe casualties. Early in 1945, the 11th Battalion was transferred to Palestine with the rest of the 1st Infantry Division and remained there for the rest of the war.
===Post-1945===

====Regular Battalions====
In 1948, all infantry regiments of the British Army were reduced to only a single regular battalion and the 2nd Battalion was disbanded and merged with the 1st Battalion. In 1968, the Regiment was amalgamated with the other regiments of the Fusilier Brigade – the Royal Northumberland Fusiliers, Royal Warwickshire Fusiliers and the Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment) – to form the Royal Regiment of Fusiliers.

====Territorial Battalions====
The 5th Battalion was reformed but disbanded when the TA was reduced into the TAVR in 1967. The battalion&#x27;s lineage was continued by retaining a company in the 4th Battalion Queen&#x27;s Lancashire Regiment and subsequently the Lancastrian and Cumbrian Volunteers on its formation in 1999. The other TA battalions were all reconstituted as anti-aircraft (AA) units in Anti-Aircraft Command:
* 633 (6th Bn Lancashire Fusiliers) Light AA Regiment, Royal Artillery
* 574th (7th Bn Lancashire Fusiliers) (Mixed) Heavy AA Regiment, RA, (&#x27;mixed&#x27; indicating that members of the Women&#x27;s Royal Army Corps were integrated into the unit)
* 634 (8th Bn Lancashire Fusiliers) Heavy AA Regiment, RA, later renumbered 310 HAA Rgt

AA Command was disbanded in 1955, and a number of disbandments and mergers took place among TA air defence units: 633 LAA Regiment was disbanded, while four HAA regiments in the Manchester area, including 574 and 310, formed a new 314 HAA Regiment. By this merger, the 7th and 8th Bns Lancashire Fusiliers, both descended from the 56th Lancashire RVC, were brought back together. They formed Q (Salford) Battery in the new regiment.

On 1 May 1961, Q Battery transferred to 253 Field Regiment (The Bolton Artillery). Since the reduction of the TA in 1967, the Bolton Artillery has existed as a battery of 103 (Lancashire Artillery Volunteers) Regiment RA, but it no longer has a presence in Salford.

==Regimental museum==

A collection of military memorabilia and educational displays are in the Fusilier Museum in Bury.

==Battle honours==
The regiment&#x27;s battle honours were as follows:
*Dettingen, Minden, Egmont-op-Zee, Egypt, Maida, Vimiera, Corunna, Vittoria, Pyrenees, Orthes, Toulouse, Peninsula, Alma, Inkerman, Sevastopol, Lucknow, Khartoum, Relief of Ladysmith, South Africa 1899–1902
*&quot;Great War (30 Battalions)&quot;: Le Cateau, Retreat from Mons, Marne 1914, Aisne 1914 &#x27;18, Armentières 1914, Ypres 1915 &#x27;17 &#x27;18, St. Julien, Bellewaarde, Somme 1916 &#x27;18, Albert 1916 &#x27;18, Bazentin, Delville Wood, Pozières, Ginchy, Flers-Courcelette, Morval, Thiepval, Le Transloy, Ancre Heights, Ancre 1916 &#x27;18, Arras 1917 &#x27;18, Scarpe 1917 &#x27;18, Arleux, Messines 1917, Pilckem, Langemarck 1917, Menin Road, Polygon Wood, Broodseinde, Poelcappelle, Passchendaele, Cambrai 1917 &#x27;18, St. Quentin, Bapaume 1918, Rosières, Lys, Estaires, Hazebrouck, Bailleul, Kemmel, Béthune, Scherpenberg, Amiens, Drocourt-Quéant, Hindenburg Line, Épéhy, Canal du Nord, St. Quentin Canal, Courtrai, Selle, Sambre, France and Flanders 1914–18, Doiran 1917, Macedonia 1915–18, Helles, Landing at Helles, Krithia, Suvla, Landing at Suvla, Scimitar Hill, Gallipoli 1915, Rumani, Egypt 1915–17
*&quot;Second World War (12 Battalions)&quot;: Defence of Escaut, St. Omer-La Bassée, Caen, North-West Europe 1940 &#x27;44, Medjez el Bab, Oued Zarga, North Africa 1942–43, Adrano, Sicily 1943, Termoli, Trigno, Sangro, Cassino II, Trasimene Line, Monte Ceco, Monte Spaduro, Senio, Argenta Gap, Italy 1943–45, Malta 1941–42, Rathedaung, Htizwe, Kohima, Naga Village, Chindits 1944, Burma 1943–45

==Victoria Cross recipients==
The following members of the Regiment were awarded the Victoria Cross:
* Captain (Temporary Major) Cuthbert Bromley, Great War
* Sergeant Frank Edward Stubbs, Great War
* Lance-Corporal (later Lieutenant-Colonel) John Elisha Grimshaw, Great War
* Captain (later Major) Richard Raymond Willis, Great War
* Sergeant Alfred Joseph Richards, Great War
* Private (later Lance-Sergeant) William Stephen Kenealy, Great War
* Private John Lynn, Great War
* Private (later Corporal) James Hutchinson, Great War
* Captain (Temporary Lieutenant-Colonel) Bertram Best-Dunkley, Great War
* Sergeant Joseph Lister, Great War
* Second Lieutenant Bernard Matthew Cassidy, Great War
* Temporary Second Lieutenant John Schofield, Great War
* Lance-Corporal Joel Halliwell, Great War
* Lance-Sergeant (later Lieutenant) Edward Benn Smith, Great War
* Acting Sergeant Harold John Colley, Great War
* Private Frank Lester, Great War
* Sergeant (later Regimental Sergeant-Major) James Clarke, Great War
* Acting Lieutenant-Colonel James Neville Marshall, Great War
* Fusilier (later Lance-Corporal) Francis Arthur Jefferson, Second World War

==Colonels of the Regiment==

Colonels of the regiment were:

*1688–1689: Col. Sir Robert Peyton
*1689–1706: Maj-Gen. Gustavus Hamilton, 1st Viscount Boyne
*1706–1714: Maj-Gen. John Newton
*1714–1719: Lt-Gen. Thomas Meredyth
*1719–1732: Col. Hon. William Egerton
*1732–1737: Brig-Gen. Francis Howard, 1st Earl of Effingham
*1737–1740: Lt-Gen. Richard St. George
*1740: Col. Alexander Rose
*1740–1746: Lt-Gen. Thomas Bligh
*1746–1749: Lt-Gen. George Germain, 1st Viscount Sackville
*1749–1755: Lt-Gen. George Keppel, 3rd Earl of Albemarle, KG (Viscount Bury)

===The 20th Regiment of Foot===
*1755–1756: Gen. Philip Honeywood
*1756–1769: Lt-Gen. William Kingsley
*1769–1773: Gen. Bernard Hale
*1773–1782: Lt-Gen. Hon. George Lane Parker

===The 20th (East Devon) Regiment of Foot===
*1782–1789: Lt-Gen. William Wynyard
*1789–1797: Lt-Gen. West Hyde
*1797–1809: Gen. Charles Leigh
*1809–1815: Lt-Gen Sir John Stuart, Count of Maida GCB
*1815–1842: Gen Sir William Houston, 1st Baronet GCB GCH
*1842–1850: Lt-Gen. Sir James Stevenson Burns KCB
*1850–1853: Lt-Gen. Sir Andrew Pilkington, KCB
*1853: Lt-Gen. Sir William Chalmers, CB, KCH
*1853: Maj-Gen. Henry Godwin, CB
*1853–1854: Lt-Gen. Sir Nathaniel Thorn, KCB, KH
*1854–1858: Lt-Gen. Henry Thomas, CB
*1858–1876: Gen. Marcus Beresford
*1876–1894: Gen. Sir Frederick Horn, GCB

===The Lancashire Fusiliers===
*1894–1897: Gen. Sir William Pollexfen Radcliffe, KCB
*1897–1909: Gen. Sir Edward Alan Holdich, GCB
*1909–1914: Maj-Gen. Sir William Drummond Scrase-Dickins, KCB
*1914–1926: Maj-Gen. Charles James Blomfield, CB, DSO
*1926–1945: Maj-Gen. George Henry Basil Freeth, CB, CMG, DSO
*1945–1955: Maj-Gen. George Surtees, CB, CBE, MC
*1955–1965: Brig. Percy Geoffrey Bamford, CBE, DSO
*1965–1968: Lt-Gen. Sir George Harris Lea, KCB, DSO, MBE
*&quot;1968: Regiment amalgamated with The Royal Northumberland Fusiliers, The Royal Warwickshire Fusiliers, and The Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment), to form The Royal Regiment of Fusiliers&quot;

==Football==
The football team of the 1st Battalion was a member of the Irish Football League for the 1891-92 season, while deployed in Victoria Barracks, Belfast, and won the Army Cup in 1896-97 while deployed to Custume Barracks, Athlone.

==Notes==
== References ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Lancashire Record Office (2010), &quot;Handlist 72: Sources for the History of the Militia and Volunteer Regiments in Lancashire&quot;. 
* Latter, Maj-Gen J.C. (1949) &quot;The History of the Lancashire Fusiliers 1914–1918&quot;, Vol. I, Aldershot: Gale &amp; Polden 
* Latter, Maj-Gen J.C. (1949) &quot;The History of the Lancashire Fusiliers 1914–1918&quot;, Vol. II, Aldershot: Gale &amp; Polden 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* Regimental museum
* Website for ex-members of the regiment
* The British Army– The Twentieth of Foot
* British Regimental Drums &amp; Colours
* Regiments.org: Land Forces of Britain, the Empire and Commonwealth
* The Regimental Warpath 1914–1918
* Chris Baker, &quot;The Long, Long Trail&quot;
* The Royal Artillery 1939–1945 
* British Army units from 1945 on</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q81925" start="4" end="24" title="Lancashire Fusiliers" label="Lancashire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q595732" start="31" end="44" title="line infantry" label="line infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q52371" start="45" end="53" title="regiment" label="regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="61" end="73" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="148" end="163" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="173" end="178" title="World War I" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="183" end="200" title="World War II" label="Second World Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510044" start="341" end="357" title="Fusilier Brigade" label="Fusilier Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115291" start="364" end="394" title="Royal Northumberland Fusiliers" label="Royal Northumberland Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725651" start="396" end="424" title="Royal Warwickshire Regiment" label="Royal Warwickshire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="433" end="474" title="Royal Fusiliers" label="Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340951" start="497" end="524" title="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers" label="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136118" start="682" end="688" title="Torbay" label="Torbay"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="830" end="837" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="878" end="897" title="Glorious Revolution" label="Glorious Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q129987" start="904" end="920" title="William III of England" label="King William III"/>
<link wikidata="Q644960" start="933" end="952" title="Battle of the Boyne" label="Battle of the Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887916" start="974" end="991" title="Battle of Aughrim" label="Battle of Aughrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q150701" start="1012" end="1041" title="War of the Spanish Succession" label="War of the Spanish Succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q311759" start="1102" end="1120" title="Battle of Vigo Bay" label="Battle of Vigo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q924661" start="1204" end="1216" title="Thomas Bligh" label="Thomas Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q402312" start="1259" end="1278" title="Battle of Dettingen" label="Battle of Dettingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q569953" start="1303" end="1321" title="Battle of Fontenoy" label="Battle of Fontenoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048487" start="1356" end="1373" title="Edward Cornwallis" label="Edward Cornwallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="1407" end="1425" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049945" start="1451" end="1474" title="Jacobite rising of 1745" label="Jacobite rising of 1745"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="1519" end="1528" title="Freemason" label="Freemason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355596" start="1583" end="1605" title="Grand Lodge of Ireland" label="Grand Lodge of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33143" start="1817" end="1838" title="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Seven Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q683044" start="1873" end="1889" title="Battle of Minden" label="Battle of Minden"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1968" end="1974" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q47315" start="1975" end="1982" title="cavalry" label="cavalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="2002" end="2028" title="American Revolutionary War" label="American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="2055" end="2061" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q436775" start="2148" end="2161" title="John Burgoyne" label="John Burgoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q846674" start="2260" end="2268" title="Battles of Saratoga" label="Saratoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="2452" end="2459" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4141642" start="2495" end="2528" title="Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland" label="Anglo-Russian invasion of Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2931306" start="2547" end="2567" title="Battle of Krabbendam" label="Battle of Krabbendam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933601" start="2594" end="2611" title="Battle of Alkmaar (1799)" label="Battle of Alkmaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="2645" end="2650" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750968" start="2688" end="2708" title="Battle of Alexandria (1801)" label="Battle of Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="2735" end="2760" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458" start="2778" end="2786" title="Calabria" label="Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q588075" start="2808" end="2823" title="Battle of Maida" label="Battle of Maida"/>
<link wikidata="Q249232" start="2848" end="2874" title="War of the Third Coalition" label="War of the Third Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="2903" end="2911" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="2939" end="2953" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsular War"/>
<link wikidata="Q209359" start="2976" end="2993" title="Battle of Vimeiro" label="Battle of Vimeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q708088" start="3017" end="3034" title="Battle of Corunna" label="Battle of Corunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q276059" start="3154" end="3171" title="Battle of Vitoria" label="Battle of Vitoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q131691" start="3242" end="3260" title="Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington" label="Duke of Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890693" start="3341" end="3363" title="Battle of the Pyrenees" label="Battle of the Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890553" start="3382" end="3399" title="Battle of Nivelle" label="Battle of Nivelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079873" start="3426" end="3442" title="Battle of Orthez" label="Battle of Orthez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885195" start="3473" end="3491" title="Battle of Toulouse (1814)" label="Battle of Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="3519" end="3530" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q913604" start="3562" end="3576" title="Battle of Alma" label="Battle of Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q770536" start="3603" end="3621" title="Battle of Inkerman" label="Battle of Inkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038812" start="3772" end="3788" title="Cardwell Reforms" label="Cardwell Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q19972077" start="3939" end="3958" title="Wellington Barracks, Bury" label="Wellington Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="3962" end="3966" title="Bury, Greater Manchester" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097955" start="4045" end="4061" title="Childers reforms" label="Childers reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857898" start="4209" end="4216" title="Militia (United Kingdom)" label="Militia"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676789" start="4268" end="4305" title="7th Royal Lancashire Militia (Rifles)" label="7th Royal Lancashire Militia (Rifles)"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="4341" end="4345" title="Bury, Greater Manchester" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125" start="4347" end="4357" title="Manchester" label="Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177620" start="4362" end="4369" title="County Borough of Salford" label="Salford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941026" start="4452" end="4473" title="Volunteer Force (Great Britain)" label="Rifle Volunteer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q474605" start="4724" end="4732" title="Rochdale" label="Rochdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="4799" end="4831" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="56th Lancashire Rifle Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521766" start="4893" end="4912" title="Manchester Regiment" label="Manchester Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="4927" end="4950" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="3rd Volunteer Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="5510" end="5523" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137302" start="5648" end="5666" title="Battle of Omdurman" label="Battle of Omdurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="5782" end="5797" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="5830" end="5845" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072592" start="5883" end="5902" title="Battle of Spion Kop" label="Battle of Spion Kop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237997" start="5940" end="5959" title="Relief of Ladysmith" label="Relief of Ladysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q927606" start="6056" end="6076" title="Peace of Vereeniging" label="Peace of Vereeniging"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="6125" end="6134" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713735" start="6212" end="6221" title="Aldershot Garrison" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3642981" start="6426" end="6434" title="Luckhoff" label="Luckhoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5641233" start="6842" end="6857" title="Haldane Reforms" label="Haldane Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676789" start="7052" end="7075" title="3rd (Reserve) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="3rd (Reserve) Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676789" start="7080" end="7109" title="4th (Extra Reserve) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="4th (Extra Reserve) Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518834" start="7161" end="7178" title="Territorial Force" label="Territorial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q26320119" start="7277" end="7291" title="Castle Armoury" label="Castle Armoury"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251571" start="7349" end="7361" title="Baron Street drill hall" label="Baron Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="7408" end="7431" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="3rd Volunteer Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="7443" end="7446" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="7th"/>
<link wikidata="Q38251590" start="7480" end="7490" title="Cross Lane drill hall" label="Cross Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548435" start="7536" end="7564" title="125th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="Lancashire Fusiliers Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637775" start="7573" end="7597" title="42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division" label="East Lancashire Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="7726" end="7733" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754797" start="7838" end="7860" title="landing at Cape Helles" label="landing at Cape Helles"/>
<link wikidata="Q164983" start="7889" end="7907" title="Gallipoli Campaign" label="Gallipoli Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644917" start="7923" end="7935" title="86th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="86th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q221553" start="7943" end="7956" title="29th Division (United Kingdom)" label="29th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="8088" end="8102" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8163" end="8203" title="Landing at Cape Helles#.22Six VCs before Breakfast.22" label="&amp;#x27;the six VCs before breakfast&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="8354" end="8363" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="8400" end="8413" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="8444" end="8452" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548870" start="8468" end="8480" title="12th Armoured Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="12th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709225" start="8488" end="8500" title="4th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="4th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477538" start="8623" end="8645" title="36th (Ulster) Division" label="36th (Ulster) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676789" start="8713" end="8726" title="3rd (Reserve) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="3rd (Reserve)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676789" start="8731" end="8760" title="4th (Extra Reserve) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="4th (Extra Reserve) Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q550995" start="8812" end="8818" title="Humber" label="Humber"/>
<link wikidata="Q671892" start="8853" end="8870" title="Barrow-in-Furness" label="Barrow-in-Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q12068771" start="8888" end="8894" title="Severn Estuary" label="Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="9187" end="9191" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q105676789" start="9240" end="9286" title="13th (Reserve) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="13th (Reserve) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435813" start="9293" end="9314" title="Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Kitchener&amp;#x27;s Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="9723" end="9738" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="1/7th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548435" start="9801" end="9837" title="125th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="125th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q233379" start="9880" end="9904" title="Second Battle of Krithia" label="Second Battle of Krithia"/>
<link wikidata="Q221553" start="9936" end="9949" title="29th Division (United Kingdom)" label="29th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637775" start="9982" end="10013" title="42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division" label="42nd (East Lancashire) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776203" start="10022" end="10045" title="Third Battle of Krithia" label="Third Battle of Krithia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636490" start="10050" end="10076" title="Battle of Krithia Vineyard" label="Battle of Krithia Vineyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014244" start="10155" end="10162" title="Moudros" label="Moudros"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550451" start="10339" end="10359" title="154th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="3rd Highland Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438997" start="10367" end="10384" title="51st (Highland) Division" label="Highland Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="10452" end="10467" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="2/7th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579119" start="10526" end="10539" title="197th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="197th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642200" start="10547" end="10582" title="66th Division (United Kingdom)" label="66th (2nd East Lancashire) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q30671969" start="10639" end="10658" title="3rd/5th Battalion Lancashire Fusiliers" label="The 3/5th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="10794" end="10817" title="German spring offensive" label="German spring offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824211" start="10879" end="10884" title="Cadre (military)" label="cadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="10917" end="10924" title="US Army" label="US Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="11006" end="11020" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="24th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q208296" start="11056" end="11062" title="Cromer" label="Cromer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451843" start="11189" end="11198" title="Suvla" label="Suvla Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635399" start="11243" end="11255" title="34th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="34th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547794" start="11259" end="11283" title="11th (Northern) Division" label="11th (Northern) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q14903921" start="11620" end="11632" title="52nd Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="52nd Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4553568" start="11640" end="11664" title="17th (Northern) Division" label="17th (Northern) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643353" start="11793" end="11805" title="74th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="74th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4632247" start="11813" end="11826" title="25th Division (United Kingdom)" label="25th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q892" start="11854" end="11870" title="J. R. R. Tolkien" label="J. R. R. Tolkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q393477" start="11916" end="11928" title="trench fever" label="trench fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="11940" end="11959" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642125" start="12041" end="12053" title="65th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="65th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631367" start="12061" end="12074" title="22nd Division (United Kingdom)" label="22nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="12124" end="12132" title="Thessaloniki" label="Salonika"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646103" start="12351" end="12363" title="96th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="96th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635061" start="12371" end="12384" title="32nd Division (United Kingdom)" label="32nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546528" start="12589" end="12602" title="104th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="104th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635579" start="12610" end="12623" title="35th Division (United Kingdom)" label="35th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646103" start="12767" end="12779" title="96th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="96th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635061" start="12787" end="12800" title="32nd Division (United Kingdom)" label="32nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546528" start="12934" end="12947" title="104th Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="104th Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635579" start="12955" end="12968" title="35th Division (United Kingdom)" label="35th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q26263471" start="13048" end="13076" title="Lancashire Fusiliers War Memorial" label="war memorial to the regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q19972077" start="13156" end="13175" title="Wellington Barracks, Bury" label="Wellington Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q378157" start="13339" end="13356" title="Sir Edwin Lutyens" label="Sir Edwin Lutyens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896743" start="13369" end="13381" title="The Cenotaph, Whitehall" label="the Cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="13746" end="13761" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="13800" end="13814" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13850" end="13866" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="13895" end="13908" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="13921" end="13935" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q873549" start="14009" end="14017" title="Chindits" label="Chindits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643607" start="14037" end="14065" title="77th Indian Infantry Brigade" label="77th Indian Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="14090" end="14099" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)" label="Brigadier"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="14100" end="14112" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547877" start="14328" end="14349" title="11th Infantry Brigade and Headquarters South East" label="11th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329457" start="14369" end="14381" title="East Surrey Regiment" label="East Surreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115609" start="14390" end="14421" title="Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry" label="Oxford and Bucks Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061818" start="14445" end="14458" title="5th (Huntingdonshire) Battalion, Northamptonshire Regiment" label="5th Northants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709225" start="14489" end="14510" title="4th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="4th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="14561" end="14588" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="14633" end="14644" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q697625" start="14663" end="14670" title="Battle of Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="14675" end="14681" title="Battle of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="14705" end="14723" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="retreat to Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="14733" end="14742" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="evacuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="14821" end="14836" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="German invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3599828" start="14957" end="14979" title="78th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="78th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="15025" end="15047" title="North African Campaign" label="North African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q852365" start="15053" end="15070" title="Tunisian Campaign" label="Tunisian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="15165" end="15171" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="15181" end="15197" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q696810" start="15214" end="15225" title="Gothic Line" label="Gothic Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1483744" start="15258" end="15266" title="Fusilier" label="Fusilier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487539" start="15267" end="15282" title="Frank Jefferson" label="Frank Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="15299" end="15313" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="15488" end="15504" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637775" start="15530" end="15570" title="42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division" label="42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548435" start="15614" end="15636" title="125th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="125th Infantry brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="15701" end="15728" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="15753" end="15770" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="Battle of Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="15780" end="15789" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="evacuated"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220353" start="15856" end="15914" title="108th Regiment Royal Armoured Corps" label="108th Regiment Royal Armoured Corps (Lancashire Fusiliers)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388246" start="16013" end="16033" title="Royal Armoured Corps" label="Royal Armoured Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056823" start="16245" end="16280" title="109th Regiment Royal Armoured Corps" label="109th Regiment Royal Armoured Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="16329" end="16384" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="39th (The Lancashire Fusiliers) Anti-Aircraft Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098650" start="16386" end="16401" title="Royal Engineers" label="Royal Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q935570" start="16493" end="16514" title="Manchester Ship Canal" label="Manchester Ship Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865668" start="16519" end="16539" title="Barton Power Station" label="Barton Power Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q190882" start="16551" end="16561" title="Phoney War" label="Phoney War"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="16580" end="16594" title="Orkney Islands" label="Orkney Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="16682" end="16691" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658321" start="16703" end="16712" title="May Blitz, Liverpool" label="May Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="16861" end="16876" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863789" start="16920" end="16930" title="Minden Day" label="Minden Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q12824211" start="17021" end="17026" title="Cadre (military)" label="cadre"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="17375" end="17390" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1 flying bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096995" start="17428" end="17443" title="Operation Diver" label="Operation Diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q23198346" start="17452" end="17477" title="356th Moonlight Battery, Royal Artillery" label="356th Searchlight Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="17491" end="17496" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="17644" end="17659" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17707" end="17724" title="Western Front (World War II)#1944.E2.80.9345: The Second Front" label="North West Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="17844" end="17871" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944606" start="17915" end="17930" title="Border Regiment" label="Border Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639308" start="17940" end="17960" title="4th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="4th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471075" start="17973" end="17994" title="2nd Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="2nd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="18081" end="18097" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446069" start="18161" end="18172" title="Royal Scots" label="Royal Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374594" start="18195" end="18217" title="Royal Norfolk Regiment" label="Royal Norfolk Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q207145" start="18301" end="18308" title="Béthune" label="Bethune"/>
<link wikidata="Q641064" start="18419" end="18438" title="Le Paradis massacre" label="Le Paradis massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q159522" start="18464" end="18485" title="SS Totenkopf Division" label="SS Totenkopf Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="18522" end="18536" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q383614" start="18590" end="18606" title="Battle of Kohima" label="Battle of Kohima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918766" start="18623" end="18646" title="Fourteenth Army (United Kingdom)" label="British Fourteenth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="18653" end="18662" title="William Slim, 1st Viscount Slim" label="Bill Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579119" start="18774" end="18796" title="197th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="197th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548435" start="18837" end="18859" title="125th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="125th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q85738542" start="18880" end="18902" title="66th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="66th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033501" start="18992" end="19030" title="59th (Staffordshire) Infantry Division" label="59th (Staffordshire) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="19037" end="19055" title="Invasion of Normandy" label="landed in Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="19067" end="19085" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q696823" start="19177" end="19181" title="Battle for Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q579936" start="19193" end="19212" title="Operation Charnwood" label="Operation Charnwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443128" start="19273" end="19294" title="Second Battle of the Odon" label="Operation Pomegranate"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="19599" end="19612" title="Major-general (United Kingdom)" label="Major-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536811" start="19613" end="19623" title="Lewis Lyne" label="Lewis Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="20057" end="20072" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q752760" start="20100" end="20121" title="Royal Welch Fusiliers" label="Royal Welch Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2345596" start="20123" end="20144" title="53rd (Welsh) Infantry Division" label="53rd (Welsh) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265327" start="20164" end="20182" title="Gordon Highlanders" label="Gordon Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840558" start="20184" end="20208" title="15th (Scottish) Infantry Division" label="15th (Scottish) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108549" start="20228" end="20247" title="Glasgow Highlanders" label="Glasgow Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328786" start="20296" end="20320" title="East Lancashire Regiment" label="East Lancashire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="20382" end="20389" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="20390" end="20412" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Sir Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="20470" end="20485" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579119" start="20969" end="20991" title="197th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="197th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033501" start="21050" end="21088" title="59th (Staffordshire) Infantry Division" label="59th (Staffordshire) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725651" start="21252" end="21279" title="Royal Warwickshire Regiment" label="Royal Warwickshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630878" start="21404" end="21426" title="211th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="211th infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644448" start="21440" end="21472" title="80th Infantry (Reserve) Division (United Kingdom)" label="80th Infantry (Reserve) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630429" start="21555" end="21577" title="203rd Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="203rd Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643602" start="21591" end="21612" title="77th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="77th Holding Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595675" start="21763" end="21785" title="199th (Manchester) Brigade" label="199th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521766" start="21813" end="21832" title="Manchester Regiment" label="Manchester Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748736" start="21902" end="21942" title="55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division" label="55th (West Lancashire) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368198" start="22242" end="22260" title="Lieutenant colonel (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant Colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6536811" start="22261" end="22271" title="Lewis Lyne" label="Lewis Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630490" start="22306" end="22347" title="208th Independent Infantry Brigade (Home)" label="208th Independent Infantry Brigade (Home)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548435" start="22394" end="22416" title="125th (Lancashire Fusiliers) Brigade" label="125th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637775" start="22426" end="22466" title="42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division" label="42nd (East Lancashire) Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q697625" start="22597" end="22604" title="Battle of Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="22606" end="22612" title="Battle of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="22617" end="22624" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056874" start="22685" end="22720" title="143rd Regiment Royal Armoured Corps" label="143rd Regiment Royal Armoured Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630490" start="22846" end="22887" title="208th Independent Infantry Brigade (Home)" label="208th Independent Infantry Brigade (Home)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411074" start="22923" end="22955" title="King&amp;#x27;s Regiment (Liverpool)" label="King&amp;#x27;s Regiment (Liverpool)"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="22965" end="22980" title="Royal Fusiliers" label="Royal Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="23009" end="23014" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783802" start="23033" end="23058" title="Arakan Campaign 1942–1943" label="Arakan Campaign 1942–1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644067" start="23070" end="23098" title="7th Indian Infantry Division" label="7th Indian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631637" start="23105" end="23133" title="23rd Indian Infantry Brigade" label="23rd Indian Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="23550" end="23555" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q682452" start="23567" end="23572" title="Siege of Malta (World War II)" label="Siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631493" start="23582" end="23604" title="233rd Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="233rd Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642216" start="23681" end="23702" title="66th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="66th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446069" start="23741" end="23752" title="Royal Scots" label="Royal Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365383" start="23756" end="23763" title="Standing army" label="Regular"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744794" start="23789" end="23811" title="Hertfordshire Regiment" label="Hertfordshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="23815" end="23826" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="Territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q115940811" start="23855" end="23876" title="History of the British 1st Division during the World Wars" label="1st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="23903" end="23919" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q696810" start="23963" end="23974" title="Gothic Line" label="Gothic Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="24058" end="24067" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510044" start="24440" end="24456" title="Fusilier Brigade" label="Fusilier Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115291" start="24463" end="24493" title="Royal Northumberland Fusiliers" label="Royal Northumberland Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725651" start="24495" end="24523" title="Royal Warwickshire Regiment" label="Royal Warwickshire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="24532" end="24573" title="Royal Fusiliers" label="Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340951" start="24588" end="24615" title="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers" label="Royal Regiment of Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609672" start="24727" end="24731" title="Army Reserve (United Kingdom)" label="TAVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="24799" end="24806" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270017" start="24828" end="24860" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Lancashire Regiment" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Lancashire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483301" start="24882" end="24917" title="Lancastrian and Cumbrian Volunteers" label="Lancastrian and Cumbrian Volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774102" start="25022" end="25043" title="Anti-Aircraft Command" label="Anti-Aircraft Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091525" start="25118" end="25183" title="7th Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers" label="574th (7th Bn Lancashire Fusiliers) (Mixed) Heavy AA Regiment, RA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031054" start="25235" end="25264" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Army Corps" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Royal Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q112183062" start="25859" end="25900" title="Bolton Artillery" label="253 Field Regiment (The Bolton Artillery)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546472" start="25990" end="26039" title="103rd (Lancashire Artillery Volunteers) Regiment Royal Artillery" label="103 (Lancashire Artillery Volunteers) Regiment RA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510048" start="26182" end="26197" title="Fusilier Museum" label="Fusilier Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q47822" start="26201" end="26205" title="Bury, Greater Manchester" label="Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q402312" start="26280" end="26289" title="Battle of Dettingen" label="Dettingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q683044" start="26291" end="26297" title="Battle of Minden" label="Minden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933601" start="26299" end="26312" title="Battle of Alkmaar (1799)" label="Egmont-op-Zee"/>
<link wikidata="Q253684" start="26314" end="26319" title="French Campaign in Egypt and Syria" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q588075" start="26321" end="26326" title="Battle of Maida" label="Maida"/>
<link wikidata="Q209359" start="26328" end="26335" title="Battle of Vimiera" label="Vimiera"/>
<link wikidata="Q708088" start="26337" end="26344" title="Battle of Corunna" label="Corunna"/>
<link wikidata="Q276059" start="26346" end="26354" title="Battle of Vittoria" label="Vittoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890693" start="26356" end="26364" title="Battle of the Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079873" start="26366" end="26372" title="Battle of Orthes" label="Orthes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2885195" start="26374" end="26382" title="Battle of Toulouse (1814)" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q152499" start="26384" end="26393" title="Peninsular War" label="Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q913604" start="26395" end="26399" title="Battle of Alma" label="Alma"/>
<link wikidata="Q770536" start="26401" end="26409" title="Battle of Inkerman" label="Inkerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q815216" start="26411" end="26421" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1854–1855)" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q815165" start="26423" end="26430" title="Siege of Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137302" start="26432" end="26440" title="Battle of Omdurman" label="Khartoum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237997" start="26442" end="26461" title="Relief of Ladysmith" label="Relief of Ladysmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="26463" end="26485" title="Second Boer War" label="South Africa 1899–1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="27471" end="27489" title="Battle of St Omer-La Bassée" label="St. Omer-La Bassée"/>
<link wikidata="Q714248" start="27637" end="27651" title="Trasimene Line" label="Trasimene Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q383614" start="27750" end="27756" title="Battle of Kohima" label="Kohima"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="27887" end="27901" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196765" start="27931" end="27947" title="Cuthbert Bromley" label="Cuthbert Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="27949" end="27958" title="World War I" label="Great War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4438888" start="27970" end="27989" title="Frank Edward Stubbs" label="Frank Edward Stubbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231590" start="28045" end="28065" title="John Elisha Grimshaw" label="John Elisha Grimshaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328612" start="28101" end="28123" title="Richard Raymond Willis" label="Richard Raymond Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394959" start="28146" end="28168" title="Alfred Joseph Richards" label="Alfred Joseph Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8013923" start="28213" end="28236" title="William Kenealy" label="William Stephen Kenealy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6245619" start="28258" end="28267" title="John Lynn (VC)" label="John Lynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136473" start="28306" end="28322" title="James Hutchinson (VC)" label="James Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895746" start="28375" end="28395" title="Bertram Best-Dunkley" label="Bertram Best-Dunkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6284978" start="28418" end="28431" title="Joseph Lister (VC)" label="Joseph Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893417" start="28463" end="28486" title="Bernard Matthew Cassidy" label="Bernard Matthew Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059532" start="28528" end="28542" title="John Schofield (VC)" label="John Schofield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213522" start="28571" end="28585" title="Joel Halliwell" label="Joel Halliwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345356" start="28633" end="28650" title="Edward Smith (VC)" label="Edward Benn Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661276" start="28680" end="28698" title="Harold John Colley" label="Harold John Colley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16059493" start="28720" end="28732" title="Frank Lester (VC)" label="Frank Lester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131388" start="28789" end="28801" title="James Clarke (VC)" label="James Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138941" start="28841" end="28863" title="James Marshall (VC)" label="James Neville Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487539" start="28909" end="28933" title="Francis Arthur Jefferson" label="Francis Arthur Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="28935" end="28951" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621553" start="29071" end="29108" title="Gustavus Hamilton, 1st Viscount Boyne" label="Gustavus Hamilton, 1st Viscount Boyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q20709673" start="29162" end="29177" title="Thomas Meredyth" label="Thomas Meredyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16239472" start="29200" end="29215" title="William Egerton (1684–1732)" label="William Egerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481333" start="29238" end="29275" title="Francis Howard, 1st Earl of Effingham" label="Francis Howard, 1st Earl of Effingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q924661" start="29362" end="29374" title="Thomas Bligh" label="Thomas Bligh"/>
<link wikidata="Q332806" start="29395" end="29433" title="George Germain, 1st Viscount Sackville" label="George Germain, 1st Viscount Sackville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183761" start="29561" end="29577" title="Philip Honywood (British Army officer, died 1785)" label="Philip Honeywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893206" start="29632" end="29644" title="Bernard Hale (British Army officer)" label="Bernard Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19845414" start="29670" end="29688" title="George Lane Parker" label="George Lane Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q28844136" start="29818" end="29831" title="Charles Leigh (British Army officer)" label="Charles Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11727992" start="29855" end="29882" title="John Stuart, Count of Maida" label="John Stuart, Count of Maida"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529633" start="29903" end="29935" title="Sir William Houston, 1st Baronet" label="Sir William Houston, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q18526464" start="30018" end="30035" title="Andrew Pilkington" label="Andrew Pilkington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5722028" start="30102" end="30114" title="Henry Godwin (Army officer)" label="Henry Godwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6758033" start="30222" end="30238" title="Marcus Beresford (British Army officer, born 1800)" label="Marcus Beresford"/>
<link wikidata="Q110555266" start="30260" end="30274" title="Frederick Horn" label="Frederick Horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019275" start="30333" end="30360" title="William Pollexfen Radcliffe" label="William Pollexfen Radcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30387" end="30406" title="Edward Alan Holdich" label="Edward Alan Holdich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115291" start="30785" end="30819" title="The Royal Northumberland Fusiliers" label="The Royal Northumberland Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725651" start="30821" end="30853" title="The Royal Warwickshire Fusiliers" label="The Royal Warwickshire Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q248220" start="30859" end="30904" title="The Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment)" label="The Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340951" start="30914" end="30945" title="The Royal Regiment of Fusiliers" label="The Royal Regiment of Fusiliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16842987" start="30970" end="31004" title="Lancashire Fusiliers F.C." label="football team of the 1st Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712465" start="31025" end="31046" title="Irish Football League" label="Irish Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053873" start="31055" end="31062" title="Irish League 1891-92" label="1891-92"/>
<link wikidata="Q22083763" start="31089" end="31115" title="Victoria Barracks, Belfast" label="Victoria Barracks, Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q19972090" start="31167" end="31192" title="Custume Barracks" label="Custume Barracks, Athlone"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871405" wikidata="Q553214" url="?curid=871405" title="Explorer 2">
<text>Explorer 2 was an American unmanned space mission within the Explorer program. Intended to be a repetition of the previous Explorer 1 mission, which placed a satellite into medium Earth orbit, the spacecraft was unable to reach orbit due to a failure in the launch vehicle during launch.

Explorer 2 was launched from Cape Canaveral Missile Test Center of the Atlantic Missile Range (AMR), LC-26A in Florida on 5 March 1958 at 18:27:57 GMT by a Juno I launch vehicle. The Juno I had its origins in the United States Army&#x27;s Project Orbiter in 1954. The project was canceled in 1955 when the decision was made to proceed with Project Vanguard.

== Background ==
Following the launch of the Soviet Sputnik 1 on 4 October 1957, the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) was directed to proceed with the launching of a satellite using the Juno I four-stage variant of the three-stage Jupiter-C, which had already been flight-tested in nose-cone re-entry tests for the Jupiter IRBM (intermediate-range ballistic missile). Working closely together, ABMA and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) completed the job of modifying the Jupiter-C and building Explorer 1 in 84 days.

== Spacecraft ==
Explorer 2 was identical to Explorer 1 except for the addition of a tape recorder designed to enable playback of data. The satellite was a long, diameter cylinder and nosecone that comprised the fourth stage of the Jupiter-C launch vehicle. With a mass of , it was about heavier than Explorer 1. The spacecraft body was made of stainless AISI-410 steel, thick. The case was heat-oxidized to a gold color and eight alternate stripes of white Rokide A (flame sprayed aluminum oxide) were used for temperature control.

The base of the cylinder held the Sergeant solid-fuel rocket motor. The sub-carrier oscillators and Mallory mercury batteries for the low power transmitter were in the upper part of the nose cone. Below these was the low power (10 mW, 108.00 MHz) transmitter for the carrier and sub-carrier signals, which used the stainless steel satellite skin as a dipole antenna.

Below the nose cone was the detector deck, holding the Geiger-Mueller counter tube for the cosmic ray experiment, the command receiver, for recorder interrogations, high power playback transmitter (60 mW, 108.03 MHz) for interrogation response, cosmic ray experiment electronics, Mallory mercury batteries for the high power transmitter, and a , diameter magnetic tape recorder. An acoustic micrometeorite detector was mounted to the inside of the spacecraft cylinder near the cosmic ray device. Near the bottom of the detector deck four circularly polarized turnstile stainless steel wire whip antennas protruded radially from the side of the spacecraft, equally spaced around the axis. A gap for the high powered antenna and a heat radiation shield were between the payload and the rocket motor. The micrometeorite detectors were arranged in a ring around the cylinder near the bottom of the spacecraft. Four temperature gauges were mounted a various locations in the spacecraft.

Explorer 2 was equipped with a Geiger counter for the purposes of detecting cosmic rays. After Explorer 3, it was decided that the original Geiger counter had been overwhelmed by strong radiation coming from a belt of charged particles trapped in space by the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field (see: Van Allen radiation belt). Explorer 2 was also equipped with a wire grid array and an acoustic detector for the purpose of micrometeorite detection.

== Instruments ==
=== Geiger counter ===
An Anton 314 omnidirectional Geiger tube detector was used to measure the flux of energetic charged particles (protons E&gt;30 MeV and electrons E&gt;3 MeV). The instrument consisted of a single Geiger-Mueller tube, a scaling circuit to reduce the number of pulses, and a telemetry system to transmit the data to ground receiving stations. The Geiger-Mueller tube was a type 314 Anton halogen quenched counter with stainless steel (approximately 75% iron, 25% chromium) wall of approximately thickness. The instrument was mounted within the spacecraft hull, which had thick stainless steel walls. The counter was long by diameter and the internal wire was in length. The tube had a very small variation in counting efficiency over the range -55° to +175 °C. It had approximately 85% counting efficiency for cosmic rays, and about 0.3% counting efficiency for photons of energy 660 keV. The &quot;dead time&quot; (time to reset to record the next count) of the counters was about 100 microseconds. The counter was connected to a current amplifier, which directly fed a scaler stage, a bistable transistor multivibrator that could operate over a wide range of voltages and a temperature range of -15° to +85 °C, limited primarily by the supply batteries. The scaler resolving time was 250 microseconds. For pulse counts higher than 4000 per second, the scaler indicated a count of 4000. Results were sent to the ground through the telemetry system in real time. The experiment had no onboard data storage device, and could only send telemetry to the ground when it was passing over an Earth receiving station, so some regions had no coverage during the flight.

=== Micrometeorite Detector ===
Direct measurements of micrometeorites were made on Explorer 1 using two separate detectors: a wire grid detector and a crystal transducer. The parameters determined were the influx rates of each size interval, the impinging velocity, the composition, and the density of the micrometeorite.

The wire grid detector consisted of 12 cards (connected in parallel) mounted in a fiberglass supporting ring which in turn was mounted on the satellite&#x27;s cylindrical surface. Each card was wound with enameled 17-micron-diameter nickel alloy wire. Two layers of wire were wound on each card to ensure that a total area of completely covered. A micrometeorite of about 10 microns would fracture the wire upon impact, destroy the electrical connection, and thus record the event.

The acoustic detector (transducer and solid-state amplifier) was placed in acoustical contact with the middle section skin where it could respond to meteorite impacts on the spacecraft skin such that each recorded event would be a function of mass and velocity. The effective area of this section was 0.075 m2, and the average threshold sensitivity was 0.0025 g-cm/s.

=== Satellite Drag Atmospheric Density ===
Because of its symmetrical shape, Explorer 2 was selected for use in determining upper atmospheric densities as a function of altitude, latitude, season, and solar activity. Density values near perigee were deduced from sequential observations of the spacecraft position, using optical (Baker-Nunn camera network) and radio and/or radar tracking techniques.

=== Resistance Thermometers ===
The Explorer 2 satellite was equipped with four resistance thermometers that made direct temperature measurements, three external and one internal. The primary purpose of the experiment was to study the efficacy of passive thermal control (in this case, insulation and exterior coatings) on the exterior and interior of a satellite, and to document the temperature of the instrumentation to study its effect on instrument operation.

==== Thermometers ====
The thermometer designated external temperature gauge no. 1 was mounted on the outer hull at the bottom of the upper (instrumentation) section of the satellite. This measured the cylinder skin temperature over a range of -50 °C to +110 °C, with an accuracy of 4 °C over the range -10 °C to +80 °C. External temperature gauge no. 2 was mounted along the bottom of the nose cone to measure the nose cone skin temperature. It could cover a range of -50 °C to +220 °C. The accuracy was 16 °C at a temperature of 50 °C and 18 °C at 0 °C. External temperature gauge no. 3 was mounted at the top of the nose cone and measured the stagnation-point temperature. It covered from -50 °C to +450 °C with an accuracy of approximately 20 °C.

The internal temperature gauge was mounted in the high powered transmitter at the base of the instrumentation section. It could cover a range of -60 °C to +110 °C. The accuracy was 2 °C at temperatures from 0 °C to +30 °C and fell off to an accuracy of 20 °C at a temperature of 90 °C. External temperature gauges no. 2 and no. 3 transmitted on the low-powered (10 mW, 108.00-MHz) transmitter, and the other two gauges transmitted on the high-powered (60 mW, 108.03-MHz) transmitter. Additionally, the nose cone internal temperature could be indirectly estimated by measuring the frequency of the cosmic ray channel. Calibrations of the oscillator indicate the internal nose cone temperature could be known within 12 °C from 0 to +25 °C, and to 6 °C for 25 to 50 °C.

== Telemetry ==
The telemetry was broadcast continuously. There were no recorders or data storage devices on board, so temperature data could only be received in real time covering periods when Explorer 1 was over a receiving station. There were 5 receiving stations: Patrick Air Force Base (Cape Canaveral), Earthquake Valley (near San Diego), San Gabriel, California, Singapore (Malaya), and Ibadan (Nigeria). All 5 could receive data from the low-power transmitter, only Patrick AFB and San Gabriel could receive from the high-power transmitter. There were typically 4 passes per day over Patrick AFB, Earthquake Valley, and San Gabriel, and 7 passes per day over Nigeria and Singapore.

== Thermal control ==
The exterior temperature control was achieved by coating a fraction of the stainless steel satellite casing with an aluminum oxide ceramic (Rokide A). Approximately 30% of the nose cone (upper 30 cm of the satellite) and 25% of the upper of the cylindrical body were coated in longitudinal stripes. There was insulation between the nose cone and instrument compartment, and between the instrument compartment and rocket motor section.

An internal temperature range of -5 °C to +45 °C was required for proper operation of the equipment in the satellite. The batteries would not operate below -5 °C, but low temperatures would not damage the batteries or equipment. Permanent damage to the equipment would not occur unless the temperature rose above +80 °C.

== Telecommunications ==
Data were continuously transmitted using a 60 mW amplitude-modulated transmitter and a 10 mW phase-modulated transmitter, both transmitting as a frequency of 108 MHz. Data were recorded only when the spacecraft was over one of seventeen receiving stations. Both the high-power and low-power transmitters were battery powered and operated.

== Launch vehicle ==
The launch vehicle was a Juno I, a variant of the three-stage Jupiter-C with an added fourth propulsive stage, which in this case was the Explorer 2. The first stage was an upgraded Redstone liquid-fueled launch vehicle. The second stage comprised a cluster of eleven Sergeant solid-fuel rocket motors and the third stage held three Sergeants. The booster was equipped to spin the fourth stage in increments, leading to a final rate of 750 rpm about its long axis.

== Mission ==
Explorer 2 launched from the Cape Canaveral Missile Test Center of the Atlantic Missile Range (AMR), pad 26A, on 5 March 1958 at 18:27:57 GMT. The flight was nominal through third stage ignition. The fourth stage failed to ignite, making attainment of orbital velocity impossible. The spacecraft reentered the atmosphere and fell into the Atlantic Ocean near Trinidad, some from the launch site. The cause of the failure was believed to be due to failure of a light plastic cone, which held the igniter in place at the fourth stage nozzle, under the launch stresses. This allowed the igniter to fall out of position. The igniter support was strengthened for later flights.

== See also ==

* Explorer 1
* Explorer program

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q553214" start="0" end="10" title="Explorer 2" label="Explorer 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q603526" start="61" end="77" title="Explorer program" label="Explorer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="123" end="133" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q334465" start="390" end="396" title="Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 26" label="LC-26A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192304" start="445" end="451" title="Juno I" label="Juno I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514453" start="528" end="543" title="Project Orbiter" label="Project Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q179527" start="629" end="645" title="Project Vanguard" label="Project Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="700" end="709" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141247" start="883" end="892" title="Jupiter-C" label="Jupiter-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473449" start="967" end="979" title="PGM-19 Jupiter" label="Jupiter IRBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q392893" start="981" end="1017" title="intermediate-range ballistic missile" label="intermediate-range ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="1055" end="1080" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="1214" end="1224" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q899725" start="1803" end="1828" title="Mercury battery" label="Mallory mercury batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q48171" start="3085" end="3099" title="Geiger counter" label="Geiger counter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="3130" end="3140" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q550613" start="3149" end="3159" title="Explorer 3" label="Explorer 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500960" start="3314" end="3341" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s magnetic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="3348" end="3372" title="Van Allen radiation belt" label="Van Allen radiation belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q589534" start="3471" end="3485" title="micrometeoroid" label="micrometeorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q587553" start="3631" end="3647" title="charged particle" label="charged particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210142" start="3734" end="3753" title="Geiger–Müller tube" label="Geiger-Mueller tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="4346" end="4356" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198" start="4398" end="4404" title="photon" label="photon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211554" start="4567" end="4584" title="Amplifier" label="current amplifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14605250" start="5254" end="5268" title="micrometeorite" label="micrometeorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="5605" end="5615" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808202" start="6576" end="6589" title="Solar activity and climate" label="solar activit"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="6612" end="6619" title="Apsis" label="perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q891841" start="6705" end="6730" title="Schmidt camera" label="Baker-Nunn camera network"/>
<link wikidata="Q848041" start="6857" end="6879" title="resistance thermometer" label="resistance thermometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q209867" start="8783" end="8792" title="telemetry" label="telemetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230410" start="9031" end="9053" title="Patrick Space Force Base" label="Patrick Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327261" start="9072" end="9089" title="Earthquake Valley" label="Earthquake Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7698332" start="9489" end="9508" title="temperature control" label="temperature control"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="11060" end="11063" title="Revolutions per minute" label="rpm"/>
<link wikidata="Q128323" start="11459" end="11467" title="Trinidad" label="Trinidad"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="11792" end="11802" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q603526" start="11805" end="11821" title="Explorer program" label="Explorer program"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871408" wikidata="Q7147074" url="?curid=871408" title="Patrick Maclellan of Bombie">
<text>Patrick Maclellan of Bombie (d. c. 1452) Sheriff of Galloway, then the head of his family, the Clan MacLellan, and a staunch royalist declined an invitation to join William Douglas, 8th Earl of Douglas, along with the Earls of Ross and Crawford and Ormond in a powerful alliance against the young King James II of Scotland.

By marriage to his cousin, Margaret Douglas (daughter of Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Douglas) William Douglas, a member of the &#x27;Black Douglas&#x27; family thereby increased the powers vested in his family and estates to the point where he was the most powerful nobleman in the country. The alliance with the Earls of Ross and Crawford further strengthened his power base, making it apparent they were plotting an overthrow of King James.

George Buchanan&#x27;s version of events suggests that Maclellan had previously killed one of the Douglas family by whom he had been insulted, but it is generally understood that the cause of quarrel was Maclellan&#x27;s refusal to join the alliance. The Earl of Douglas, outraged with this opposition to his plot, laid siege to Raeberry Castle (MacLellan&#x27;s Castle) and captured Sir Patrick Maclellan forcibly removing him to the fortress of Threave Castle, where Maclellan was held a prisoner.

Lord Andrew Gray, Maclellan’s uncle, whose son, Sir Patrick Gray, held a high office at the Court, was able to obtain a letter from King James requesting the earl of Douglas to release his prisoner. Sir Patrick Gray carried the dispatch himself, appearing with the king&#x27;s letter. William Douglas, suspecting its message, refused to open the dispatch until after Sir Patrick Gray had dined. Treachery was afoot however, in the Douglas camp. Having received such a shrewd guest as Gray, and anticipating his intentions, the earl ordered Maclellan to be immediately put to death.

Douglas then conducted Gray to the courtyard, where Sir Patrick Maclellan&#x27;s headless body lay. Gray retreated from the castle, almost certainly Threave and not the much lesser castle of Douglas and escaped capture only by his skill as a horseman.

Later at Stirling Castle, by direct invitation of the king to dine, Douglas refused to abandon the alliance. King James stabbed him in the neck, and the king&#x27;s attendants, including Gray, finished off the murder, throwing the body of Earl Douglas from a window.

His son was William Maclellan, who killed the bandit Black Morrow.

==Notes==
==References==
*Maxwell, Sir Herbert &quot;History of the House of Douglas&quot; II vols. London 1902.
*D0UGLASES vol. 1. 63, 64., and the &quot;Dumfries &amp; Galloway Standard&quot;, November, 1891.
*Way, George and Squire, Romily. &quot;Collins Scottish Clan &amp; Family Encyclopedia&quot;. (Foreword by The Rt Hon. The Earl of Elgin KT, Convenor, The Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs). Published in 1994. Pages 424 - 425.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7147074" start="0" end="27" title="Patrick Maclellan of Bombie" label="Patrick Maclellan of Bombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q578478" start="41" end="48" title="Sheriff" label="Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342092" start="52" end="60" title="Galloway" label="Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5125566" start="95" end="109" title="Clan MacLellan" label="Clan MacLellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q920299" start="165" end="201" title="William Douglas, 8th Earl of Douglas" label="William Douglas, 8th Earl of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3172627" start="227" end="231" title="John of Islay, Earl of Ross" label="Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719411" start="236" end="244" title="Alexander Lindsay, 4th Earl of Crawford" label="Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5930577" start="249" end="255" title="Hugh Douglas, Earl of Ormond" label="Ormond"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="302" end="322" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783503" start="352" end="368" title="Margaret Douglas, Fair Maid of Galloway" label="Margaret Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q359901" start="382" end="420" title="Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Douglas" label="Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q715169" start="772" end="787" title="George Buchanan" label="George Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722014" start="1118" end="1141" title="MacLellan&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="MacLellan&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q607339" start="1219" end="1233" title="Threave Castle" label="Threave Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015520" start="2389" end="2406" title="William Maclellan" label="William Maclellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921307" start="2430" end="2442" title="Black Morrow" label="Black Morrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7527252" start="2471" end="2491" title="Herbert Maxwell" label="Maxwell, Sir Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313787" start="2600" end="2632" title="Dumfries &amp;amp; Galloway Standard" label="Dumfries &amp;amp; Galloway Standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546095" start="2657" end="2668" title="George Way of Plean" label="Way, George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598492" start="2811" end="2846" title="Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs" label="Standing Council of Scottish Chiefs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871415" wikidata="Q931311" url="?curid=871415" title="Christopher Zeeman">
<text>Sir Erik Christopher Zeeman FRS (4 February 1925 – 13 February 2016), was a British mathematician, known for his work in geometric topology and singularity theory.

==Overview==
Zeeman&#x27;s main contributions to mathematics were in topology, particularly in knot theory, the piecewise linear category, and dynamical systems.

His 1955 thesis at the University of Cambridge described a new theory termed &quot;dihomology&quot;, an algebraic structure associated to a topological space, containing both homology and cohomology, introducing what is now known as the Zeeman spectral sequence. This was studied by Clint McCrory in his 1972 Brandeis thesis following a suggestion of Dennis Sullivan that one make &quot;a general study of the Zeeman spectral sequence to see how singularities in a space perturb Poincaré duality&quot;. This in turn led to the discovery of intersection homology by Robert MacPherson and Mark Goresky at Brown University where McCrory was appointed in 1974.

From 1976 to 1977 he was the Donegall Lecturer in Mathematics at Trinity College Dublin.

Zeeman is known among the wider scientific public for his contribution to, and spreading awareness of catastrophe theory, which was due initially to another topologist, René Thom, and for his Christmas lectures about mathematics on television in 1978. He was especially active in encouraging the application of mathematics, and catastrophe theory in particular, to biology and behavioural sciences.

==Early life==
Zeeman was born in Japan to a Danish father, Christian Zeeman, and a British mother. They moved to England one year after his birth. After being educated at Christ&#x27;s Hospital in Horsham, West Sussex, he served as a Flying Officer with the Royal Air Force from 1943 to 1947. He studied mathematics at Christ&#x27;s College, Cambridge, but had forgotten much of his school mathematics while serving in the Air Force. He received an MA and PhD (the latter under the supervision of Shaun Wylie) from the University of Cambridge, and became a Fellow of Gonville and Caius College where he tutored David Fowler and John Horton Conway.

==Academic career==
Zeeman is one of the founders of engulfing theory in piecewise linear topology and is credited with working out the engulfing theorem (independently also worked out by John Stallings), which can be used to prove the piecewise linear version of the Poincaré conjecture for all dimensions above four.

After working at Cambridge (during which he spent a year abroad at University of Chicago and Princeton as a Harkness Fellow) and the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques, he founded the Mathematics Department and Mathematics Research Centre at the new University of Warwick in 1964. In his own words
:&quot;I was 38 and had developed some fairly strong ideas on how to run a department and create a Mathematics Institute: I wanted to combine the flexibility of options that are common in most American universities, with the kind of tutorial care to be found in Oxford and Cambridge.&quot;

Zeeman&#x27;s style of leadership was informal, but inspirational, and he rapidly took Warwick to international recognition for the quality of its mathematical research. The first six appointments he made were all in topology, enabling the department to immediately become internationally competitive, followed by six in algebra, and finally six in analysis and six in applied mathematics. He was able to trade four academic appointments for funding that enabled PhD students to give undergraduate supervision in groups of two for the first two years, in a manner similar to the tutorial system at Oxford and Cambridge. He remained at Warwick until 1988, but from 1966 to 1967 he was a visiting professor at the University of California at Berkeley, after which his research turned to dynamical systems, inspired by many of the world leaders in this field, including Stephen Smale and René Thom, who both spent time at Warwick. In 1963, Zeeman showed that causality in special relativity expressed by the preservation of partial ordering is given exactly and only by the Lorentz transforms. Zeeman subsequently spent a sabbatical with Thom at the Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques in Paris, where he became interested in catastrophe theory. On his return to Warwick, he taught an undergraduate course in Catastrophe Theory that became immensely popular with students; his lectures generally were &quot;standing room only&quot;. In 1973 he gave an MSc course at Warwick giving a complete detailed proof of Thom&#x27;s classification of elementary catastrophes, mainly following an unpublished manuscript, &quot;Right-equivalence&quot; written by John Mather at Warwick in 1969. David Trotman wrote up his notes of the course as an MSc thesis. These were then distributed in thousands of copies throughout the world and published both in the proceedings of a 1975 Seattle conference on catastrophe theory and its applications, and in a 1977 collection of papers on catastrophe theory by Zeeman. In 1974 Zeeman gave an invited address at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Vancouver, about applications of catastrophe theory.
Zeeman was elected as a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1975, and was awarded the Society&#x27;s Faraday Medal in 1988. He was the 63rd President of the London Mathematical Society in 1986–88 giving his Presidential Address on 18 November 1988 &quot;On the classification of dynamical systems&quot;. He was awarded the Senior Whitehead Prize of the Society in 1982. He was the Society&#x27;s first Forder lecturer, involving a lecture tour in New Zealand, in 1987. Between 1988 and 1994 he was the Professor of Geometry at Gresham College.

In 1978, Zeeman gave the televised series of Christmas Lectures at the Royal Institution. From these grew the Mathematics and Engineering Masterclasses for both primary and secondary school children that now flourish in forty centers in the United Kingdom.

In 1988, Zeeman became Principal of Hertford College, Oxford. The following year he was appointed an honorary fellow of Christ&#x27;s College, Cambridge. He received a knighthood in the 1991 Birthday Honours for &quot;mathematical excellence and service to British mathematics and mathematics education&quot;. He was invited to become President of The Mathematical Association in 2003 and based his book &quot;Three-dimensional Theorems for Schools&quot; on his 2004 Presidential Address. On Friday 6 May 2005, the University of Warwick&#x27;s new Mathematics and Statistics building was named the Zeeman Building in his honour. He became an Honorary Member of The Mathematical Association in 2006. In September 2006, the London Mathematical Society and the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications awarded him the David Crighton medal in recognition of his long and distinguished service to mathematics and the mathematical community. The medal is awarded triennially, and Zeeman was the second-ever recipient of the award. He died on 13 February 2016.

==The Zeeman Medal==
The &quot;&quot; of the London Mathematical Society and the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications is named in Zeeman&#x27;s honour. The award aims &quot;to honour mathematicians who have excelled in promoting mathematics and engaging with the general public. They may be academic mathematicians based in universities, mathematics school teachers, industrial mathematicians, those working in the financial sector or indeed mathematicians from any number of other fields&quot;.

==See also==
* Mary Lou Zeeman, Zeeman&#x27;s daughter, also a mathematician
* Nicolette Zeeman, Zeeman&#x27;s daughter, a literary scholar
* Samuel C. Zeeman, Zeeman&#x27;s son, a plant biologist

== References ==
== External links ==
* Interview in &quot;CIM Bulletin&quot; 2001
* Three references for further reading
* Bibliography
* Zeeman&#x27;s Catastrophe Machine
** Zeeman&#x27;s Catastrophe Machine in Flash
** AMS — The Catastrophe Machine
** Doctor Zeeman&#x27;s Original Catastrophe Machine
**Video illustrating Zeeman&#x27;s Catastrophe Machine
* &quot;The Cusp of Catastrophe: René Thom, Christopher Zeeman and Denis Postle&quot; in &quot;Maps of the Mind&quot; Charles Hampden-Turner. Collier Books, 1981. 
* Mathematics into pictures, Christopher Zeeman&#x27;s 1978 Royal Institution Christmas Lectures
* Zeeman building, University of Warwick</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q931311" start="0" end="27" title="Christopher Zeeman" label="Sir Erik Christopher Zeeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="28" end="31" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939186" start="121" end="139" title="geometric topology" label="geometric topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245771" start="144" end="162" title="singularity theory" label="singularity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q42989" start="234" end="242" title="topology" label="topology"/>
<link wikidata="Q849798" start="260" end="271" title="knot theory" label="knot theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7191425" start="277" end="293" title="Piecewise linear manifold" label="piecewise linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q638328" start="308" end="325" title="dynamical systems" label="dynamical systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="351" end="374" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q179899" start="468" end="485" title="topological space" label="topological space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144780" start="503" end="511" title="Homology (mathematics)" label="homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198376" start="516" end="526" title="cohomology" label="cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503315" start="572" end="589" title="spectral sequence" label="spectral sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q726376" start="679" end="694" title="Dennis Sullivan" label="Dennis Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503315" start="745" end="762" title="spectral sequence" label="spectral sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063099" start="807" end="823" title="Poincaré duality" label="Poincaré duality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056721" start="868" end="889" title="intersection homology" label="intersection homology"/>
<link wikidata="Q931297" start="893" end="910" title="Robert MacPherson (mathematician)" label="Robert MacPherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900071" start="915" end="927" title="Mark Goresky" label="Mark Goresky"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="931" end="947" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q65082248" start="1015" end="1047" title="Donegall Lecturer in Mathematics" label="Donegall Lecturer in Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q258464" start="1051" end="1073" title="Trinity College Dublin" label="Trinity College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345659" start="1178" end="1196" title="catastrophe theory" label="catastrophe theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q164428" start="1245" end="1254" title="René Thom" label="René Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q677579" start="1648" end="1670" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q177544" start="1674" end="1681" title="Horsham" label="Horsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="1711" end="1725" title="Flying Officer" label="Flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1735" end="1750" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q714717" start="1796" end="1828" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297864" start="1926" end="1928" title="Master of Arts (Oxbridge)" label="MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q836653" start="1974" end="1985" title="Shaun Wylie" label="Shaun Wylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q863940" start="2044" end="2070" title="Gonville and Caius College" label="Gonville and Caius College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233776" start="2088" end="2100" title="David Fowler (mathematician)" label="David Fowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q268961" start="2105" end="2123" title="John Horton Conway" label="John Horton Conway"/>
<link wikidata="Q203586" start="2394" end="2413" title="Poincaré conjecture" label="Poincaré conjecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="2463" end="2472" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q131252" start="2513" end="2534" title="University of Chicago" label="University of Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2539" end="2548" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5658217" start="2554" end="2569" title="Harkness Fellowship" label="Harkness Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156553" start="2579" end="2619" title="Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques" label="Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="2702" end="2723" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="3753" end="3789" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California at Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q315394" start="3908" end="3921" title="Stephen Smale" label="Stephen Smale"/>
<link wikidata="Q164428" start="3926" end="3935" title="René Thom" label="René Thom"/>
<link wikidata="Q217255" start="4112" end="4130" title="Lorentz transforms" label="Lorentz transforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345659" start="4269" end="4287" title="catastrophe theory" label="catastrophe theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q440717" start="4693" end="4704" title="John Mather (mathematician)" label="John Mather"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240508" start="4725" end="4738" title="David Trotman" label="David Trotman"/>
<link wikidata="Q21015854" start="5064" end="5127" title="List of International Congresses of Mathematicians Plenary and Invited Speakers" label="invited address at the International Congress of Mathematicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="5208" end="5235" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810244" start="5336" end="5363" title="London Mathematical Society" label="London Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q943724" start="5502" end="5524" title="Senior Whitehead Prize" label="Senior Whitehead Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607594" start="5681" end="5702" title="Gresham Professor of Geometry" label="Professor of Geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q788375" start="5706" end="5721" title="Gresham College" label="Gresham College"/>
<link wikidata="Q600467" start="5769" end="5812" title="Royal Institution Christmas Lectures" label="Christmas Lectures at the Royal Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q81090" start="6018" end="6042" title="Hertford College, Oxford" label="Hertford College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q714717" start="6102" end="6134" title="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge" label="Christ&amp;#x27;s College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="6150" end="6160" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586732" start="6168" end="6189" title="1991 Birthday Honours" label="1991 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786827" start="6330" end="6358" title="Mathematical Association" label="The Mathematical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6786827" start="6643" end="6671" title="The Mathematical Association" label="The Mathematical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810244" start="6704" end="6731" title="London Mathematical Society" label="London Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040575" start="6740" end="6785" title="Institute of Mathematics and its Applications" label="Institute of Mathematics and its Applications"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6802" end="6822" title=":Category:David Crighton medalists" label="David Crighton medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810244" start="7087" end="7114" title="London Mathematical Society" label="London Mathematical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q6040575" start="7123" end="7168" title="Institute of Mathematics and its Applications" label="Institute of Mathematics and its Applications"/>
<link wikidata="Q36591095" start="7563" end="7578" title="Mary Lou Zeeman" label="Mary Lou Zeeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q51491461" start="7627" end="7643" title="Nicolette Zeeman" label="Nicolette Zeeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q24525661" start="8248" end="8261" title="Collier Books" label="Collier Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171086" start="8330" end="8347" title="Royal Institution" label="Royal Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q600467" start="8348" end="8366" title="Christmas Lectures" label="Christmas Lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q865528" start="8386" end="8407" title="University of Warwick" label="University of Warwick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871416" wikidata="Q6730483" url="?curid=871416" title="Magic, Inc.">
<text>Magic, Inc. (1940) is a science fantasy novella by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It was originally published in &quot;Unknown Fantasy Fiction&quot; of September 1940, under the title &quot;The Devil Makes the Law&quot;.

In the story, magic is a commonplace profession used by businessmen in various fields. A small business owner fights off an attempt to force magic under the control of a corrupt association called &quot;Magic, Inc.&quot; The story is included in the book &quot;Waldo &amp; Magic, Inc.&quot;

==Plot summary==

Archie Fraser is a building contractor whose business is thriving. Despite the common use of magic in other professions, Archie has relatively little use for it, since so much of his work involves &quot;cold iron&quot;, which defies magic. He does have a sideline in instant temporary structures, such as bleachers and tents, all made of wood with no iron in them, which can be reconstituted from a fragment of an original structure. The work is done by magicians operating as independent contractors. Occasionally mistakes are made – at one point a fragment of a house is used by mistake. Archie creatively puts a sign outside the out-of-place structure saying &quot;Display model! Now open!&quot;

One day Archie is the subject of a shakedown by a sleazy character who seems to be operating a protection racket based on magic. After scaring the criminal off by exploiting his obvious superstitions (helped by the display of a conveniently concealed handgun), Archie goes to see his friend Jedson, who uses magic to operate a clothing business. Jedson&#x27;s specialty is &quot;one season&quot; clothing which is not intended to be hard-wearing. As Archie arrives, he is auditioning a teenage medium who can produce clothing from ectoplasm. Jedson is disappointed to find that the result is simply a copy of an existing design owned by somebody else, so he cannot use it.

Jedson and Archie are able to grab the would-be gangster as he lurks near Archie&#x27;s storefront and hustle him inside. There Jedson draws a &quot;magic circle&quot; around the miscreant, imprisoning him. He then makes a voodoo doll and uses it to strike fear into the criminal. The criminal breaks down and babbles some information, most of it useless in finding out who runs the racket. They kick him out of the store, believing him to be just a small-time hood. Archie protests Jedson&#x27;s tactics, but Jedson replies that he didn&#x27;t really do anything. The circle and the doll were just symbolic. The man&#x27;s own misguided beliefs caused his body to react as if he really were being imprisoned and tortured. At that point there is a scream outside. They discover the man&#x27;s body, ripped from shoulder to groin as if by the talons of a huge bird, the gouges being filled with a stinking ichor.

Slowly Archie&#x27;s business begins to suffer. There are mysterious accidents and problems with his workers who are scared by hex symbols which appear around the business. One morning the entire business is destroyed, apparently by elementals of fire, earth and water.

Jedson initially helps Archie consult a prestigious magician, Biddle, who sets up a tent on site, then after some activity in the tent, announces he can do nothing and that they owe him $500 as a &quot;survey fee&quot;. Jedson politely tells him to forget it, as no such fee was mentioned before, and magicians, like lawyers, work on a &quot;contingency fee&quot; basis. Biddle disappears in a huff. At that point a young magician by the name of Bodie, who had been watching the performance, tells then they should have used an old witch he knows, a Mrs. Jennings.

They consult her in her small, well-ordered home. After a reading of tea-leaves, Mrs. Jennings announces that she knows what they need. At Archie&#x27;s jobsite, she draws a pentacle and calls the elementals to her. These are a gnome, an undine, and a fire salamander. The undine is a repulsive sluglike creature, while the salamander is a naive, benign creature of flame which sees no wrong in burning, though it regrets causing harm. By force and persuasion, she instructs them to reverse what they did. There is a huge rushing noise and Archie&#x27;s business is restored.

Strange events continue, this time directed at Archie himself. A few times he is saved from danger, apparently by the distant intervention of Mrs. Jennings herself. Jedson consults an anthropologist, who is also a &quot;witch smeller&quot;. A large, handsome African impeccably dressed in an expensive business suit, holding a string of degrees from prestigious institutions, Dr. Royce Worthington can find and neutralize black magic. He eventually announces that he has found a lot of unusual magic, but that he will leave his grandfather (a shrunken head) behind to watch over things.

Meanwhile, Biddle&#x27;s organization, a body of &quot;professional magicians&quot;, nominally intended to assure high standards, keeps dunning Archie over Biddle&#x27;s fee. There is also a new &quot;one stop shopping&quot; company calling itself &quot;Magic, Inc.&quot; which hires magicians and finds them work. It is an open secret that the two organizations are the same. The nominal head of Magic Inc. is a man called Ditworth. Jedson discovers that a bill in the State Legislature, intended to regulate magicians, would give Ditworth monopoly power. They go to the State Capitol to try to head off this law, but are outwitted by Ditworth, who manages to get the bill attached to a major public works project, making its passage unstoppable. However Ditworth makes the mistake of passing by a large mirror in the Capitol building. He is seen to cast no reflection, showing that he is actually a demon.

Once the law begins to bite, only magicians who work for Magic Inc. are able to find work, while those who refuse to join Magic Inc. have their licenses revoked. Meanwhile, customers such as Archie are charged ever higher rates for magic services. Jedson discovers that Ditworth has been at work in all other states, and there is nowhere for them to go to get away from his schemes.

Royce, Jedson, Bodie and Archie meet at Mrs Jennings house from time to time. They hatch a plan to enter the Half World, the realm of demons and Old Nick himself, to challenge Ditworth. Bodie stays behind to guard the portal in Mrs. Jennings&#x27; fireplace, while Jedson (transformed into an ugly half-bestial form), Royce (in his work costume), and Archie (in his normal form) travel with Mrs. Jennings, who to Archie&#x27;s surprise and delight, has transformed herself into Amanda Jennings, the young, beautiful redhead she once was.

In the Half World, custom reigns supreme and natural laws are negotiable. They go before Old Nick and demand to inspect his demons, as custom allows. Faced with seemingly endless legions of horrific creatures, Royce and Archie, helped by Mrs. Jennings&#x27; cat, travel up and down the rows. Jedson and Amanda have to remain behind as hostages. After what seems years they identify and tackle Ditworth. Being a demon, Ditworth can kill them, but another demon breaks ranks and subdues their enemy. At this point their helper reveals himself to be an FBI agent. Archie faints.

Again citing custom, they demand that Ditworth face their champion, who is of course the white witch Amanda. Ditworth is afraid to do this, and has to face Old Nick&#x27;s sentence for being defeated by white magic. He is imprisoned for &quot;a thousand thousand years&quot;, a fairly light sentence, which is enough to stop his scheming on Earth.

Old Nick announces that the FBI man has to stay behind for his special attention, but after a challenge from Amanda, who seems capable of taking on him and all his legions, he thinks better of it. They all return to the house. The FBI man tells them he was working Ditworth&#x27;s scams from another angle and had become trapped in the Half World. As they emerge from the fireplace, Bodie recognizes him as an old friend. The FBI man, now in human form with a snappy suit and fedora hat, bids them a quick goodbye as he leaves to report back to the Bureau.

Archie, overpowered by Amanda&#x27;s beauty, hangs around her like a lovesick puppy, but she is firmly unreceptive. She sets him down for a nap to recover from his ordeal, and when he awakes, she is Mrs. Jennings again. Archie&#x27;s business recovers, as all Ditworth&#x27;s schemes fall apart.

==Reception==
&quot;Kirkus Reviews&quot; considered it to be &quot;highly imaginative&quot;, while &quot;Rain Taxi&quot; calls it a &quot;breakthrough&quot;.

==See also==
* &quot;Operation Chaos&quot;/&quot;Operation Luna&quot; - a similar fantasy world by Poul Anderson
* &quot;The Case of the Toxic Spell Dump&quot; - a similar fantasy world by Harry Turtledove

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1080374" start="24" end="39" title="science fantasy" label="science fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="40" end="47" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="67" end="85" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629880" start="118" end="153" title="Unknown (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Unknown Fantasy Fiction&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q81741" start="241" end="246" title="magic (paranormal)" label="magic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961547" start="488" end="511" title="Waldo &amp;amp; Magic, Inc." label="Waldo &amp;amp; Magic, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6072973" start="740" end="749" title="cold iron" label="cold iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067349" start="842" end="851" title="bleachers" label="bleachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452087" start="1272" end="1281" title="Extortion" label="shakedown"/>
<link wikidata="Q18554" start="1332" end="1349" title="protection racket" label="protection racket"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="1731" end="1737" title="Mediumship" label="medium"/>
<link wikidata="Q387138" start="1768" end="1777" title="ectoplasm (paranormal)" label="ectoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17622292" start="2134" end="2145" title="voodoo doll" label="voodoo doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q257462" start="2816" end="2821" title="ichor" label="ichor"/>
<link wikidata="Q109411" start="2951" end="2954" title="curse" label="hex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786347" start="3057" end="3066" title="elemental" label="elemental"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165361" start="3437" end="3452" title="contingency fee" label="contingency fee"/>
<link wikidata="Q8011595" start="3719" end="3726" title="fortune telling" label="reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642650" start="3835" end="3843" title="pentacle" label="pentacle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188215" start="3889" end="3894" title="gnome" label="gnome"/>
<link wikidata="Q192032" start="3899" end="3905" title="Ondine (mythology)" label="undine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140626" start="3913" end="3928" title="Salamander (legendary creature)" label="fire salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130156" start="4781" end="4794" title="shrunken head" label="shrunken head"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270264" start="5296" end="5313" title="State legislature (United States)" label="State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164975" start="6264" end="6272" title="Christian teaching about the Devil" label="Old Nick"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="7208" end="7211" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q638335" start="8060" end="8066" title="Fedora (hat)" label="fedora"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197403" start="8459" end="8473" title="Kirkus Reviews" label="Kirkus Reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284491" start="8544" end="8553" title="Rain Taxi" label="Rain Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883945" start="8619" end="8634" title="Operation Chaos (novel)" label="Operation Chaos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097249" start="8647" end="8661" title="Operation Luna" label="Operation Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="8697" end="8710" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721539" start="8719" end="8751" title="The Case of the Toxic Spell Dump" label="The Case of the Toxic Spell Dump"/>
<link wikidata="Q455780" start="8787" end="8803" title="Harry Turtledove" label="Harry Turtledove"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871417" wikidata="Q7961547" url="?curid=871417" title="Waldo &amp; Magic, Inc.">
<text>Waldo &quot;and&quot; Magic, Inc. is a book containing those two novellas, one science fiction, one fantasy, by American writer Robert A. Heinlein. It was published in 1950.

In 1999, Tor Books published &quot;The Fantasies of Robert A. Heinlein&quot;, an omnibus containing stories from &quot;Waldo &quot;and&quot; Magic, Inc.&quot; and &quot;The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag&quot;.

&quot;Waldo &quot;and&quot; Magic, Inc.&quot; was later republished separately by Baen Books in 2014.

==Contents==
*&quot;Waldo&quot; (1942; originally published in &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot;)
*&quot;Magic, Inc.&quot; (1940; originally published in &quot;Unknown&quot;)

==Reception==
L. Sprague de Camp recommended the collection highly, praising Heinlein for &quot;his prodigality of invention, his shrewd grasp of human nature and his versatile knowledge of law, politics, business and science.&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="65" end="72" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="79" end="94" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="100" end="107" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123078" start="128" end="146" title="Robert A. Heinlein" label="Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733378" start="210" end="245" title="The Fantasies of Robert A. Heinlein" label="The Fantasies of Robert A. Heinlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771676" start="344" end="386" title="The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag (collection)" label="The Unpleasant Profession of Jonathan Hoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017768" start="518" end="523" title="Waldo (short story)" label="Waldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="567" end="593" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730483" start="608" end="619" title="Magic, Inc." label="Magic, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q2629880" start="663" end="670" title="Unknown (magazine)" label="Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q316313" start="693" end="711" title="L. Sprague de Camp" label="L. Sprague de Camp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871418" wikidata="Q1976174" url="?curid=871418" title="Fibrous protein">
<text>In molecular biology, fibrous proteins or scleroproteins are one of the three main classifications of protein structure (alongside globular and membrane proteins). Fibrous proteins are made up of elongated or fibrous polypeptide chains which form filamentous and sheet-like structures. This kind of protein can be distinguished from globular protein by its low solubility in water. In contrast, globular proteins are spherical and generally soluble in water, performing dynamic functions like enzymatic activity or transport. Such proteins serve protective and structural roles by forming connective tissue, tendons, bone matrices, and muscle fiber.

Fibrous proteins consist of many families including keratin, collagen, elastin, fibrin or spidroin. Collagen is the most abundant of these proteins which exists in vertebrate connective tissue including tendon, cartilage, and bone.

==Biomolecular structure==
A fibrous protein forms long protein filaments, which are shaped like rods or wires. Fibrous proteins are structural or storage proteins that are typically inert and water-insoluble. A fibrous protein occurs as an aggregate due to hydrophobic side chains that protrude from the molecule.

A fibrous protein&#x27;s peptide sequence often has limited residues with repeats; these can form unusual secondary structures, such as a collagen helix. The structures often feature cross-links between chains (e.g., cys-cys disulfide bonds between keratin chains).

Fibrous proteins tend not to denature as easily as globular proteins.

Miroshnikov et al. (1998) are among the researchers who have attempted to synthesize fibrous proteins.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7202" start="3" end="20" title="molecular biology" label="molecular biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976174" start="22" end="38" title="Fibrous protein" label="fibrous proteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976174" start="42" end="56" title="Fibrous protein" label="scleroproteins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251471" start="83" end="98" title="Protein fold class" label="classifications"/>
<link wikidata="Q735188" start="102" end="119" title="protein structure" label="protein structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q901969" start="131" end="139" title="globular protein" label="globular"/>
<link wikidata="Q423042" start="144" end="160" title="membrane protein" label="membrane protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="217" end="234" title="polypeptide chain" label="polypeptide chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="361" end="371" title="solubility" label="solubility"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="589" end="606" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="608" end="614" title="tendon" label="tendon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="617" end="630" title="Bone#Matrix" label="bone matrices"/>
<link wikidata="Q428914" start="636" end="648" title="muscle fiber" label="muscle fiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q417841" start="684" end="692" title="protein family" label="families"/>
<link wikidata="Q189474" start="703" end="710" title="keratin" label="keratin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="712" end="720" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q409747" start="722" end="729" title="elastin" label="elastin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27205" start="731" end="737" title="fibrin" label="fibrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255270" start="741" end="749" title="spidroin" label="spidroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="826" end="843" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q232358" start="854" end="860" title="tendon" label="tendon"/>
<link wikidata="Q502730" start="862" end="871" title="cartilage" label="cartilage"/>
<link wikidata="Q265868" start="877" end="881" title="bone" label="bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920483" start="940" end="956" title="protein filament" label="protein filament"/>
<link wikidata="Q425526" start="1031" end="1046" title="storage protein" label="storage protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q262175" start="1067" end="1072" title="Chemically inert" label="inert"/>
<link wikidata="Q170731" start="1083" end="1092" title="Solubility" label="insoluble"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="1142" end="1153" title="Hydrophobe" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q899689" start="1154" end="1164" title="side chain" label="side chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="1189" end="1197" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="1225" end="1241" title="peptide sequence" label="peptide sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q903495" start="1260" end="1268" title="Residue (chemistry)" label="residues"/>
<link wikidata="Q904984" start="1306" end="1325" title="secondary structure" label="secondary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768908" start="1338" end="1352" title="collagen helix" label="collagen helix"/>
<link wikidata="Q898597" start="1383" end="1394" title="cross-links" label="cross-links"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397485" start="1403" end="1409" title="chains" label="chains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="1425" end="1439" title="disulfide bond" label="disulfide bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q273186" start="1496" end="1504" title="Denaturation (biochemistry)" label="denature"/>
<link wikidata="Q901969" start="1518" end="1534" title="globular protein" label="globular protein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871419" wikidata="Q2439753" url="?curid=871419" title="Tom Jones (lyricist)">
<text>Thomas Collins Jones (February 17, 1928 – August 11, 2023) was an American lyricist and librettist, best known for &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;, &quot;110 in the Shade&quot;, and &quot;I Do! I Do!&quot;.

==Early life==
Jones was born in Littlefield, Texas, on February 17, 1928. He was raised in Coleman, Texas, the son of a turkey farmer (his father William) and a homemaker (his mother Jessie). During his adolescence, he worked as an usher in a movie theater and attended the University of Texas at Austin, where he was involved in its theatre department. He attained a master&#x27;s degree from the university in 1951. All of Jones&#x27;s major musicals were written with Harvey Schmidt, whom he met at the university.

==Career==
His best-known work is &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;, which ran off-Broadway from 1960 until 2002, and the hit song from the same, &quot;Try to Remember&quot;. Other songs from &quot;The Fantasticks&quot; include &quot;Soon It&#x27;s Gonna Rain&quot;, &quot;Much More&quot;, and &quot;I Can See It&quot;. He also wrote the screenplay for the 1995 feature-film adaptation.

Jones acted in a New York City revival of &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;, which he also directed. He played the part of the Old Actor, from when the musical opened in 1960, and from April 26, 2010, to June 6, 2010. He was credited as an actor in the show as Thomas Bruce. 

Jones was also the author of &quot;Making Musicals: An Informal Introduction to the World of Musical Theater&quot;, about which Elyse Sommer wrote on January 15, 1998 in &quot;CurtainUp&quot;:

Extremely well organized and packed with interesting information, the first half of the book deals in broad and general terms with the growth and development of the American musical. The second half focuses on the practical &quot;how-to&quot; of putting together a musical, using Jones&#x27;s own career and shows he&#x27;s worked on as a springboard ... Since only half the book falls within the category of how-to I&#x27;m glad to report that this advice is stick-to-the-ribs solid. No hyperbole. No gratuitous name dropping.

==Personal life and death==
Jones was first married to Eleanor Wright; the two later divorced. Jones went on to marry choreographer Janet Watson. The couple had two children, Michael and Sam Jones. Watson died in 2016.

Jones died from cancer on August 11, 2023, at the age of 95.

==Theater credits==
* &quot;Shoestring &#x27;57&quot; (contributor) (1957)
* &quot;Demi-Dozen&quot; (contributor) (1958) (For the titles of his contributions, see &quot;Discography&quot; in Julius Monk.)
* &quot;The Fantasticks&quot; (1960)
* &quot;110 in the Shade&quot; (1963; book by N. Richard Nash, based on his play &quot;The Rainmaker&quot;)
* &quot;I Do! I Do!&quot; (1966; based on &quot;The Fourposter&quot; by Jan de Hartog)
* &quot;Celebration&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Colette&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Philemon&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Grover&#x27;s Corners&quot; (1987; based on &quot;Our Town&quot;)
* &quot;Mirette&quot; (1996; book by Elizabeth Diggs, based on the children&#x27;s book &quot;Mirette on the High Wire&quot; by Emily Arnold McCully)
* &quot;Roadside&quot; (2001; book by Jones, based on the 1929 play of the same name by Lynn Riggs, with music by Harvey Schmidt)
* &quot;Harold and Maude&quot; (2004; music by Joseph Thalken, based on the film)
* &quot;The Game of Love&quot; (2012; music by Jacques Offenbach with arrangements and additional music by Nancy Ford, based on the &quot;Anatol&quot; plays by Arthur Schnitzler).

==References==
==External links==
*
* (archive)
*Tom Jones Downstage Center XM radio interview at American Theatre Wing, September 2006
*&quot;Philemon&quot; at The Guide to Musical Theatre
*&quot;Roadside&quot; at The Guide to Musical Theatre</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2439753" start="0" end="20" title="Tom Jones (lyricist)" label="Thomas Collins Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481121" start="121" end="136" title="The Fantasticks" label="The Fantasticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474521" start="150" end="166" title="110 in the Shade" label="110 in the Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980515" start="184" end="195" title="I Do! I Do!" label="I Do! I Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q202736" start="237" end="255" title="Littlefield, Texas" label="Littlefield, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q974201" start="296" end="310" title="Coleman, Texas" label="Coleman, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="479" end="508" title="University of Texas at Austin" label="University of Texas at Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587936" start="676" end="690" title="Harvey Schmidt" label="Harvey Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481121" start="764" end="779" title="The Fantasticks" label="The Fantasticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848436" start="870" end="885" title="Try to Remember" label="Try to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562690" start="952" end="977" title="Soon It&amp;#x27;s Gonna Rain" label="Soon It&amp;#x27;s Gonna Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733394" start="1075" end="1103" title="The Fantasticks (film)" label="1995 feature-film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309971" start="2572" end="2583" title="Julius Monk" label="Julius Monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481121" start="2594" end="2609" title="The Fantasticks" label="The Fantasticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474521" start="2631" end="2647" title="110 in the Shade" label="110 in the Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q446404" start="2669" end="2684" title="N. Richard Nash" label="N. Richard Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379900" start="2710" end="2723" title="The Rainmaker (play)" label="The Rainmaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980515" start="2739" end="2750" title="I Do! I Do!" label="I Do! I Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q23011458" start="2779" end="2793" title="The Fourposter" label="The Fourposter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375319" start="2803" end="2816" title="Jan de Hartog" label="Jan de Hartog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057623" start="2826" end="2837" title="Celebration (musical)" label="Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183008" start="2888" end="2896" title="Philemon (musical)" label="Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755219" start="2968" end="2976" title="Our Town" label="Our Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q112166521" start="3021" end="3036" title="Elizabeth Diggs" label="Elizabeth Diggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938094" start="3078" end="3102" title="Mirette on the High Wire" label="Mirette on the High Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372037" start="3112" end="3132" title="Emily Arnold McCully" label="Emily Arnold McCully"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390616" start="3142" end="3150" title="Roadside (musical)" label="Roadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587936" start="3248" end="3262" title="Harvey Schmidt" label="Harvey Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q130002779" start="3311" end="3325" title="Joseph Thalken" label="Joseph Thalken"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897875" start="3354" end="3370" title="The Game of Love (musical)" label="The Game of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q41555" start="3393" end="3410" title="Jacques Offenbach" label="Jacques Offenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q550334" start="3484" end="3490" title="Anatol" label="Anatol"/>
<link wikidata="Q44331" start="3506" end="3523" title="Arthur Schnitzler" label="Arthur Schnitzler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745239" start="3625" end="3646" title="American Theatre Wing" label="American Theatre Wing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871420" wikidata="Q1587936" url="?curid=871420" title="Harvey Schmidt">
<text>Harvey Lester Schmidt (September 12, 1929 – February 28, 2018) was an American composer for musical theatre and illustrator. He was best known for composing the music for the longest running musical in history, &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;, which ran off-Broadway for 42 years, from 1960 to 2002.

==Biography==

Schmidt was born in Dallas, Texas. He attended the University of Texas to study art, but when he met Tom Jones at the university, he started to accompany the drama student on the piano. They soon started writing musicals together, the first being a revue. However, after serving in the Army, Schmidt moved to New York and worked as a graphic artist for NBC Television and later as an illustrator for &quot;Life&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot;, and &quot;Fortune&quot;.

All of Schmidt&#x27;s major musicals were written with lyricist Tom Jones. The duo is best known for the musical &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;, which ran for 42 years off-Broadway, from 1960 to 2002 for a total of 17,162 performances. He also collaborated on the 1995 feature film adaptation. In 1992, Schmidt received a Tony Award honor for &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;, then in its 33rd year.

Jones and Schmidt followed with the Broadway musical &quot;110 in the Shade&quot; in 1963, which ran for 330 performances on Broadway and earned a Tony Award nomination for Best Composer and Lyricist for Schmidt and Jones. &quot;I Do! I Do!&quot; followed in 1966, which brought Mary Martin and Robert Preston to the Broadway stage in a two-person musical and ran for 560 performances. Jones and Schmidt were nominated for the Tony Award for Best Composer and Lyricist and Best Musical.

They both appeared in a revue of their songs, &quot;The Show Goes On&quot;, at the York Theatre Company in 1997. The run was extended several times and the show was recorded on the DRG label.

Schmidt and Jones wrote a musical based on Thornton Wilder&#x27;s &quot;Our Town&quot;, which took the duo thirteen years to write, only to have the rights rescinded by Wilders nephew|

==Honours==

Schmidt was inducted into the American Theatre Hall of Fame. His recording, &quot;Harvey Schmidt Plays Jones and Schmidt&quot;, was released in 2005.

Schmidt and Jones were both inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in July 2012.

==Songs==
* &quot;I Can See It&quot; from the musical &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;; later recorded by Barbra Streisand
* &quot;Much More&quot; from the musical &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;; later recorded by Barbra Streisand for &quot;The Barbra Streisand Album&quot;
* &quot;Soon It&#x27;s Gonna Rain&quot; from the musical &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;; later recorded by Barbra Streisand for &quot;The Barbra Streisand Album&quot;
*&quot;Try To Remember&quot; from the musical &quot;The Fantasticks&quot;
*&quot;What is a Woman?&quot; from the musical &quot;I Do! I Do!,&quot; later recorded by Peggy Lee
*&quot;My Cup Runneth Over&quot; from the musical &quot;I Do! I Do!,&quot; later recorded by Bing Crosby and Ed Ames.

==Theatre==
* &quot;Shoestring &#x27;57&quot; (1957)
* &quot;Demi-Dozen&quot; (1958)
* &quot;The Fantasticks&quot; (1960)
* &quot;New York Scrapbook&quot; (1961 TV Special)
* &quot;110 in the Shade&quot; (1963)
* &quot;I Do! I Do!&quot; (1966)
* &quot;Celebration&quot; (1969)
* &quot;The Bone Room&quot; (1968)
* &quot;Colette&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Bad Company&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Philemon&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Colette Collage&quot; (1982 revision)
* &quot;Grovers Corners&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Mirette&quot; (1996)
* &quot;The Show Goes On&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Roadside&quot; (2001)

==See also==
*&quot;Mirette on the High Wire&quot;

==References==
==External links==
*
*Internet Off-Broadway Database listing
*The Guide to Musical Theatre Philemon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1587936" start="0" end="21" title="Harvey Schmidt" label="Harvey Lester Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="92" end="107" title="musical theatre" label="musical theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q644687" start="112" end="123" title="illustrator" label="illustrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481121" start="217" end="232" title="The Fantasticks" label="The Fantasticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="250" end="262" title="off-Broadway" label="off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="332" end="338" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="363" end="382" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439753" start="413" end="422" title="Tom Jones (writer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="665" end="679" title="NBC Television" label="NBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="718" end="722" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="736" end="756" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="770" end="788" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q372989" start="806" end="813" title="Fortune (magazine)" label="Fortune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2439753" start="886" end="895" title="Tom Jones (writer)" label="Tom Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481121" start="941" end="956" title="The Fantasticks" label="The Fantasticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733394" start="1083" end="1111" title="The Fantasticks (film)" label="1995 feature film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="1141" end="1151" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1251" end="1259" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474521" start="1274" end="1290" title="110 in the Shade" label="110 in the Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="1340" end="1348" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980515" start="1444" end="1455" title="I Do! I Do!" label="I Do! I Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q285483" start="1494" end="1505" title="Mary Martin" label="Mary Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q451811" start="1510" end="1524" title="Robert Preston (actor)" label="Robert Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q155087" start="1939" end="1954" title="Thornton Wilder" label="Thornton Wilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755219" start="1968" end="1976" title="Our Town" label="Our Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q467050" start="2125" end="2154" title="American Theatre Hall of Fame" label="American Theatre Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481121" start="2392" end="2407" title="The Fantasticks" label="The Fantasticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636" start="2433" end="2449" title="Barbra Streisand" label="Barbra Streisand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699113" start="2565" end="2591" title="The Barbra Streisand Album" label="The Barbra Streisand Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562690" start="2606" end="2631" title="Soon it&amp;#x27;s gonna rain" label="Soon It&amp;#x27;s Gonna Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848436" start="2769" end="2784" title="Try To Remember" label="Try To Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980515" start="2889" end="2900" title="I Do! I Do!" label="I Do! I Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q229139" start="2926" end="2935" title="Peggy Lee" label="Peggy Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q119084403" start="2943" end="2962" title="My Cup Runneth Over (song)" label="My Cup Runneth Over"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980515" start="2992" end="3003" title="I Do! I Do!" label="I Do! I Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q72984" start="3029" end="3040" title="Bing Crosby" label="Bing Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282268" start="3045" end="3052" title="Ed Ames" label="Ed Ames"/>
<link wikidata="Q4481121" start="3148" end="3163" title="The Fantasticks" label="The Fantasticks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3185" end="3203" title="New York Scrapbook" label="New York Scrapbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474521" start="3236" end="3252" title="110 in the Shade" label="110 in the Shade"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980515" start="3274" end="3285" title="I Do! I Do!" label="I Do! I Do!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057623" start="3307" end="3318" title="Celebration (musical)" label="Celebration"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3340" end="3353" title="The Bone Room" label="The Bone Room"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3375" end="3382" title="Colette (musical)" label="Colette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1660768" start="3404" end="3415" title="Bad Company (1972 film)" label="Bad Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183008" start="3437" end="3445" title="Philemon (musical)" label="Philemon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3550" end="3557" title="Mirette (musical)" label="Mirette"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3579" end="3595" title="The Show Goes On (musical)" label="The Show Goes On"/>
<link wikidata="Q18390616" start="3617" end="3625" title="Roadside (musical)" label="Roadside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938094" start="3660" end="3684" title="Mirette on the High Wire" label="Mirette on the High Wire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871421" wikidata="Q8020116" url="?curid=871421" title="William Webb Follett">
<text>Sir William Webb Follett, QC (2 December 179628 June 1845) was an English lawyer and politician who served as MP for Exeter (1835–1845). He served twice as Solicitor-General, in 1834-5 and 1841 and as Attorney-General in 1844. He was knighted in 1835. He was reputed to have been the &quot;greatest advocate of the century&quot;.

==Early life==
Follett was born 2 December 1796 at Topsham in Devon, the eldest surviving son of ten children. His father was Captain Benjamin Follett, late 13th Regiment of Infantry, who had retired from the army in 1790 and gone into business as a timber merchant, and his mother was Ann Webb, daughter of John Webb, of Kinsale, Ireland. His younger brother was Brent Spencer Follett (1810–1887) QC, MP and his sister Elizabeth married Richard Bright.

Follett attended Exeter grammar school and was privately educated by Mr Hutchinson, the curate of Heavitree. In 1813, he matriculated at Trinity College, Cambridge, receiving a B.A. without honours in 1818 and an M.A. in 1830.

On 11 October 1830, Follett married Jane Mary Giffard, the eldest daughter of Sir Ambrose Hardinge Giffard (1771–1827) who was chief justice of British Ceylon. They had five sons and two daughters.

==Career==
He joined the Inner Temple in Michaelmas term 1814 and read in the chambers of Robert Bayly and Godfrey Sykes. He became a special pleader in 1821 and was called to the bar on 28 May 1824. He joined the western circuit in 1825, where his first notable case was &quot;Garnett v Ferrand&quot;.

In November 1828, he and Henry Brougham were briefed on the case of &quot;Rowe v Brenton&quot; and when Brougham became Lord Chancellor, he offered to make Follett a silk, but Follett declined. He had a large practice with the House of Lords and, when it was re-organised in 1833, the Privy Council of the United Kingdom.

In 1832, Follett ran to be a Member of Parliament for Exeter but was unsuccessful. Instead he served as recorder for Exeter from 1832 to 1834, when Sir Robert Peel formed his first administration. He became solicitor-general in November and thereafter was appointed a King&#x27;s Counsel and received a knighthood.

On 6 January 1835, he was returned to parliament for Exeter with 1425 votes. He resigned with the ministry in April 1835. In 1837 and 1841, Follett was re-elected to Parliament. On the return of Peel to power in 1841 Follett was again appointed Solicitor-General on 6 September, and on 15 April 1844 he succeeded Sir Frederick Pollock as Attorney-General.

Follett never gave up his private practice. He was best known for defending James Brudenell, 7th Earl of Cardigan in 1841 after a duel with Captain Harvey Tuckett, and representing George Chapple Norton in an action against Lord Melbourne in 1836. His speech in the latter case was parodied in the &quot;Pickwick Papers&quot; (1837).

==Death and legacy==

Follett was first ill in December 1835 and April 1836. He collapsed in February 1839 and could not return to work until later that year. He collapsed again in April 1844 and he was compelled to relinquish legal practice and to visit the south of Europe to recuperate. He returned to England in March 1845, but the tuberculosis, with which he had previously been diagnosed, reasserted itself and he died at Croker&#x27;s house, 9 Cumberland Terrace, Regent&#x27;s Park, London on 28 June 1845. He was buried in the Temple Church in London on 4 July.

A statue of Follett executed by William Behnes was erected by subscription and placed in the north transept at Westminster Abbey. His marble bust by Edward Bowring Stephens exists in the Devon and Exeter Institution, Exeter.

== References ==
== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8020116" start="0" end="24" title="William Webb Follett" label="Sir William Webb Follett"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="74" end="80" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="110" end="112" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768" start="117" end="123" title="Exeter (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q583809" start="156" end="173" title="Solicitor General for England and Wales" label="Solicitor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="201" end="217" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q127095" start="382" end="389" title="Topsham, Devon" label="Topsham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23156" start="393" end="398" title="Devon" label="Devon"/>
<link wikidata="Q840681" start="653" end="669" title="Kinsale" label="Kinsale, Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961378" start="695" end="716" title="Brent Spencer Follett" label="Brent Spencer Follett"/>
<link wikidata="Q945492" start="769" end="783" title="Richard Bright (physician)" label="Richard Bright"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420130" start="803" end="824" title="Exeter School" label="Exeter grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753370" start="874" end="880" title="curate" label="curate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694972" start="884" end="893" title="Heavitree" label="Heavitree"/>
<link wikidata="Q332342" start="923" end="949" title="Trinity College, Cambridge" label="Trinity College, Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741793" start="1096" end="1120" title="Ambrose Hardinge Giffard" label="Ambrose Hardinge Giffard"/>
<link wikidata="Q918153" start="1158" end="1172" title="British Ceylon" label="British Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233784" start="1238" end="1250" title="Inner Temple" label="Inner Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q6835655" start="1254" end="1269" title="Michaelmas term" label="Michaelmas term"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574847" start="1347" end="1362" title="special pleader" label="special pleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="1379" end="1396" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="1427" end="1442" title="Western Circuit" label="western circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q333220" start="1542" end="1556" title="Henry Brougham, 1st Baron Brougham and Vaux" label="Henry Brougham"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="1637" end="1652" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="1683" end="1687" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Counsel" label="silk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="1744" end="1758" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="1802" end="1837" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="1869" end="1889" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q24768" start="1894" end="1900" title="Exeter (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135808" start="1944" end="1952" title="Recorder (judge)" label="recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q181875" start="1988" end="2003" title="Robert Peel" label="Sir Robert Peel"/>
<link wikidata="Q583809" start="2047" end="2064" title="Solicitor General for England and Wales" label="solicitor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="2108" end="2127" title="King&amp;#x27;s Counsel" label="King&amp;#x27;s Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="2143" end="2149" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q12066115" start="2469" end="2490" title="Sir Frederick Pollock, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="2494" end="2510" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q335449" start="2589" end="2626" title="James Brudenell, 7th Earl of Cardigan" label="James Brudenell, 7th Earl of Cardigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130784642" start="2653" end="2675" title="Harvey Tuckett" label="Captain Harvey Tuckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q26262876" start="2694" end="2715" title="George Chapple Norton" label="George Chapple Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312567" start="2737" end="2751" title="William Lamb, 2nd Viscount Melbourne" label="Lord Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q460583" start="2817" end="2832" title="The Pickwick Papers" label="Pickwick Papers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="3184" end="3196" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007519" start="3299" end="3317" title="Cumberland Terrace" label="Cumberland Terrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q739341" start="3319" end="3337" title="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park" label="Regent&amp;#x27;s Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3339" end="3345" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429312" start="3384" end="3397" title="Temple Church" label="Temple Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568428" start="3452" end="3466" title="William Behnes" label="William Behnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="3531" end="3548" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q16063176" start="3569" end="3592" title="Edward Bowring Stephens" label="Edward Bowring Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q17547622" start="3607" end="3635" title="Devon and Exeter Institution" label="Devon and Exeter Institution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871425" wikidata="Q1814439" url="?curid=871425" title="Kishinev pogrom">
<text>The Kishinev pogrom or Kishinev massacre was an anti-Jewish riot that took place in Kishinev (modern Chișinău, Moldova), then the capital of the Bessarabia Governorate in the Russian Empire, on . During the pogrom, which began on Easter Day, 49 Jews were killed, 92 were gravely injured, a number of Jewish women were raped, over 500 were lightly injured and 1,500 homes were damaged. American Jews began large-scale organized financial help, and assisted in emigration. The incident focused worldwide attention on the persecution of Jews within the Russian Empire, and led Theodor Herzl to propose the Uganda Scheme as a temporary refuge for the Jews. A second pogrom erupted in the city in October 1905.

==History==
The most popular newspaper in Kishinev at the time, the Russian-language anti-Semitic newspaper &quot;Бессарабец&quot; (&quot;Bessarabets&quot;, meaning &quot;Bessarabian&quot;), published by Pavel Krushevan, regularly published articles with headlines such as &quot;Death to the Jews!&quot; and &quot;Crusade against the Hated Race!&quot; (referring to the Jews). When a Ukrainian boy, Mikhail Rybachenko, was found murdered in the town of Dubăsari, about north of Kishinev, and a girl who committed suicide by poisoning herself was declared dead in a Jewish hospital, the &quot;Bessarabetz&quot; paper insinuated that both children had been murdered by the Jewish community for the purpose of using their blood in the preparation of matzo for Passover. Another newspaper, &quot;Свет&quot; (&quot;Svet&quot;, &quot;Light&quot;) made similar insinuations. These allegations sparked the pogrom.

The pogrom began on April 19 (April 6 according to the Julian calendar, then in use in the Russian Empire) after congregations were dismissed from church services on Easter Sunday. In two days of rioting, 47 (some put the figure at 49) Jews were killed, 92 were severely wounded and 500 were slightly injured, 700 houses were destroyed, and 600 stores were pillaged. &quot;The Times&quot; published a forged dispatch by Vyacheslav von Plehve, the Minister of Interior, to the governor of Bessarabia, which supposedly gave orders not to stop the rioters. Unlike the more responsible authorities at Dubăsari, who acted to prevent the pogrom, there is evidence that the officials in Kishinev acted in collusion or negligence, turning a blind eye to the impending pogrom.
On 28 April, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reprinted a &quot;Yiddish Daily News&quot; report that was smuggled out of Russia:
The Kishinev pogrom of 1903 captured the attention of the international public and was mentioned in the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine as an example of the type of human rights abuse which would justify United States involvement in Latin America. The 1904 book &quot;The Voice of America on Kishinev&quot; provides more detail as does the book &quot;Russia at the Bar of the American People: A Memorial of Kishinef&quot;.

==Russian response==
The Russian ambassador to the United States, Count Arthur Cassini, characterised the 1903 pogrom as a reaction of financially hard-pressed peasants to Jewish creditors in an interview on 18 May 1903:
There is a memorial to the 1903 pogrom in modern Kishinev.

==Aftermath==
American media mogul William Randolph Hearst &quot;adopt[ed] Kishinev as little less than a crusade&quot;, according to Stanford historian Steven Zipperstein. As part of this publicity, Hearst sent the Irish nationalist journalist Michael Davitt to Kishinev as &quot;special commissioner to investigate the massacres of the Jews&quot;, becoming one of the first foreign journalists to report on the pogrom.

Due to their involvement in the pogrom, two men were sentenced to seven and five years&#x27; imprisonment respectively, and a further 22 were sentenced to one or two years.

This pogrom was instrumental in convincing tens of thousands of Russian Jews to leave for the West or Palestine. As such, it became a rallying point for early Zionists, especially what would become Revisionist Zionism, inspiring early self-defense leagues under leaders like Ze&#x27;ev Jabotinsky.
===1905 pogrom===

A second pogrom took place in Kishinev on 19–20 October 1905. This time, the riots began as political protests against the Tsar, but turned into an attack on Jews wherever they could be found. By the time the riots were over, 19 Jews had been killed and 56 were injured. Jewish self-defense leagues, organized after the first pogrom, stopped some of the violence, but were not wholly successful. This pogrom was part of a series of pogroms that swept the Russian Empire at the time.

==Cultural references==

Russian authors such as Vladimir Korolenko wrote about the pogrom in &quot;House 13&quot;, while Tolstoy and Gorky wrote condemnations blaming the Russian government—a change from the earlier pogroms of the 1880s, when most members of the Russian intelligentsia were silent. Tolstoy worked with Sholem Aleichem to produce an anthology dedicated to the victims, with all publisher and author proceeds going to relief efforts, which became the work &quot;Esarhaddon, King of Assyria&quot;. Sholem Aleichem went on to write the material for the famous &quot;Fiddler on the Roof&quot;.

It also had a major impact on Jewish art and literature. After interviewing survivors of the Kishinev pogrom, the Hebrew poet Hayim Nahman Bialik (1873–1934) wrote &quot;In the City of Slaughter,&quot; about the perceived passivity of the Jews in the face of the mobs. Ze&#x27;ev Jabotinsky, who was also in the city after the massacre, translated Bialik&#x27;s poem into Russian, thereby contributing to both the publication of the poem and Bialik&#x27;s fame in Russian-speaking countries. In the 1908 play by Israel Zangwill titled &quot;The Melting Pot&quot;, the Jewish hero emigrates to America in the wake of the Kishinev pogrom, eventually confronting the Russian officer who led the rioters.

More recently, Joann Sfar&#x27;s series of graphic novels titled &quot;Klezmer&quot; depicts life in Odessa, Ukraine, at this time; in the final volume (number 5), &quot;Kishinev-des-fous&quot;, the first pogrom affects the characters. Playwright Max Sparber took the Kishinev pogrom as the subject for one of his earliest plays in 1994. The novel &quot;The Lazarus Project&quot; by Aleksander Hemon (2008) provides a vivid description of the pogrom and details its long-reaching consequences.

In Brazil, the Jewish writer Moacyr Scliar wrote the fiction and social satire book &quot;O Exército De Um Homem Só&quot; (1986), about Mayer Guinzburg, a Brazilian-Jew and Communist activist whose family are refugees from the Kishinev pogrom.

==Monument to victims==
The Victims of the Chișinău Pogrom Monument () is a memorial stone to the victims of the Kishinev pogrom, unveiled in 1993 in Alunelul park, Chișinău, Moldova.

== The name list of the victims ==
Many sources report that 49 people were killed in the Kishinev pogrom, but their specific identity remains elusive. Soon after the pogrom, one of the first foreign journalists to arrive in the city was the Irish reporter Michael Davitt. He covered the events and later published a book detailing his findings, which included a list of the victims&#x27; names, ages, and, in some instances, their occupations. However, this list contains only 40 of the 49 victims. In the National Library of Israel, there is a photo album from the pogrom titled &quot;Kishinev Pogrom [Photo Album]&quot;, published in 1929, which includes a list of the victims. The list claims there were 49 fatalities but records the names of only 41 individuals. The organization JewishGen cross-referenced a wide range of sources and compiled a list of 47 names, though they caution that errors may still exist, suggesting that further research is required to complete the record.

==See also==

*1929 Hebron massacre
*History of the Jews in Moldova
*Jacob Bernstein-Kogan

==References==
== Bibliography ==
*

==Further reading==
*Judge, Edward H. &quot;Easter in Kishinev: Anatomy of a Pogrom&quot;. NYU Press 1992.
*
*Schoenberg, Philip Ernest. &quot;The American Reaction to the Kishinev Pogrom of 1903&quot;. &quot;American Jewish Historical Quarterly&quot; 63.3 (1974): 262–283.
*Zipperstein, Steven J. &quot;&quot;. Liveright Publishing March 2018.

==External links==
*Kishinev Pogrom unofficial commemorative website
*Resources about the pogrom
*&quot;Are Jewish men cowards?&quot; Interview in Chicago Jewish Cafe with Prof. Steven Zipperstein, the author of &quot;Pogrom: Kishinev and the Tilt of History.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1814439" start="4" end="19" title="Kishinev pogrom" label="Kishinev pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814439" start="23" end="40" title="Kishinev pogrom" label="Kishinev massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="48" end="59" title="anti-Jewish" label="anti-Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q124757" start="60" end="64" title="riot" label="riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="101" end="109" title="Chișinău" label="Chișinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="111" end="118" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190582" start="145" end="167" title="Bessarabia Governorate" label="Bessarabia Governorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="175" end="189" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q44003" start="574" end="587" title="Theodor Herzl" label="Theodor Herzl"/>
<link wikidata="Q664588" start="603" end="616" title="Uganda Scheme" label="Uganda Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="792" end="804" title="anti-Semitic" label="anti-Semitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="878" end="888" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444084" start="911" end="926" title="Pavel Krushevan" label="Pavel Krushevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="1077" end="1080" title="Jew" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="1091" end="1100" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q688654" start="1160" end="1168" title="Dubăsari" label="Dubăsari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061047" start="1395" end="1431" title="blood libel" label="for the purpose of using their blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q211361" start="1454" end="1459" title="Matzah" label="matzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q121393" start="1464" end="1472" title="Passover" label="Passover"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="1605" end="1611" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11184" start="1669" end="1684" title="Julian calendar" label="Julian calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="1987" end="1996" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332286" start="2015" end="2021" title="forgery" label="forged"/>
<link wikidata="Q351927" start="2034" end="2055" title="Vyacheslav von Plehve" label="Vyacheslav von Plehve"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="2401" end="2419" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143231" start="2613" end="2655" title="Roosevelt Corollary" label="Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530175" start="2969" end="3008" title="Russian ambassador to the United States" label="Russian ambassador to the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q4216788" start="3016" end="3030" title="Arthur Cassini" label="Arthur Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q294931" start="3260" end="3283" title="William Randolph Hearst" label="William Randolph Hearst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6587602" start="3378" end="3396" title="Steven Zipperstein" label="Steven Zipperstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387994" start="3470" end="3484" title="Michael Davitt" label="Michael Davitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q177716" start="3826" end="3832" title="pogrom" label="pogrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="3915" end="3919" title="Western world" label="West"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="3923" end="3932" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="3980" end="3988" title="Zionism" label="Zionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q592710" start="4019" end="4038" title="Revisionist Zionism" label="Revisionist Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319896" start="4096" end="4117" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky" label="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="4261" end="4265" title="Tsar" label="Tsar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4560" end="4577" title="Pogroms_in_the_Russian_Empire#1903–1906" label="series of pogroms"/>
<link wikidata="Q335064" start="4671" end="4689" title="Vladimir Korolenko" label="Vladimir Korolenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="4744" end="4751" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="4756" end="4761" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q238090" start="4942" end="4957" title="Sholem Aleichem" label="Sholem Aleichem"/>
<link wikidata="Q28039493" start="5100" end="5127" title="Esarhaddon, King of Assyria" label="Esarhaddon, King of Assyria"/>
<link wikidata="Q487330" start="5202" end="5221" title="Fiddler on the Roof" label="Fiddler on the Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q359705" start="5356" end="5375" title="Chaim Bialik" label="Hayim Nahman Bialik"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404672" start="5400" end="5424" title="In the City of Slaughter" label="In the City of Slaughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q319896" start="5499" end="5520" title="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky" label="Ze&amp;#x27;ev Jabotinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q113681" start="5742" end="5757" title="Israel Zangwill" label="Israel Zangwill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16997553" start="5771" end="5786" title="The Melting Pot (play)" label="The Melting Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q239897" start="5947" end="5957" title="Joann Sfar" label="Joann Sfar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746477" start="6286" end="6305" title="The Lazarus Project (novel)" label="The Lazarus Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q738114" start="6315" end="6331" title="Aleksander Hemon" label="Aleksander Hemon"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="6430" end="6436" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q956187" start="6456" end="6469" title="Moacyr Scliar" label="Moacyr Scliar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670560" start="6582" end="6595" title="History of the Jews in Brazil" label="Brazilian-Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="6600" end="6609" title="Communism" label="Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q203443" start="6748" end="6762" title="memorial stone" label="memorial stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387994" start="7113" end="7127" title="Michael Davitt" label="Michael Davitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q188915" start="7363" end="7389" title="National Library of Israel" label="National Library of Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q820610" start="7641" end="7650" title="JewishGen" label="JewishGen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417490" start="7859" end="7879" title="1929 Hebron massacre" label="1929 Hebron massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q549381" start="7881" end="7911" title="History of the Jews in Moldova" label="History of the Jews in Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q441997" start="7913" end="7934" title="Jacob Bernstein-Kogan" label="Jacob Bernstein-Kogan"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8017" end="8056" title="Easter in Kishinev: Anatomy of a Pogrom" label="Easter in Kishinev: Anatomy of a Pogrom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871427" wikidata="Q7205900" url="?curid=871427" title="Plynlimon">
<text>Plynlimon, or Pumlumon in Welsh (also historically anglicised as Plinlimon, Plynlymmon or Plinlimmon), is the highest point of the Cambrian Mountains in Wales (taking a restricted definition of the Cambrian Mountains, excluding Snowdonia, the Berwyns and the Brecon Beacons), and the highest point in Mid Wales. It is a massif that dominates the surrounding countryside and is the highest point (county top) of Ceredigion (both the modern council area, and the historic county, also known as Cardiganshire).

The highest point of the massif itself is Pen Pumlumon Fawr, which is above ordnance datum. Its other important peaks are Pen Pumlumon Arwystli, Y Garn, Pen Pumlumon Llygad-bychan and Pumlumon Fach. Bryn yr Ŵyn, or &#x27;hill of the lambs&#x27;, is a former Dewey in the foothills.

The longest river in Britain, the River Severn, has its source on the mountain, as do the rivers Wye and Rheidol.

Folklore says there is a sleeping giant in Plynlimon.

==Etymology==
&quot;Plynlimon&quot; is anglicised from the Welsh name &quot;Pumlumon&quot;, which is thought to mean &quot;five tops&quot; or &quot;five beacons&quot;. The first element is Old Welsh &quot;pimp&quot;, meaning &quot;five&quot; (Modern Welsh &quot;pump&quot;), and the second is , &quot;beacon&quot;, an element whose Brittonic equivalent underlies the Scottish hill-names Lomond Hills and Ben Lomond.

==Habitat and restoration==
The Plynlimon area is the source of the rivers Wye, Severn and Rheidol.
Since 2007 the Wildlife Trusts of Wales have been working to improve the habitat as a &quot;living landscape&quot; project. This watershed area has been affected by loss of biodiversity, erosion of the peaty soils&#x27; structure, and accelerated drainage.

Like most of the uplands across Wales, intensive land use activities have resulted in many habitats being either lost or degraded. Over-grazing of sheep has induced soil compaction, which has resulted in increased flooding of the lowland areas. The principal land cover within the project area is dominated by a complex mosaic of locally, nationally and internationally important habitats and species, such as dry and wet dwarf-shrub heathland, blanket bog, unimproved acid grassland and a number of oligotrophic lakes. Agriculturally improved grassland, broadleaved woodlands and forestry plantation are also characteristic features of the area.

The Plynlimon area is also important for breeding, wintering and feeding bird fauna particularly hen harrier, merlin, short-eared owl and red and black grouse, and a number of Red Data Book and UK BAP invertebrates. The red kite also frequents the area. Golden plovers have declined by 92% since 1992.

==Severn Way==
The Severn Way runs for 210 miles (337 km) along the River Severn between its source at Plynlimon and the mouth of the Severn at Bristol, England.

==References==
==External links==
* Computer generated summit panoramas Plynlimon index
*THE PUMLUMON PROJECT, Montgomeryshire Wildlife Trust
* www.geograph.co.uk ; photos of Plynlimon and surrounding area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7205900" start="0" end="9" title="Plynlimon" label="Plynlimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205900" start="14" end="22" title="Plynlimon" label="Pumlumon"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="26" end="31" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205900" start="65" end="74" title="Plynlimon" label="Plinlimon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205900" start="76" end="86" title="Plynlimon" label="Plynlymmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205900" start="90" end="100" title="Plynlimon" label="Plinlimmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028218" start="131" end="149" title="Cambrian Mountains" label="Cambrian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="153" end="158" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="228" end="237" title="Snowdonia" label="Snowdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q904522" start="259" end="273" title="Brecon Beacons" label="Brecon Beacons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094811" start="301" end="310" title="Mid Wales" label="Mid Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061151" start="320" end="326" title="massif" label="massif"/>
<link wikidata="Q6613777" start="396" end="406" title="List of counties of England and Wales in 1964 by highest point" label="county top"/>
<link wikidata="Q217829" start="411" end="421" title="Ceredigion" label="Ceredigion"/>
<link wikidata="Q217829" start="492" end="505" title="Cardiganshire" label="Cardiganshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205900" start="551" end="568" title="Plynlimon" label="Pen Pumlumon Fawr"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336080" start="585" end="599" title="ordnance datum" label="ordnance datum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162102" start="631" end="652" title="Pen Pumlumon Arwystli" label="Pen Pumlumon Arwystli"/>
<link wikidata="Q8046133" start="654" end="660" title="Y Garn (Plynlimon)" label="Y Garn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162103" start="662" end="688" title="Pen Pumlumon Llygad-bychan" label="Pen Pumlumon Llygad-bychan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259792" start="693" end="706" title="Pumlumon Fach" label="Pumlumon Fach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4980922" start="708" end="719" title="Bryn yr Ŵyn" label="Bryn yr Ŵyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="804" end="809" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="826" end="838" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638420" start="844" end="854" title="Hafren Forest" label="its source"/>
<link wikidata="Q19695" start="889" end="892" title="River Wye" label="Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399804" start="897" end="904" title="River Rheidol" label="Rheidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="907" end="915" title="Folklore" label="Folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266723" start="1151" end="1160" title="Old Welsh" label="Old Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="1205" end="1217" title="Welsh language" label="Modern Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="1294" end="1303" title="Common Brittonic" label="Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669523" start="1349" end="1361" title="Lomond Hills" label="Lomond Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q816556" start="1366" end="1376" title="Ben Lomond" label="Ben Lomond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774963" start="1494" end="1518" title="The Welsh Wildlife Trusts" label="Wildlife Trusts of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q18466271" start="1644" end="1664" title="Biodiversity loss" label="loss of biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q878223" start="1754" end="1760" title="Highland (geography)" label="upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="2171" end="2180" title="heathland" label="heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="2190" end="2193" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="2211" end="2220" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q45279" start="2237" end="2247" title="oligotroph" label="oligotroph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="2250" end="2254" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="2304" end="2312" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4259511" start="2318" end="2337" title="forestry plantation" label="forestry plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q25572" start="2482" end="2493" title="hen harrier" label="hen harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q131918" start="2495" end="2501" title="Merlin (bird)" label="merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25769" start="2503" end="2518" title="short-eared owl" label="short-eared owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q40655821" start="2523" end="2526" title="red grouse" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q155878" start="2531" end="2543" title="black grouse" label="black grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="2561" end="2574" title="Red Data Book" label="Red Data Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914772" start="2582" end="2585" title="Biodiversity action plan" label="BAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q156250" start="2605" end="2613" title="red kite" label="red kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359014" start="2639" end="2652" title="Golden plover" label="Golden plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457956" start="2707" end="2717" title="Severn Way" label="Severn Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="2756" end="2768" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="2832" end="2839" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963606" start="2962" end="2992" title="Montgomeryshire Wildlife Trust" label="Montgomeryshire Wildlife Trust"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871429" wikidata="Q5455706" url="?curid=871429" title="Fitzroy Kelly">
<text>Sir Fitzroy Edward Kelly (9 October 1796 – 18 September 1880) was an English commercial lawyer, Tory politician and judge. He was the last Chief Baron of the Exchequer.

==Background and education==
Kelly was born in London, the son of Robert Hawke Kelly (died in or before 1807), a captain in the Royal Navy. His mother was the novelist Isabella Kelly, daughter of Captain William Fordyce, Groom of the Privy Chamber to George III. In 1824, he was called to the bar by Lincoln&#x27;s Inn, having already gained a reputation as a skilled special pleader.

==Career==
In 1834 Kelly was made a King&#x27;s Counsel, remarkably after only ten years&#x27; call. A strong Tory, he was returned as Member of Parliament for Ipswich in 1835, but was unseated on petition. In 1837 however he again became member for that town. From 1843 to 1847 he was MP for Cambridge, and in 1852 was elected member for Harwich, but with a vacancy suddenly occurring in East Suffolk, he preferred to contest that seat and was elected.

Most of his legal cases were of a commercial nature, but one was one of the great criminal poisoning crimes of the early Victorian period. In March 1845 Kelly defended John Tawell, the &quot;Quaker murderer,&quot; was in fact no longer a member of the Quakers, though he did try to return to that group. Tawell had poisoned his mistress, Sarah Hart, and fled from Salt Hill in Aylesbury by train. However, a description of Tawell was sent to London by electric telegraph, and he was captured. Kelly did the best he could for his client, but he was not accustomed to criminal defence. His argument that Sarah Hart had eaten too many apple pips and been poisoned by the prussic acid in the pips led to the nickname &quot;Apple-pip,&quot; which followed Kelly for the rest of his life. Despite his endeavours, his client was found guilty and hanged.

Kelly was Solicitor General in 1845 (when he was knighted) and again from February to December 1852, during which time he was junior to Attorney General Sir Frederic Thesiger in the prosecution of John Henry Newman for libel, the Achilli trial. 

In 1854, Kelly was appointed to the Royal Commission for Consolidating the Statute Law, a royal commission to consolidate existing statutes and enactments of English law.

In 1858–1859 he was Attorney General in Lord Derby&#x27;s second ministry. In 1866 he was raised to the bench as the last Chief Baron of the Exchequer and made a member of the Privy Council, entitling him to sit on the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.

Kelly died at Brighton on 18 September 1880, aged 83. He was buried on the western side of Highgate Cemetery.
==Arms==
==See also==
*Politics of the United Kingdom

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
* Gowing, Richard (1875) &#x27;Sir Fitzroy Kelly, Lord Chief Baron&#x27; in: Richard Gowing &quot;Public Men of Ipswich and East Suffolk. a series of personal sketches&quot;. Ipswich: Scopes; London: Grant &amp; Co., 1875; pp. 71–78

== External links ==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5455706" start="0" end="24" title="Fitzroy Kelly" label="Sir Fitzroy Edward Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="69" end="76" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q219186" start="77" end="91" title="commercial law" label="commercial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q499956" start="96" end="100" title="Tory (British political party)" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963439" start="139" end="167" title="Chief Baron of the Exchequer" label="Chief Baron of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="217" end="223" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="298" end="308" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078021" start="338" end="352" title="Isabella Kelly" label="Isabella Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5610265" start="391" end="417" title="Groom of the Privy Chamber" label="Groom of the Privy Chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="421" end="431" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="449" end="466" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q69482" start="470" end="488" title="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn" label="Lincoln&amp;#x27;s Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574847" start="538" end="553" title="special pleader" label="special pleader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="592" end="611" title="King&amp;#x27;s Counsel" label="King&amp;#x27;s Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="666" end="670" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="691" end="711" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072645" start="716" end="723" title="Ipswich (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Ipswich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072690" start="849" end="858" title="Cambridge (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119967" start="895" end="902" title="Harwich (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Harwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q27996015" start="913" end="941" title="1852 East Suffolk by-election" label="a vacancy suddenly occurring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329450" start="945" end="957" title="East Suffolk (UK Parliament constituency)" label="East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260301" start="1179" end="1190" title="John Tawell" label="John Tawell"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="1202" end="1208" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q213474" start="1388" end="1397" title="Aylesbury" label="Aylesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q26075" start="1679" end="1691" title="hydrogen cyanide" label="prussic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q583809" start="1869" end="1886" title="Solicitor General for England and Wales" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="1908" end="1916" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631987" start="1995" end="2011" title="Attorney General for England and Wales" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q332731" start="2012" end="2033" title="Frederic Thesiger, 1st Baron Chelmsford" label="Sir Frederic Thesiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q600751" start="2041" end="2052" title="prosecution" label="prosecution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44490" start="2056" end="2073" title="John Henry Newman" label="John Henry Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="2078" end="2083" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421456" start="2089" end="2102" title="Achilli trial" label="Achilli trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q7604573" start="2142" end="2192" title="Royal Commission for Consolidating the Statute Law" label="Royal Commission for Consolidating the Statute Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986735" start="2196" end="2212" title="royal commission" label="royal commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138780" start="2264" end="2275" title="English law" label="English law"/>
<link wikidata="Q237829" start="2318" end="2328" title="Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby" label="Lord Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443241" start="2336" end="2351" title="Second Derby–Disraeli ministry" label="second ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963439" start="2400" end="2428" title="Chief Baron of the Exchequer" label="Chief Baron of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="2454" end="2467" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="2497" end="2536" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q131491" start="2553" end="2561" title="Brighton" label="Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q533697" start="2630" end="2647" title="Highgate Cemetery" label="Highgate Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q678363" start="2672" end="2702" title="Politics of the United Kingdom" label="Politics of the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871439" wikidata="Q8005755" url="?curid=871439" title="William Bovill">
<text>Sir William Bovill, PC, FRS (26 May 18141 November 1873) was an English lawyer, politician and judge. He served as Chief Justice of the Common Pleas between 1866 and his death in 1873.

==Background==
Bovill was born at Allhallows, Barking, a younger son of Benjamin Bovill, of Wimbledon, London.

==Career==
On leaving school, Bovill did not go to university but was articled to a firm of solicitors. He entered the Middle Temple and practised for a short time as a special pleader below the bar. He was called to the bar in 1841 and joined the home circuit. His special training in a solicitor&#x27;s office, and its resulting connection, combined with a thorough knowledge of the details of engineering, acquired through his interest in a manufacturing firm in the east end of London, soon brought him a very extensive patent and commercial practice.

Bovill became a Queen&#x27;s Counsel (QC) in 1855, and on 28 March 1857 was elected Member of Parliament (MP) for Guildford. 
In the House of Commons, he was very zealous for legal reform, and the Partnership Law Amendment Act 1865, which he helped to pass, is always referred to as Bovill&#x27;s Act. 
In 1866, he was appointed Solicitor General, an office which he vacated on becoming Chief Justice of the Common Pleas in succession to Sir William Erle in November of the same year.

==Personal life==
Bovill had married, in 1844, Maria Bolton, eldest daughter of John Henry Bolton of Lee Park, Blackheath. They lived firstly in London and then moved to Worplesdon, where they made their home at Worplesdon Lodge (later renamed Worplesdon Place).

He died at Kingston upon Thames on 1 November 1873. Maria, Lady Bovill died in London 21 October 1901.

==Honours and arms==
Bovill was knighted in 1866. In May 1867 he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.

==References==

Attribution:

== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8005755" start="0" end="18" title="William Bovill" label="Sir William Bovill"/>
<link wikidata="Q683120" start="20" end="22" title="Privy Council of the United Kingdom" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="24" end="27" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="FRS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096810" start="115" end="148" title="Chief Justice of the Common Pleas" label="Chief Justice of the Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q377720" start="232" end="239" title="Barking, London" label="Barking"/>
<link wikidata="Q736742" start="278" end="295" title="Wimbledon, London" label="Wimbledon, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q925942" start="417" end="430" title="Middle Temple" label="Middle Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574847" start="467" end="496" title="special pleader below the bar" label="special pleader below the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021687" start="505" end="522" title="called to the bar" label="called to the bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="871" end="891" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Counsel" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="939" end="959" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087870" start="969" end="978" title="Guildford (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="988" end="1004" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1138" end="1155" title="Bovill&amp;#x27;s Act" label="Bovill&amp;#x27;s Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q583809" start="1184" end="1201" title="Solicitor General for England and Wales" label="Solicitor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096810" start="1242" end="1275" title="Chief Justice of the Common Pleas" label="Chief Justice of the Common Pleas"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008629" start="1293" end="1309" title="William Erle" label="Sir William Erle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="1616" end="1636" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q833163" start="1741" end="1749" title="Knight Bachelor" label="knighted"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="1788" end="1815" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871445" wikidata="Q21071761" url="?curid=871445" title="Murdoch">
<text>Murdoch ( , ) is an Irish/Scottish given name, as well as a surname. The name is derived from old Irish Gaelic words &quot;mur&quot;, meaning &quot;sea&quot; and &quot;murchadh&quot;, meaning &quot;sea warrior&quot;. The following is a list of notable people or entities with the name.

== Given name ==

* Muireadhach I, Earl of Menteith, Scottish nobleman
* Muireadhach II, Earl of Menteith, Scottish nobleman
* Muireadhach III, Earl of Menteith, Scottish nobleman
* Murdoch Stewart, Duke of Albany, Scottish nobleman.
* Murdoch Macdonald, British politician and civil engineer
* Murdoch MacLennan (born 1949), British media executive

== Surname ==

* Alexi Murdoch, Scottish-born singer
* Alister Murdoch, Australian air marshal
* Beamish Murdoch, judge and historian of Nova Scotia
* Ben Murdoch-Masila, New Zealand Rugby League player
* Billy Murdoch, Australian cricketer
* Billy Murdoch (Scottish footballer)
* Blair Murdoch, Canadian television producer
* Bobby Murdoch, Scottish footballer
* Bradley John Murdoch, Australian murderer
* Brian H. Murdoch (1930–2020), Irish mathematician
* Colin Murdoch, New Zealand pharmacist and veterinarian who invented disposable hypodermic syringes
* David Murdoch – several people including
** David Murdoch, Scottish sportsman
* Don Murdoch, National Hockey League player
* Elisabeth Murdoch (businesswoman), daughter of Rupert Murdoch
* Elisabeth Murdoch (senior), philanthropist, wife of Keith Murdoch and mother of Rupert Murdoch
* George Murdoch, first mayor of Calgary, Alberta, Canada
* Gilbert Hugh Murdoch, Canadian politician
* Iris Murdoch, British novelist and philosopher
* James Murdoch – several people including
** James Murdoch (born 1972), British-American businessman
* John E. Murdoch, American historian and philosopher of science
* John Smith Murdoch, Australian architect
* Keith Murdoch, Australian journalist and father of Rupert Murdoch
* Keith Murdoch (rugby union) (1943–2018), New Zealand rugby union footballer
* Lachlan Murdoch, former chief operating officer of News Corporation and eldest son of Rupert Murdoch
* Lachlan Murdoch, Canadian actor
* Marion Murdoch (1849–?), American minister
* Richard Murdoch, British comedian and light actor
* Robert C. Murdoch, New Zealand malacologist
* Rupert Murdoch, Australian-American media mogul, CEO and Chairman of News Corporation
* Stuart Murdoch (football manager), former footballer and ex-manager of Milton Keynes Dons F.C.
* Stuart Murdoch (musician), Scottish singer
* Trevor Murdoch, American professional wrestler
* Walter Murdoch, Australian academic and essayist
* William Murdoch – several people including
** William McMaster Murdoch, first officer on the RMS &quot;Titanic&quot;
** William Murdoch, Scottish engineer and inventor of gas lighting (sometimes spelt &quot;Murdock&quot;)
** William Murdoch (poet), Scottish poet

== Fictional characters ==

* Detective William Murdoch, the protagonist in a series of novels by Maureen Jennings, and a spin-off television series
* John Murdoch, protagonist in the feature film &quot;Dark City&quot;
* Murdoc Niccals, bassist for the virtual band Gorillaz
* Murdoc, a character in the MacGyver television series
* Murdoch, a tender engine character in &quot;Thomas &amp; Friends&quot;, Introduced in the Series 7 episode (Peace and Quiet)

== Organisations ==
* Murdoch University, a public university in Perth, Australia

== See also ==
* Murdaugh
* Murdock
* Muirchertach
* Murtagh

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21071761" start="0" end="7" title="Murdoch" label="Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619311" start="307" end="338" title="Muireadhach I, Earl of Menteith" label="Muireadhach I, Earl of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933194" start="360" end="392" title="Muireadhach II, Earl of Menteith" label="Muireadhach II, Earl of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933197" start="414" end="447" title="Muireadhach III, Earl of Menteith" label="Muireadhach III, Earl of Menteith"/>
<link wikidata="Q335804" start="469" end="500" title="Murdoch Stewart, Duke of Albany" label="Murdoch Stewart, Duke of Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938224" start="523" end="540" title="Murdoch Macdonald" label="Murdoch Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6938221" start="582" end="599" title="Murdoch MacLennan" label="Murdoch MacLennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383565" start="655" end="668" title="Alexi Murdoch" label="Alexi Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4727348" start="693" end="708" title="Alister Murdoch" label="Alister Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4876217" start="735" end="750" title="Beamish Murdoch" label="Beamish Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886201" start="789" end="807" title="Ben Murdoch-Masila" label="Ben Murdoch-Masila"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527101" start="843" end="856" title="Billy Murdoch" label="Billy Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q28024808" start="881" end="916" title="Billy Murdoch (Scottish footballer)" label="Billy Murdoch (Scottish footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924148" start="919" end="932" title="Blair Murdoch" label="Blair Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q888638" start="965" end="978" title="Bobby Murdoch" label="Bobby Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954959" start="1002" end="1022" title="Bradley John Murdoch" label="Bradley John Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q75117171" start="1046" end="1062" title="Brian H. Murdoch" label="Brian H. Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q899162" start="1098" end="1111" title="Colin Murdoch" label="Colin Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q20780012" start="1199" end="1212" title="David Murdoch (disambiguation)" label="David Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1175788" start="1243" end="1256" title="David Murdoch" label="David Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q569039" start="1279" end="1290" title="Don Murdoch" label="Don Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051101" start="1324" end="1357" title="Elisabeth Murdoch (businesswoman)" label="Elisabeth Murdoch (businesswoman)"/>
<link wikidata="Q713195" start="1388" end="1414" title="Elisabeth Murdoch (senior)" label="Elisabeth Murdoch (senior)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542706" start="1485" end="1499" title="George Murdoch" label="George Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q130892255" start="1543" end="1563" title="Gilbert Hugh Murdoch" label="Gilbert Hugh Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q217495" start="1587" end="1599" title="Iris Murdoch" label="Iris Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140166" start="1636" end="1649" title="James Murdoch (disambiguation)" label="James Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q471851" start="1680" end="1693" title="James Murdoch" label="James Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699969" start="1738" end="1753" title="John E. Murdoch" label="John E. Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258400" start="1803" end="1821" title="John Smith Murdoch" label="John Smith Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132687" start="1846" end="1859" title="Keith Murdoch" label="Keith Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384804" start="1914" end="1941" title="Keith Murdoch (rugby union)" label="Keith Murdoch (rugby union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215817" start="1992" end="2007" title="Lachlan Murdoch" label="Lachlan Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q27898565" start="2095" end="2110" title="Lachlan Murdoch (actor)" label="Lachlan Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42953184" start="2129" end="2143" title="Marion Murdoch" label="Marion Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354281" start="2174" end="2189" title="Richard Murdoch" label="Richard Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342637" start="2226" end="2243" title="Robert C. Murdoch" label="Robert C. Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q53944" start="2272" end="2286" title="Rupert Murdoch" label="Rupert Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7626881" start="2360" end="2393" title="Stuart Murdoch (football manager)" label="Stuart Murdoch (football manager)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746295" start="2457" end="2482" title="Stuart Murdoch (musician)" label="Stuart Murdoch (musician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q45164" start="2502" end="2516" title="Trevor Murdoch" label="Trevor Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7965690" start="2551" end="2565" title="Walter Murdoch" label="Walter Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464964" start="2602" end="2617" title="William Murdoch (disambiguation)" label="William Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q347334" start="2648" end="2672" title="William McMaster Murdoch" label="William McMaster Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q451444" start="2722" end="2737" title="William Murdoch" label="William Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015933" start="2827" end="2849" title="William Murdoch (poet)" label="William Murdoch (poet)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2896" end="2921" title="Maureen Jennings#Detective Murdoch series" label="Detective William Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127281" start="3069" end="3078" title="Dark City (1998 film)" label="Dark City"/>
<link wikidata="Q189991" start="3087" end="3101" title="Murdoc Niccals" label="Murdoc Niccals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099306" start="3143" end="3149" title="Murdoc" label="Murdoc"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3199" end="3206" title="List of Thomas &amp;amp; Friends railway engines#Murdoch" label="Murdoch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375146" start="3347" end="3365" title="Murdoch University" label="Murdoch University"/>
<link wikidata="Q108673301" start="3425" end="3433" title="Murdaugh family" label="Murdaugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q353576" start="3436" end="3443" title="Murdock" label="Murdock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6933181" start="3446" end="3458" title="Muirchertach" label="Muirchertach"/>
<link wikidata="Q130313798" start="3461" end="3468" title="Murtagh (name)" label="Murtagh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871448" wikidata="Q236154" url="?curid=871448" title="Paulina Porizkova">
<text>Paulina Porizkova (; born 9 April 1965) is a fashion model and author. Born in Czechoslovakia, she moved to Sweden in 1973 and began modelling in France at the age of 15. In 1984, Porizkova became the first Central European woman to appear on the cover of the &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; swimsuit issue.

As an actress, she made her film debut in &quot;Anna&quot; (1987).

==Early life==
Porizkova was born on 9 April 1965 in Prostějov, then in Czechoslovakia, to anti-Soviet dissident parents, Anna Pořízková and Jiří Pořízka. She was left in the care of her maternal grandmother after her parents fled to Sweden to escape the Warsaw Pact invasion. Czechoslovak authorities would not allow her parents to reclaim her, and the ensuing battle was widely publicized in the Swedish press, making her a &quot;cause célèbre&quot;.

When Porizkova was seven, her pregnant mother returned to Czechoslovakia with a fake passport in an attempt to rescue her. After the attempt failed, her mother was briefly detained by the national police and then placed under house arrest with her family. In 1973, international political pressure led by Olof Palme caused the communist government to allow the Pořízek family to be reunited. Porizkova&#x27;s parents divorced after her father had an affair. She and her father, who refused to pay child support for his children, have been estranged since her youth. Her mother, a midwife, remarried at least twice and, as of 2010, was reported to be serving in the Peace Corps in Uganda.

==Career==
===Modeling===
Porizkova shared the photo that got the attention of modeling scout John Casablancas. She was 13. One of her friends, who wanted to be a makeup artist, painted Porizkova&#x27;s face, along with other friends, and sent the photographs to modeling agencies in Paris in the hopes of getting hired. &quot;Soon after, a modeling agent called inviting me to Copenhagen to meet the famed model scout John Casablancas. ... He took one look at me and asked: ‘Want to go to Paris?’ As if I&#x27;d say no! The rest, as they say, is history.&quot;

Porizkova rose to become a top model in Paris during the early 1980s. She appeared as a model in &quot;Sports Illustrated&quot; in 1983, and in 1984, at 18 years old, she became the first woman from Central Europe to be on the cover of the swimsuit issue. She appeared again on the cover in 1985. She was the second woman (after Christie Brinkley) to be featured on the swimsuit issue&#x27;s front cover in consecutive years (1984 and 1985). She appeared on the cover of &quot;New York&quot; magazine in July 1985. &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot; named her one of its ten most beautiful women in 1992 and American &quot;Photo&quot; magazine in its first issue declared her to be the model of the 1980s. Porizkova appeared on the covers of numerous magazines around the world during the 1980s and 1990s, including &quot;Vogue&quot;, &quot;Elle&quot;, &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot;, &quot;Self&quot;, &quot;Cosmopolitan&quot;, and &quot;Glamour&quot;.

She has been featured in advertising campaigns for Chanel, Versace, Hermes, Christian Dior, Oscar De La Renta, Mikimoto, Perry Ellis, Laura Biagiotti, Anne Klein, Ellen Tracy, Barneys New York, Ann Taylor, Guerlain, and Revlon and appeared on the runway for Calvin Klein.

In 1988, Porizkova won what was then the highest-paying modeling contract: a $6,000,000 contract with Estée Lauder, replacing Willow Bay. The black-and-white television and print advertising campaign won praise from critics. The Estée Lauder makeover transformed Porizkova&#x27;s public image from a swimsuit model to that of European sophisticate and she remained the company&#x27;s face until 1995. She soon landed another multimillion-dollar contract, with Escada.

===Television work===
Porizkova was part of the panel of judges on &quot;America&#x27;s Next Top Model&quot; (&quot;ANTM&quot;), starting on Cycle 10, replacing fashion icon Twiggy.

Porizkova continued to conduct regular weekly evaluations of &quot;ANTM&quot; participants on the show until she announced during a 12 May 2009, appearance on &quot;The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson&quot; that she had been fired from the show. Although Porizkova maintained she was told by producers that she had an &quot;ego problem,&quot; especially when she &quot;consistently complained&quot; about Tyra Banks&#x27; reported lateness to the set, &quot;ANTM&quot; executive producer Ken Mok and Banks released a statement claiming Porizkova&#x27;s firing was due to &quot;the current state of the economy,&quot; forcing &quot;ANTM&quot; to &quot;make major budget cuts…unfortunately, Paulina was a casualty of these cuts.&quot; When questioned by ABC News journalist Cynthia McFadden about the firing of Porizkova as well as former &quot;ANTM&quot; colleague, Janice Dickinson, both of whom had complained Banks was &quot;difficult,&quot; Banks refused to address the issue.

She appeared on &quot;Andy Warhol&#x27;s Fifteen Minutes&quot;.

Porizkova was a participant on the fourth season of &quot;Dancing with the Stars&quot; in spring 2007, but was voted off on the first results show which aired on 27 March 2007.

In 2009 and 2010, she played Clarissa on about five episodes of the CBS Daytime soap opera &quot;As the World Turns&quot;. Porizkova appeared in the fourth episode of &quot;Celebrity Ghost Stories&quot;&#x27; second season.

===Acting===
Porizkova&#x27;s film debut was in the 1983 modeling mockumentary, &quot;Portfolio&quot;. She appeared in the 1987 film &quot;Anna&quot;. In 1989, she co-starred with Tom Selleck in the film &quot;Her Alibi&quot;; she was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress for her appearance.

Porizkova appeared in Emir Kusturica&#x27;s 1993 film &quot;Arizona Dream&quot;, with Johnny Depp and Jerry Lewis, in a minor role as Lewis&#x27;s young Polish fiancée. She had the main female role in the 1998 film &quot;Thursday&quot;. Porizkova wrote and directed the 2001 film, &quot;Roommates&quot;. She also starred in the 2001 thriller film &quot;Dark Asylum&quot;, alongside Judd Nelson. In 2004, she starred in the romantic comedy &quot;Knots&quot;. She appeared in an episode of the Starz comedy series &quot;Head Case&quot; which aired on 24 April 2009. She appeared in a 6th-season episode of &quot;Desperate Housewives&quot;, &quot;Chromolume No. 7&quot;, alongside model Heidi Klum. She appeared on the ABC Family drama-comedy series &quot;Jane by Design&quot; in an episode which aired on 6 March 2012, and made a guest appearance on &quot;The Mysteries of Laura&quot; in February 2015.

===Writing===
Porizkova co-authored a children&#x27;s book, &quot;The Adventures of Ralphie the Roach&quot; () with British model Joanne Russell and illustrated by her stepson Adam Ocasek, that was published in September 1992. She published her first novel, &quot;A Model Summer&quot; (; &quot;Modellsommar&quot; in Swedish), in 2007, which is about a 15-year-old Swedish girl (Jirina) chosen by a modeling agent to spend a summer working in Paris in 1980. Porizkova is a blogger for Modelinia and &quot;The Huffington Post&quot;.

==In popular culture==
Porizkova is the subject of three songs: &quot;Friends of P&quot; by The Rentals, &quot;Paulina&quot; by No Doubt, and &quot;Dear Paulina&quot; (written for the film &quot;Thursday&quot; in which she appeared) by Luna. She is one of several women referenced in Sonic Youth&#x27;s song &quot;Swimsuit Issue&quot;, from the 1992 album &quot;Dirty&quot;. She was the inspiration of the late transgender model and ballroom performer Octavia St. Laurent who spoke glowingly about her in the documentary film &quot;Paris is Burning&quot;. She has said that St. Laurent&#x27;s praise and idolization in the documentary was the favorite moment of her modeling career.

==Personal life==
Porizkova holds dual Swedish and U.S. citizenship. In 1984, she met Ric Ocasek, lead singer of the rock band the Cars, during the filming of their music video &quot;Drive&quot;. The two married on 23 August 1989. They had two sons, Jonathan Raven Ocasek (born 4 November 1993) and Oliver Ocasek (born 1999). In May 2018, Porizkova announced she and Ocasek had separated a year earlier.

In September 2019, while caring for Ocasek following an unspecified surgery, Porizkova found him dead in his home. At the time of his death, they were still in the process of their divorce. In a new will, he had disinherited her and his two eldest sons, alleging that she had &quot;abandoned&quot; him before his recent surgery, a legally significant term. In 2021, her dispute with Ocasek&#x27;s estate was settled. Porizkova commented, &quot;They gave me what is mine under New York state law, and we’re done.&quot;

In 2021, Porizkova briefly dated screenwriter Aaron Sorkin.

In &quot;America Made Me a Feminist&quot;, an article she wrote for &quot;The New York Times&quot; in 2017, Porizkova stated that she considered herself a feminist.

==Filmography==
==Bibliography==
* &quot;America Made Me a Feminist&quot;. &quot;The New York Times&quot;, 10 June 2017
* &quot;A Model Summer&quot;. Hyperion, 8 April 2008
* “No filter: The Good, the Bad, and the Beautiful”, 15 November 2022

==See also==
* List of &quot;Sports Illustrated Swimsuit&quot; Issue cover models

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q236154" start="0" end="17" title="Paulina Porizkova" label="Paulina Porizkova"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="79" end="93" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734667" start="260" end="305" title="Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue" label="&amp;quot;Sports Illustrated&amp;quot; swimsuit issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q564681" start="356" end="360" title="Anna (1987 film)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q470445" start="429" end="438" title="Prostějov" label="Prostějov"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="448" end="462" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="472" end="478" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773668" start="631" end="651" title="Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia" label="Warsaw Pact invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246417" start="808" end="821" title="cause célèbre" label="cause célèbre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597357" start="1018" end="1033" title="Sbor národní bezpečnosti" label="national police"/>
<link wikidata="Q53713" start="1135" end="1145" title="Olof Palme" label="Olof Palme"/>
<link wikidata="Q727724" start="1157" end="1177" title="Communist Party of Czechoslovakia" label="communist government"/>
<link wikidata="Q786371" start="1613" end="1629" title="John Casablancas" label="John Casablancas"/>
<link wikidata="Q275837" start="2185" end="2203" title="Sports Illustrated" label="Sports Illustrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734667" start="2322" end="2336" title="Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue" label="swimsuit issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q253476" start="2411" end="2428" title="Christie Brinkley" label="Christie Brinkley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507987" start="2559" end="2567" title="New York (magazine)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="2603" end="2623" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q154008" start="2902" end="2907" title="Vogue (magazine)" label="Vogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="2921" end="2925" title="Elle (magazine)" label="Elle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11001035" start="2973" end="2977" title="Self (magazine)" label="Self"/>
<link wikidata="Q333644" start="2991" end="3003" title="Cosmopolitan (magazine)" label="Cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q472870" start="3021" end="3028" title="Glamour (magazine)" label="Glamour"/>
<link wikidata="Q218115" start="3088" end="3094" title="Chanel" label="Chanel"/>
<link wikidata="Q696376" start="3096" end="3103" title="Versace" label="Versace"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="3105" end="3111" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q159694" start="3113" end="3127" title="Christian Dior" label="Christian Dior"/>
<link wikidata="Q288029" start="3129" end="3146" title="Oscar De La Renta" label="Oscar De La Renta"/>
<link wikidata="Q956283" start="3148" end="3156" title="Mikimoto (company)" label="Mikimoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q952764" start="3158" end="3169" title="Perry Ellis" label="Perry Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q466195" start="3171" end="3186" title="Laura Biagiotti" label="Laura Biagiotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q611363" start="3188" end="3198" title="Anne Klein (fashion designer)" label="Anne Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q18353281" start="3200" end="3211" title="Ellen Tracy" label="Ellen Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59465" start="3213" end="3229" title="Barneys New York" label="Barneys New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766699" start="3231" end="3241" title="Ann Taylor (clothing retailer)" label="Ann Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553251" start="3243" end="3251" title="Guerlain" label="Guerlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459595" start="3257" end="3263" title="Revlon" label="Revlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214800" start="3295" end="3307" title="Calvin Klein" label="Calvin Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260606" start="3412" end="3424" title="The Estée Lauder Companies" label="Estée Lauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q8022266" start="3436" end="3446" title="Willow Bay" label="Willow Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q600986" start="3770" end="3776" title="Escada" label="Escada"/>
<link wikidata="Q31426" start="3852" end="3881" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model" label="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3472298" start="3920" end="3928" title="America&amp;#x27;s Next Top Model, Cycle 10" label="Cycle 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q229442" start="3953" end="3959" title="Twiggy" label="Twiggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2700116" start="4127" end="4165" title="The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson" label="The Late Late Show with Craig Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q172303" start="4370" end="4380" title="Tyra Banks" label="Tyra Banks"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="4717" end="4725" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5200121" start="4737" end="4753" title="Cynthia McFadden" label="Cynthia McFadden"/>
<link wikidata="Q230911" start="4830" end="4846" title="Janice Dickinson" label="Janice Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761448" start="4968" end="5002" title="Andy Warhol&amp;#x27;s Fifteen Minutes" label="Andy Warhol&amp;#x27;s Fifteen Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3468848" start="5046" end="5059" title="Dancing with the Stars (American TV series) season 4" label="fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q2674710" start="5069" end="5091" title="Dancing with the Stars (American TV series)" label="Dancing with the Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009243" start="5257" end="5268" title="CBS Daytime" label="CBS Daytime"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261578" start="5286" end="5304" title="As the World Turns" label="As the World Turns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057737" start="5362" end="5385" title="Celebrity Ghost Stories" label="Celebrity Ghost Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="5480" end="5492" title="mockumentary" label="mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q564681" start="5553" end="5557" title="Anna (1987 film)" label="Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q213706" start="5594" end="5605" title="Tom Selleck" label="Tom Selleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415308" start="5624" end="5633" title="Her Alibi" label="Her Alibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q602866" start="5665" end="5705" title="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress" label="Golden Raspberry Award for Worst Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q94882" start="5749" end="5763" title="Emir Kusturica" label="Emir Kusturica"/>
<link wikidata="Q260616" start="5787" end="5800" title="Arizona Dream" label="Arizona Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="5813" end="5824" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q294927" start="5829" end="5840" title="Jerry Lewis" label="Jerry Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16516" start="5948" end="5956" title="Thursday (film)" label="Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6080" end="6091" title="Dark Asylum" label="Dark Asylum"/>
<link wikidata="Q445302" start="6109" end="6120" title="Judd Nelson" label="Judd Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843961" start="6172" end="6177" title="Knots (film)" label="Knots"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689127" start="6245" end="6254" title="Head Case" label="Head Case"/>
<link wikidata="Q131758" start="6337" end="6357" title="Desperate Housewives" label="Desperate Housewives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094210" start="6371" end="6387" title="Chromolume No. 7" label="Chromolume No. 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q60036" start="6411" end="6421" title="Heidi Klum" label="Heidi Klum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682635" start="6480" end="6494" title="Jane by Design" label="Jane by Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q16915631" start="6581" end="6603" title="The Mysteries of Laura" label="The Mysteries of Laura"/>
<link wikidata="Q18049522" start="7133" end="7152" title="The Huffington Post" label="The Huffington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317250" start="7231" end="7243" title="Return of the Rentals" label="Friends of P"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098957" start="7253" end="7264" title="The Rentals" label="The Rentals"/>
<link wikidata="Q769504" start="7272" end="7279" title="No Doubt (No Doubt album)" label="Paulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q43259" start="7289" end="7297" title="No Doubt" label="No Doubt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16516" start="7356" end="7364" title="Thursday (film)" label="Thursday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094256" start="7397" end="7401" title="Luna (1990s American band)" label="Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q188626" start="7445" end="7456" title="Sonic Youth" label="Sonic Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q531154" start="7523" end="7528" title="Dirty (Sonic Youth album)" label="Dirty"/>
<link wikidata="Q28130022" start="7594" end="7602" title="ball culture" label="ballroom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076783" start="7613" end="7632" title="Octavia St. Laurent" label="Octavia St. Laurent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137311" start="7693" end="7709" title="Paris Is Burning (film)" label="Paris is Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q526406" start="7931" end="7941" title="Ric Ocasek" label="Ric Ocasek"/>
<link wikidata="Q858388" start="7972" end="7980" title="the Cars" label="the Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q169987" start="8028" end="8033" title="Drive (The Cars song)" label="Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q299194" start="8815" end="8827" title="Aaron Sorkin" label="Aaron Sorkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="8904" end="8922" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598066" start="9255" end="9321" title="List of Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Issue cover models" label="List of &amp;quot;Sports Illustrated Swimsuit&amp;quot; Issue cover models"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871453" wikidata="Q550613" url="?curid=871453" title="Explorer 3">
<text>Explorer 3 (Harvard designation 1958 Gamma) was an American artificial satellite launched into medium Earth orbit in 1958. It was the second successful launch in the Explorer program, and was nearly identical to the first U.S. satellite Explorer 1 in its design and mission.

==Background==
Explorer 3 was the third satellite in the Explorer small satellite series, which started with Explorer 1, America&#x27;s first artificial satellite. The Explorer program was a direct successor to the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA)&#x27;s Project Orbiter, initiated in November 1954 to use a slightly modified Redstone missile combined with solid-propellant rocket cluster upper stage to put a satellite into orbit.

In 1955, the &quot;Stewart Committee&quot;, under the chairmanship of Homer J. Stewart of Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), chose a Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) satellite plan using a rocket based on its Viking rocket (Project Vanguard) for the International Geophysical Year, which would start 1 July 1957. Nevertheless, ABMA hoped Redstone-Orbiter could still be used as a backup orbital system. Reentry tests that year conducted with the newly developed, Redstone-based Jupiter-C, further strengthened ABMA confidence in their vehicle as an orbital launcher. 

Following the launch of the Soviet satellite Sputnik 1 on 4 October 1957, Project Orbiter was revived, with two shots authorized as a back-up to Vanguard in early November. The failure of America&#x27;s first attempted Vanguard launch on 9 December 1957, cleared the way for an &quot;Explorer&quot; (as the crash program was dubbed) to be the first American satellite.&#x27;

Working closely together, ABMA and JPL completed the job of modifying the Jupiter-C to the Juno 1 and building Explorer 1 in 84 days. An experiment developed for Vanguard by George Ludwig, comprising an Anton 314 omnidirectional Geiger tube detector for measuring the flux of high energy charged protons and electrons, was adapted for Explorer 1. Because of the high spin rate of the Explorer 1 rocket, the experiment&#x27;s tape recorder had to be omitted, which meant that data could only be collected when the satellite was in sight and range of a ground station.

Explorer 1 took off 31 January 1958, becoming America&#x27;s first satellite. Its Geiger tube worked properly, but acted contrary to expectations. As the satellite ascended in its orbit, the radiation count increased, then abruptly dropped to zero. When the satellite was descending, the tube abruptly began detecting charged particles again. As data could only be received about 15% of the time, it was yet impossible to determine the phenomenon Explorer had detected.

==Spacecraft==
The objective of this spacecraft was a continuation of experiments started with Explorer 1. The payload consisted of a micrometeorite detector (a wire grid array and acoustic detector) and the same cosmic ray counter (a Geiger-Müller tube) experiment included on Explorer 1, but this time with an on-board tape recorder to provide a complete radiation history for each orbit, Ludwig having had time to accommodate for the spin-stabilization of the satellite.&lt;Vanguard/&gt;

Its total weight was , of which was instrumentation. The instrument section at the front end of the satellite and the empty scaled-down fourth-stage rocket casing orbited as a single unit, to be spun around its long axis at 750 revolutions per minute. Data from these instruments would be transmitted to the ground by a 60 milliwatt transmitter operating on 108.03 MHz and a 10 milliwatt transmitter operating on 108.00 MHz.

Transmitting antennas consisted of two fiberglass slot antennas in the body of the satellite itself. The four flexible whip antennas of Explorer 1 were removed from the design. The external skin of the instrument section was painted in alternate strips of white and dark green to provide passive temperature control of the satellite. The proportions of the light and dark strips were determined by studies of shadow-sunlight intervals based on firing time, trajectory, orbit, and orbital inclination.

Electrical power was provided by Mallory type RM Mercury batteries that made up approximately 40% of the payload weight. These provided power that operated the high power transmitter for 31 days and the low-power transmitter for 105 days. Because of the limited space available and the requirements for low weight, the Explorer 3 instrumentation was designed and built with simplicity and high reliability in mind.

==Launch and orbit==
Explorer 3 was launched at 17:38:03 GMT on 26 March 1958 from Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 5 via the same type of modified Jupiter-C (Juno 1) as the prior two Explorers. A guidance system orbit placed the satellite into an orbit with a higher apogee and lower perigee than planned: and , respectively. The ensuing orbital decay made for a comparatively short lifespan: initial estimates placed it at 4.6 months. In fact, the satellite reentered the atmosphere on 28 June 1958, after just 93 days of operation; by the week before reentry, Explorer 3&#x27;s apogee had dropped to and the perigee to .

==Mission results==
Explorer 3 largely confirmed the findings of Explorer 1, with the same zero count returned above an altitude of around to . Because of the consistent results, Van Allen hypothesized that the satellites&#x27; equipment might have been saturated by unexpectedly high radiation concentrations, trapped in a belt of charged particles by the Earth&#x27;s magnetic field. Explorer 4, equipped with a lead-shielded counter, flew in July and confirmed the existence of the radiation fields subsequently known as the Van Allen Belts.

On 7 May 1958, micrometeorites associated with the Eta Aquariids meteor shower ruptured two of Explorer 3&#x27;s micrometeorite erosion gauges.

==Status==

A replica of the spacecraft is currently located in the Smithsonian Institution&#x27;s National Air and Space Museum, Milestones of Flight Gallery.

==See also==

*Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes
*Explorer program

==References==
==External links==
*Data Sheet, Department of Astronautics, National Air and Space Museum, Smithsonian Institution.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q550613" start="0" end="10" title="Explorer 3" label="Explorer 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q550613" start="32" end="42" title="Explorer 3" label="1958 Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q218414" start="95" end="113" title="medium Earth orbit" label="medium Earth orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q603526" start="166" end="182" title="Explorer program" label="Explorer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="237" end="247" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q49901" start="385" end="395" title="Explorer 1" label="Explorer 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q27422" start="491" end="520" title="Army Ballistic Missile Agency" label="Army Ballistic Missile Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514453" start="535" end="550" title="Project Orbiter" label="Project Orbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q400515" start="606" end="614" title="PGM-11 Redstone" label="Redstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q102078023" start="783" end="799" title="Homer J. Stewart" label="Homer J. Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q189325" start="803" end="828" title="Jet Propulsion Laboratory" label="Jet Propulsion Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499258" start="844" end="869" title="Naval Research Laboratory" label="Naval Research Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q130712" start="919" end="925" title="Viking (rocket)" label="Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q179527" start="934" end="950" title="Project Vanguard" label="Project Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q724505" start="960" end="990" title="International Geophysical Year" label="International Geophysical Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141247" start="1188" end="1197" title="Jupiter-C" label="Jupiter-C"/>
<link wikidata="Q80811" start="1324" end="1333" title="Sputnik 1" label="Sputnik 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2364587" start="1482" end="1513" title="Vanguard TV-3" label="first attempted Vanguard launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641034" start="2805" end="2812" title="Payload (air and space craft)" label="payload"/>
<link wikidata="Q14605250" start="2828" end="2842" title="micrometeorite" label="micrometeorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11547" start="2907" end="2917" title="cosmic ray" label="cosmic ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210142" start="2929" end="2947" title="Geiger-Müller tube" label="Geiger-Müller tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q213777" start="3015" end="3028" title="tape recorder" label="tape recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q18335" start="3051" end="3060" title="radiation" label="radiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q83001" start="3131" end="3149" title="spin-stabilized satellite" label="spin-stabilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q39481" start="3322" end="3348" title="MGM-29 Sergeant" label="fourth-stage rocket casing"/>
<link wikidata="Q206037" start="3414" end="3436" title="revolutions per minute" label="revolutions per minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="3509" end="3518" title="Watt" label="milliwatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="3551" end="3554" title="hertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q131214" start="3625" end="3633" title="antenna (radio)" label="antennas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7224880" start="3651" end="3661" title="fiberglass" label="fiberglass"/>
<link wikidata="Q193139" start="4069" end="4079" title="trajectory" label="trajectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="4092" end="4111" title="orbital inclination" label="orbital inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q30192" start="4587" end="4590" title="Greenwich Mean Time" label="GMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034366" start="4613" end="4644" title="Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 5" label="Cape Canaveral Launch Complex 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192304" start="4686" end="4692" title="Juno 1" label="Juno 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="4795" end="4801" title="Apsis" label="apogee"/>
<link wikidata="Q83481" start="4812" end="4819" title="Apsis" label="perigee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918240" start="4866" end="4879" title="orbital decay" label="orbital decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q370053" start="5538" end="5548" title="Explorer 4" label="Explorer 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q188533" start="5680" end="5695" title="Van Allen Belts" label="Van Allen Belts"/>
<link wikidata="Q249546" start="5749" end="5762" title="Eta Aquariids" label="Eta Aquariids"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="5911" end="5934" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="5942" end="5971" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q604626" start="6019" end="6069" title="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes" label="Timeline of artificial satellites and space probes"/>
<link wikidata="Q603526" start="6071" end="6087" title="Explorer program" label="Explorer program"/>
<link wikidata="Q752669" start="6164" end="6193" title="National Air and Space Museum" label="National Air and Space Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="6195" end="6218" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871456" wikidata="Q209725" url="?curid=871456" title="Twickenham Stadium">
<text>Twickenham Stadium (; usually known as Twickenham, and for sponsorship purposes known as the [[Allianz]] Stadium Twickenham) is a rugby union stadium in Twickenham, London, England. It is owned by the Rugby Football Union (RFU), the English rugby union governing body, which has its headquarters there. The stadium is England&#x27;s national rugby union stadium and is the venue for the England national rugby union team&#x27;s home matches.

Twickenham is the world&#x27;s largest rugby union stadium, the second largest stadium in the United Kingdom (behind Wembley Stadium), and the fourth largest in Europe. The Middlesex Sevens, Premiership Rugby fixtures, Anglo-Welsh Cup matches, Harlequins&#x27; annual Big Game, the Varsity Match between Oxford and Cambridge universities and European Rugby Champions Cup games have been played there. It has also been used as the venue for the Rugby Football League&#x27;s Challenge Cup Final in 2001 and 2006, and the NFL London Games in 2016 and 2017.

The stadium has hosted concerts by artists such as Rihanna, Iron Maiden, Bryan Adams, Bon Jovi, Genesis, U2, Beyoncé, the Rolling Stones, the Police, Eagles, R.E.M., Eminem, Lady Gaga, Metallica, Depeche Mode and NSPPD Prayer Conference.

On 5 August 2024, it was announced that Twickenham Stadium would be renamed Allianz Stadium Twickenham as part of a long-term investment plan by the insurance company Allianz.

==Overview==
Twickenham is often referred to as &quot;the Home of Rugby&quot;. The stadium, owned and operated by the RFU, hosts rugby union fixtures all year round. It is the home of the English rugby union team, who play nearly all their home games at the stadium. Twickenham hosts England&#x27;s home Six Nations matches, as well as games against touring teams from the Southern Hemisphere, usually annually in November.

Apart from its relationship with the national team, Twickenham is the venue for a number of other domestic and international rugby union matches. It hosts the annual London leg of the World Rugby Sevens Series, the Cup (championship) final, the third-place match of the annual London leg of the World Rugby Women&#x27;s Sevens Series, and the domestic Middlesex Sevens competition. It is also the venue for the Premiership Rugby final as well as Harlequins&#x27; Big Game at Christmas time and an additional annual fixture hosted by Harlequins in late spring. Anglo-Welsh Cup, Heineken Cup and Champions Cup finals have been held here, and the stadium also hosts The Varsity Match between Oxford and Cambridge (1921–2023), the English schools&#x27; Daily Mail Cup Final and the Army Navy Match, which forms the culmination of the annual Inter-Services Competition.

===Regular events===

==History==
Sold-out Tests against New Zealand and South Africa at Crystal Palace saw the RFU realise the benefit of owning their own ground. Committee member William Williams and treasurer William Cail led the way to purchasing a 10.25 acre (4 hectare) market garden in Twickenham in 1907 for £5,500 12s 6d. The first stands were constructed the following year. Before the ground was purchased, it was used to grow, among other vegetables, cabbages, and so Twickenham Stadium is affectionately known as the Cabbage Patch. After further expenditure on roads, the first game, between Harlequins v. Richmond, was played on 2 October 1909, and the first international, England v. Wales, on 15 January 1910. At the time of the England-Wales game, the stadium had a maximum capacity of 20,000 spectators. During World War I, the ground was used for cattle, horse and sheep grazing. King George V unveiled a war memorial in 1921.
In 1926, the first Middlesex Sevens took place at the ground. In 1927 the first Varsity Match took place at Twickenham for the first time. On 19 March 1938, BBC Television broadcast the EnglandScotland (Calcutta Cup) match from Twickenham, the first time that a rugby match was shown live on television. In 1959, to mark 50 years of the ground, a combined side of England and Wales beat Ireland and Scotland by 26 points to 17.

Coming into the last match of the 1988 season, England had lost 15 of their previous 23 matches in the Five Nations Championship. The Twickenham crowd had only seen one England try in the previous two years, and at half-time the team were 0–3 down against Ireland. During the second half, England started playing an expansive game many had doubted they were capable of producing. A 0–3 deficit was turned into a 35–3 win, with England scoring six tries. This day also saw the origins of the adoption of the traditional spiritual &quot;Swing Low, Sweet Chariot&quot; as a terrace song. Three of England&#x27;s tries in the match were scored by Chris Oti, a black player who had made a reputation for himself that season as speedy left winger. A group of boys from the Benedictine school Douai, following a tradition at their school games, sang &quot;Swing Low, Sweet Chariot&quot; whenever a try was scored. When Oti scored his second try, amused spectators standing close to the boys joined in, and when Oti scored his hat-trick the song was heard around the ground. Since then &quot;Swing Low, Sweet Chariot&quot; has been a song to sing at England home games, in the same way that &quot;Fields of Athenry&quot; is sung in Dublin and &quot;Cwm Rhondda&quot; is sung in Cardiff.

The United Kingdom, Ireland and France shared the hosting of the 1991 Rugby World Cup. Twickenham was used during pool A England matches. Twickenham was also host of the 1991 Rugby World Cup Final in which Australia beat England 12–6. For this game, England changed their style of play, opting for the sort of running game that had brought them victory against Ireland in the March 1988 game referred to above. During this match, with the English facing a 12–3 deficit, David Campese reached one-handed for a ball thrown to England winger, Rory Underwood. He dropped it and the ball rolled forward, gifting England a penalty that proved to be the last score of the game. Some have claimed that Campese&#x27;s action should have been interpreted as a deliberate professional foul, with possible disciplinary action against the Australian player. However, on the same ground in November 1988, Campese had intercepted a similar pass and run the length of the field to score a try.
Some of the Welsh-hosted 1999 Rugby World Cup games were taken to Twickenham. These included three of England&#x27;s pool B matches, the second round playoff when England defeated Fiji 45 points to 24, and both semi-finals, none of which England were involved in, having made their exit in the quarter-finals at the hands of South Africa. Under the reign of Clive Woodward, the stadium became known as &#x27;Fortress Twickenham&#x27;, as England enjoyed a run of 19 unbeaten home matches from October 1999, ending with defeat against Ireland in 2004. The IRB Rugby Aid Match was played on 5 March 2005 under the auspices of the International Rugby Board (IRB) to raise money for the United Nations World Food Programme to support its work helping victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami. The match was between representative sides of the Northern and Southern hemispheres, with the Southern side winning 54–19.

In 2008, Harlequins once again became tenants at Twickenham for selected matches including the annual Big Game fixture usually hosted in late December each year. In 2022, the club launched a second annual fixture at the ground hosted each summer annually known as The Big Summer Kick Off.

In May 2023 during the 2023 Premiership Rugby Final between Sale Sharks and Saracens a group of Just Stop Oil protesters came onto the pitch and started to vandalise the surface. Some of the players helped security staff to remove the protestors, who were later arrested.

On 5 August 2024, Twickenham Stadium announced that the stadium would be renamed to the Allianz Stadium Twickenham for 10 years from September 2024, due to a sponsorship agreement with Allianz.

==Redevelopment==

Since the ground&#x27;s purchase by the RFU in 1907, it has gone through a number of redevelopments. In 1921, a stand was built above the northern terrace, with workshops placed underneath. In 1927, the East Stand was extended, bringing the capacity to 12,000. The south terrace was later extended to enable crowds of 20,000. In 1932, a new West Stand was completed, providing offices for the RFU, who made the ground their home. In 1937, Middlesex County Council approved a scheme submitted by Twickenham Borough Council to widen Rugby Road due to it being inadequate for traffic.

In 1965, the South Terrace was closed due to structural failings. It was found to be cheaper to build a new stand than to repair the existing one; however, planning permission was refused, due to objections from local residents. Permission was eventually granted in 1978. A period of extensive rebuilding took place during the early 1980s, which continued through to the mid-1990s. In 1981, the South Terrace was rebuilt as the South Stand. After being taken down in 1989, an extended North Stand was opened in 1990. Following the 1992 Five Nations, the stadium saw the development of the new East Stand and subsequently the West Stand. In 1995, the stadium redevelopment was completed, the ground now accommodating 75,000 people in an all-seater environment. The North, East and West stands were all built by Mowlem.
Planning permission was sought in 2002 and received in December 2004 for a new South Stand to further raise capacity, with building work commencing in June 2005. As well as increasing the stadium&#x27;s capacity to 82,000, the redevelopment introduced a four-star Marriott hotel with 156 rooms and six VIP suites with views over the field, a performing arts complex, a health and leisure club, a new rugby shop and a general increase in function space. In July 2005, the old south stand was demolished to make way for the new development. The festivities that were planned to mark this were cancelled in the wake of the 7 July terror attacks in the centre of London. The new seating, which had been started by Mowlem, was completed by Carillion on 5 November 2006 in time for the England vs New Zealand game of that year&#x27;s autumn internationals series, in which England lost in a near-record defeat. 
The rugby stadium continued to be developed into 2018 with the upgrading of the east stand. The new stand offers match-day hospitality as well as six floors of event spacing. The east stand was over budget due to additional safety measures put in place to make the redeveloped structure capable of withstanding a bomb attack, and to make it fireproof, with work carried out on the cladding in response to the Grenfell Tower fire. Following the upgrade, the roof is now complete.

==Rugby World Cup==
Twickenham Stadium has hosted Rugby World Cup Matches in 1991, 1999 and 2015, including the finals in 1991 and 2015 when England were the host nation. The Stadium also hosted semi-finals in 1999, including France&#x27;s famous 43–31 victory over New Zealand. In August 2023, the stadium was confirmed as one of eight host venues for the 2025 Women&#x27;s Rugby World Cup.

===1991 Rugby World Cup===
===1999 Rugby World Cup===
===2015 Rugby World Cup===
===2025 Women&#x27;s Rugby World Cup===
The stadium will be one of eight host venues for the 2025 Women&#x27;s Rugby World Cup and will host the final of the competition on 27 September 2025.
==Other uses==

===Concerts===
Due to the construction delays of Wembley, a number of scheduled events at Wembley were moved to Twickenham. The Rolling Stones&#x27; A Bigger Bang Tour concerts were taken to Twickenham. The Stones also played two shows at Twickenham in August and September 2003, the first of which was used as their stadium concert disc for the 2003 DVD Four Flicks. During 2007 Genesis played at Twickenham during their reunion tour. The Police played at the stadium in September 2007 and Rod Stewart in June. The usual capacity for concerts is anything up to 50,000, as opposed to the 82,000 for rugby.

R.E.M. performed at Twickenham in August 2008, while New Jersey rockers Bon Jovi played two gigs at the stadium in June 2008 as part of their Lost Highway Tour, and Iron Maiden played there as part of their Somewhere Back in Time World Tour on 5 July 2008, along with a full supporting bill which included Avenged Sevenfold, Within Temptation and Lauren Harris.

Lady Gaga performed two sold-out shows at the stadium during her Born This Way Ball Tour on the 8 and 9 September 2012 with 101,250 people attending for both shows. The first date broke a record for The Fastest Selling-out Stadium Show in UK history when the 50,625 tickets for the first show sold out in 50 seconds.

Rihanna performed two shows at the stadium during her Diamonds World Tour on 15 and 16 June 2013 for 95,971 people for both nights.

Since the mid-1950s it has also hosted the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses annual convention for the London area. Usually up to 25,000 attend to hear Bible talks.

===American football===
It was announced on 3 November 2015 that the RFU and America&#x27;s National Football League had agreed a three-year deal to host at least three NFL London Games. The deal began in October 2016 and gave the opportunity to host an additional two games over the three-year period of the deal.

On 23 October 2016, the Los Angeles Rams hosted the New York Giants at Twickenham Stadium. This was the second of three London Games in 2016, with the others being played at Wembley. The game was televised live in the UK on BBC Two.

The final two games of the agreement were played in 2017, with matchups announced on 13 December 2016.

===Rugby league===
Twickenham Stadium was selected as a host venue for the 2000 Rugby League World Cup The stadium hosted the opening match between co-hosts and Ashes rivals . The game, which was the first ever rugby league match at Twickenham, saw Australia claim a 22–2 victory.

During the reconstruction of Wembley Stadium, Twickenham was one of three venues which hosted the Challenge Cup Final in the year away from Wembley. The 2001 Challenge Cup Final saw St Helens beat Bradford Bulls 13–6. St Helens were victorious again in 2006 beating Huddersfield Giants 42–12.

===Car rugby===

The TV motoring show &quot;Top Gear&quot; used the pitch for a match of &quot;car rugby&quot;. The game was 5-side and used smaller Kia Ceeds as backs and larger Kia Sportages as forwards. Jeremy Clarkson&#x27;s team beat James May&#x27;s team 17–14. This was played prior to the pitch being resurfaced.

==World Rugby Museum==

The World Rugby Museum is a museum located in Twickenham Stadium. The museum covers the whole of the global game, not just English rugby union. It tells the history of the sport, including William Webb Ellis and Richard Lindon, using interactive display techniques. The museum has a rolling programme of special exhibitions which cover topical issues and offer an opportunity to display some of the obscurer items in the collection. Some unique displays include an English rugby union jersey from the first ever rugby union international in 1871 between England and Scotland, and (until 2005) the William Webb Ellis Cup which was obtained by England at the 2003 Rugby World Cup. Twickenham Stadium Tours are also available through the Museum and run four times per day (Tuesday to Saturday) and twice on Sundays. It is usually open every day of the week except for Mondays and on match days, when a special-priced entry is available for match ticket holders only.

==See also==
* Twickenham Streaker (disambiguation)
* Sport in London
* Rugby union in England
* List of rugby union stadiums by capacity
* Lists of stadiums

==References==
==Further reading==
*Harris, Ed, (2005). &quot;Twickenham: The History of the Cathedral of Rugby&quot;, Sports Books, ()
*Spragg, Iain, (2010). &quot;Twickenham – 100 Years of Rugby&#x27;s HQ&quot;, Vision Sports Publishing, ()

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q209725" start="0" end="18" title="Twickenham Stadium" label="Twickenham Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q209725" start="39" end="49" title="Twickenham Stadium" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q209725" start="93" end="123" title="Twickenham Stadium" label="[[Allianz]] Stadium Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="130" end="141" title="rugby union" label="rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143278" start="153" end="163" title="Twickenham" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="165" end="171" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347463" start="201" end="221" title="Rugby Football Union" label="Rugby Football Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634155" start="333" end="361" title="List of national stadiums" label="national rugby union stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="387" end="420" title="England national rugby union team" label="England national rugby union team"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="560" end="575" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574571" start="586" end="610" title="List of European stadia by capacity" label="fourth largest in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841952" start="616" end="632" title="Middlesex Sevens" label="Middlesex Sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960" start="634" end="651" title="Premiership Rugby" label="Premiership Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364853" start="662" end="677" title="Anglo-Welsh Cup" label="Anglo-Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149835" start="687" end="697" title="Harlequin F.C." label="Harlequins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717647" start="711" end="719" title="The Big Game (rugby union)" label="Big Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554862" start="725" end="738" title="The Varsity Match" label="Varsity Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="747" end="753" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="758" end="767" title="University of Cambridge" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="785" end="813" title="European Rugby Champions Cup" label="European Rugby Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127622" start="887" end="908" title="Rugby Football League" label="Rugby Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059994" start="916" end="929" title="Challenge Cup" label="Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530067" start="962" end="978" title="NFL International Series" label="NFL London Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="1049" end="1056" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="1058" end="1069" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="1071" end="1082" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q259254" start="1084" end="1092" title="Bon Jovi" label="Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="1094" end="1101" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="1103" end="1105" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="1107" end="1114" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="1116" end="1134" title="the Rolling Stones" label="the Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="1136" end="1146" title="the Police" label="the Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q189635" start="1148" end="1154" title="Eagles (band)" label="Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="1156" end="1162" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q5608" start="1164" end="1170" title="Eminem" label="Eminem"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="1172" end="1181" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="1183" end="1192" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="1194" end="1206" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q487292" start="1404" end="1411" title="Allianz" label="Allianz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16642" start="1718" end="1729" title="Six Nations Championship" label="Six Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3836587" start="2005" end="2015" title="London Sevens" label="London leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q766051" start="2023" end="2048" title="World Rugby Sevens Series" label="World Rugby Sevens Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996907" start="2116" end="2126" title="London Women&amp;#x27;s Sevens" label="London leg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5973417" start="2134" end="2172" title="World Rugby Women&amp;#x27;s Sevens Series" label="World Rugby Women&amp;#x27;s Sevens Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841952" start="2191" end="2207" title="Middlesex Sevens" label="Middlesex Sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5960" start="2250" end="2267" title="Premiership Rugby" label="Premiership Rugby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149835" start="2285" end="2295" title="Harlequin F.C." label="Harlequins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717647" start="2302" end="2310" title="The Big Game (rugby)" label="Big Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364853" start="2399" end="2414" title="Anglo-Welsh Cup" label="Anglo-Welsh Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="2416" end="2428" title="Heineken Cup" label="Heineken Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15120374" start="2433" end="2446" title="European Rugby Champions Cup" label="Champions Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554862" start="2502" end="2519" title="The Varsity Match" label="The Varsity Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359056" start="2528" end="2534" title="Oxford University RFC" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934697" start="2539" end="2548" title="Cambridge University R.U.F.C." label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209297" start="2588" end="2602" title="Daily Mail Cup" label="Daily Mail Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794196" start="2617" end="2632" title="Army Navy Match" label="Army Navy Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q55801" start="2762" end="2773" title="New Zealand national rugby union team" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="2778" end="2790" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142393" start="2794" end="2808" title="Crystal Palace National Sports Centre" label="Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836949" start="2886" end="2902" title="Billy Williams (cricketer, born 1861)" label="William Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q371838" start="2917" end="2929" title="William Cail" label="William Cail"/>
<link wikidata="Q25224" start="3021" end="3022" title="Pound sterling" label="£"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149835" start="3310" end="3320" title="Harlequin F.C." label="Harlequins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431476" start="3324" end="3332" title="Richmond F.C." label="Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="3393" end="3400" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q822877" start="3404" end="3409" title="Wales national rugby union team" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="3604" end="3617" title="George V of the United Kingdom" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841952" start="3670" end="3686" title="Middlesex Sevens" label="Middlesex Sevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554862" start="3731" end="3744" title="The Varsity Match" label="Varsity Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="3808" end="3822" title="BBC Television" label="BBC Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026396" start="3854" end="3866" title="Calcutta Cup" label="Calcutta Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q599903" start="4038" end="4045" title="Ireland national rugby union team" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q945016" start="4050" end="4058" title="Scotland national rugby union team" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750385" start="4615" end="4639" title="Swing Low, Sweet Chariot" label="Swing Low, Sweet Chariot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2964830" start="4723" end="4732" title="Chris Oti" label="Chris Oti"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="4847" end="4858" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299541" start="4866" end="4871" title="Douai School" label="Douai"/>
<link wikidata="Q123086" start="5099" end="5108" title="hat-trick" label="hat-trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q153274" start="5269" end="5286" title="Fields of Athenry" label="Fields of Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="5304" end="5310" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008016" start="5321" end="5332" title="Cwm Rhondda" label="Cwm Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="5350" end="5357" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322713" start="5425" end="5445" title="1991 Rugby World Cup" label="1991 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5474" end="5480" title="1991 Rugby World Cup#Pool A" label="pool A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587072" start="5530" end="5556" title="1991 Rugby World Cup Final" label="1991 Rugby World Cup Final"/>
<link wikidata="Q622443" start="5566" end="5575" title="Australia national rugby union team" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1173922" start="5830" end="5843" title="David Campese" label="David Campese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442064" start="5900" end="5914" title="Rory Underwood" label="Rory Underwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141048" start="6363" end="6383" title="1999 Rugby World Cup" label="1999 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6455" end="6461" title="1999 Rugby World Cup#Pool B" label="pool B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134669" start="6518" end="6522" title="Fiji national rugby union team" label="Fiji"/>
<link wikidata="Q498478" start="6663" end="6675" title="South Africa national rugby union team" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q921680" start="6696" end="6710" title="Clive Woodward" label="Clive Woodward"/>
<link wikidata="Q3788791" start="6893" end="6912" title="IRB Rugby Aid Match" label="IRB Rugby Aid Match"/>
<link wikidata="Q369225" start="6966" end="6991" title="International Rugby Board" label="International Rugby Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q204344" start="7036" end="7056" title="World Food Programme" label="World Food Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="7100" end="7125" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake" label="2004 Indian Ocean tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149835" start="7260" end="7270" title="Harlequin F.C." label="Harlequins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7717647" start="7353" end="7361" title="The Big Game (rugby union)" label="Big Game"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7515" end="7538" title="The Big Summer Kick Off" label="The Big Summer Kick Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q928517" start="7601" end="7612" title="Sale Sharks" label="Sale Sharks"/>
<link wikidata="Q9641" start="7617" end="7625" title="Saracens F.C." label="Saracens"/>
<link wikidata="Q487292" start="7999" end="8006" title="Allianz" label="Allianz"/>
<link wikidata="Q19186" start="8467" end="8476" title="Middlesex" label="Middlesex"/>
<link wikidata="Q13109143" start="9421" end="9427" title="Mowlem" label="Mowlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141173" start="9693" end="9701" title="Marriott International" label="Marriott"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="10049" end="10070" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="7 July terror attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13109143" start="10139" end="10145" title="Mowlem" label="Mowlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039561" start="10164" end="10173" title="Carillion" label="Carillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3985098" start="10257" end="10278" title="2006 end of year rugby tests" label="autumn internationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q30274958" start="10744" end="10763" title="Grenfell Tower fire" label="Grenfell Tower fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q111772476" start="11172" end="11205" title="2025 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup" label="2025 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q111772476" start="11382" end="11415" title="2025 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup" label="2025 Women&amp;#x27;s Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="11546" end="11553" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q11036" start="11621" end="11639" title="The Rolling Stones" label="The Rolling Stones"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298164" start="11646" end="11664" title="A Bigger Bang Tour" label="A Bigger Bang Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361613" start="11852" end="11863" title="Four Flicks" label="Four Flicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q151012" start="11877" end="11884" title="Genesis (band)" label="Genesis"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11919" end="11931" title="Turn It On Again: The Tour" label="reunion tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q178095" start="11933" end="11943" title="The Police" label="The Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q182655" start="11988" end="11999" title="Rod Stewart" label="Rod Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q134969" start="12104" end="12110" title="R.E.M." label="R.E.M."/>
<link wikidata="Q259254" start="12176" end="12184" title="Bon Jovi" label="Bon Jovi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170435" start="12246" end="12263" title="Lost Highway Tour" label="Lost Highway Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="12269" end="12280" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519023" start="12311" end="12344" title="Somewhere Back in Time World Tour" label="Somewhere Back in Time World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q165193" start="12410" end="12427" title="Avenged Sevenfold" label="Avenged Sevenfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q57138" start="12429" end="12446" title="Within Temptation" label="Within Temptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19848" start="12467" end="12476" title="Lady Gaga" label="Lady Gaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q72758" start="12532" end="12550" title="Born This Way Ball" label="Born This Way Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q36844" start="12785" end="12792" title="Rihanna" label="Rihanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780346" start="12839" end="12858" title="Diamonds World Tour" label="Diamonds World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="12961" end="12985" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="13167" end="13191" title="National Football League" label="National Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530067" start="13244" end="13260" title="NFL International Series" label="NFL London Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q22025548" start="13415" end="13431" title="2016 Los Angeles Rams season" label="Los Angeles Rams"/>
<link wikidata="Q22023431" start="13443" end="13458" title="2016 New York Giants season" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="13565" end="13572" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="13615" end="13622" title="BBC Two" label="BBC Two"/>
<link wikidata="Q3000717" start="13804" end="13831" title="2000 Rugby League World Cup" label="2000 Rugby League World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q128468" start="14040" end="14055" title="Wembley Stadium" label="Wembley Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059994" start="14109" end="14122" title="Challenge Cup" label="Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q15917324" start="14164" end="14182" title="2001 Challenge Cup" label="2001 Challenge Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134319" start="14193" end="14202" title="St Helens R.F.C." label="St Helens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2352689" start="14208" end="14222" title="Bradford Bulls" label="Bradford Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4605940" start="14264" end="14268" title="2006 Challenge Cup" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142169" start="14277" end="14296" title="Huddersfield Giants" label="Huddersfield Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q33162" start="14343" end="14363" title="Top Gear (2002 TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Top Gear&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q200970" start="14454" end="14462" title="Kia Ceed" label="Kia Ceed"/>
<link wikidata="Q145527" start="14484" end="14496" title="Kia Sportage" label="Kia Sportage"/>
<link wikidata="Q216160" start="14511" end="14526" title="Jeremy Clarkson" label="Jeremy Clarkson"/>
<link wikidata="Q314504" start="14544" end="14553" title="James May" label="James May"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036125" start="14655" end="14673" title="World Rugby Museum" label="World Rugby Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q319318" start="14840" end="14858" title="William Webb Ellis" label="William Webb Ellis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7327391" start="14863" end="14877" title="Richard Lindon" label="Richard Lindon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15116" end="15142" title="England national rugby union team#Strip" label="English rugby union jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q521098" start="15248" end="15270" title="William Webb Ellis Cup" label="William Webb Ellis Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q861018" start="15308" end="15328" title="2003 Rugby World Cup" label="2003 Rugby World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7857902" start="15631" end="15667" title="Twickenham Streaker (disambiguation)" label="Twickenham Streaker (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579458" start="15670" end="15685" title="Sport in London" label="Sport in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1582413" start="15688" end="15710" title="Rugby union in England" label="Rugby union in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6637007" start="15713" end="15753" title="List of rugby union stadiums by capacity" label="List of rugby union stadiums by capacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2196333" start="15756" end="15773" title="Lists of stadiums" label="Lists of stadiums"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871458" wikidata="Q6538755" url="?curid=871458" title="Li Fan (Han dynasty)">
<text>Li Fan () was a Chinese astronomer during the Han dynasty (202 BC – 220 AD).

He noticed that the Moon does not move uniformly through its phases by using background stars as reference. In 85 Li Fan and Bian Xin () were tasked by Emperor Zhang to resolve inaccuracies in the Taichu calendar. He is also known to have worked with inflow clepsydras as opposed to earlier, typically less accurate outflow clepsydras.

The measurements of synodic periods of the planets given in the following table are attributed to him.
An impact crater that is located at the Phaethontis quadrangle, Mars, 47.2°S Latitude and 153.2°W Longitude was named in his honor. The diameter of the impact crater is approximately 104.8 km.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6538755" start="0" end="6" title="Li Fan (Han dynasty)" label="Li Fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="24" end="34" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="46" end="57" title="Han dynasty" label="Han dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="98" end="102" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="166" end="170" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277" start="230" end="243" title="Emperor Zhang of Han" label="Emperor Zhang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="275" end="290" title="Chinese calendar#Taichu calendar and the calendars from the Han to Ming dynasties." label="Taichu calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q194173" start="329" end="346" title="Water clock" label="inflow clepsydras"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="435" end="450" title="Orbital period#Synodic period" label="synodic periods"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614530" start="521" end="534" title="Li Fan (crater)" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055669" start="558" end="580" title="Phaethontis quadrangle" label="Phaethontis quadrangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="582" end="586" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871470" wikidata="Q829257" url="?curid=871470" title="Mutual intelligibility">
<text>In linguistics, mutual intelligibility is a relationship between different but related language varieties in which speakers of the different varieties can readily understand each other without prior familiarity or special effort. Mutual intelligibility is sometimes used to distinguish languages from dialects, although sociolinguistic factors are often also used.

Intelligibility between varieties can be asymmetric; that is, speakers of one variety may be able to better understand another than vice versa. An example of this is the case between Afrikaans and Dutch. It is generally easier for Dutch speakers to understand Afrikaans than for Afrikaans speakers to understand Dutch. (See ).

In a dialect continuum, neighboring varieties are mutually intelligible, but differences mount with distance, so that more widely separated varieties may not be mutually intelligible. Intelligibility can be partial, as is the case with Azerbaijani and Turkish, or significant, as is the case with Bulgarian and Macedonian. However, sign languages, such as American and British Sign Language, usually do not exhibit mutual intelligibility with each other.

==Types==
===Asymmetric intelligibility===
Asymmetric intelligibility refers to two languages that are considered partially mutually intelligible, but for various reasons, one group of speakers has more difficulty understanding the other language than the other way around. For example, if one language is related to another but has simplified its grammar, the speakers of the original language may understand the simplified language, but not vice versa. To illustrate, Dutch speakers tend to find it easier to understand Afrikaans as a result of Afrikaans&#x27;s simplified grammar.

===Among sign languages===

Sign languages are not universal and usually not mutually intelligible, although there are also similarities among different sign languages. Sign languages are independent of spoken languages and follow their own linguistic development. For example, British Sign Language and American Sign Language (ASL) are quite different linguistically and mutually unintelligible. The grammar of sign languages does not usually resemble that of the spoken languages used in the same geographical area. To illustrate, in terms of syntax, ASL shares more in common with spoken Japanese than with English.

==As a criterion for distinguishing languages==

Some linguists use mutual intelligibility as the primary &quot;linguistic&quot; criterion for determining whether two speech varieties represent the same or different languages.

A primary challenge to this position is that speakers of closely related languages can often communicate with each other effectively if they choose to do so. In the case of transparently cognate languages recognized as distinct such as Spanish and Italian, mutual intelligibility is in principle and in practice not binary (simply yes or no), but occurs in varying degrees, subject to numerous variables specific to individual speakers in the context of the communication.

Classifications may also shift for reasons external to the languages themselves. As an example, in the case of a linear dialect continuum, the central varieties may become extinct, leaving only the varieties at both ends. Consequently, these end varieties may be reclassified as two languages, even though no significant linguistic change has occurred within the two extremes during the extinction of the central varieties.

Furthermore, political and social conventions often override considerations of mutual intelligibility. For example, the varieties of Chinese are often considered a single language, even though there is usually no mutual intelligibility between geographically separated varieties. This is similarly the case among the varieties of Arabic, which also share a single prestige variety in Modern Standard Arabic. In contrast, there is often significant intelligibility between different North Germanic languages. However, because there are various standard forms of the North Germanic languages, they are classified as separate languages.

==Within dialect continua==
===North Germanic===

Northern Germanic languages spoken in Scandinavia form a dialect continuum where the two furthermost dialects have almost no mutual intelligibility. As such, spoken Danish and Swedish normally have low mutual intelligibility, but Swedes in the Öresund region (including Malmö and Helsingborg), across the strait from the Danish capital Copenhagen, understand Danish somewhat better, largely due to the proximity of the region to Danish-speaking areas. While Norway was under Danish rule, the Bokmål written standard of Norwegian developed from Dano-Norwegian, a koiné language that evolved among the urban elite in Norwegian cities during the later years of the union. Additionally, Norwegian assimilated a considerable amount of Danish vocabulary as well as traditional Danish expressions. As a consequence, spoken mutual intelligibility is not reciprocal.

===Romance===

Because of the difficulty of imposing boundaries on a continuum, various counts of the Romance languages are given. For example, in &quot;The Linguasphere register of the world&#x27;s languages and speech communities&quot;, David Dalby lists 23 languages based on mutual intelligibility:
* Iberian Romance: Portuguese, Galician, Mirandese, Astur-Leonese, Castilian, Aragonese;
* Occitano-Romance: Catalan, Occitan;
* Southern Romance: Sardinian;
* Gallo-Romance: Langues d&#x27;oïl (including French), Piedmontese, Franco-Provençal;
* Rhaeto-Romance: Romansh, Ladin, Friulian;
* Gallo-Italic: Piedmontese, Ligurian, Lombard, Emilian-Romagnol, Venetian;
* Italo-Dalmatian (including Italian): Corsican, Neapolitan, Sicilian, Istriot, Dalmatian (extinct);
* Eastern Romance: Daco-Romanian, Istro-Romanian, Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian.

===South Slavic===

The non-standard vernacular dialects of Serbo-Croatian (Kajkavian, Chakavian and Torlakian) diverge more significantly from all four normative varieties of Serbo-Croatian. Their mutual intelligibility varies greatly between the dialects themselves, with the standard Shtokavian dialect, and with other languages. For example, Torlakian, which is considered a subdialect of Serbian Old Shtokavian, has significant mutual intelligibility with Macedonian and Bulgarian.

==List of mutually intelligible languages==
===Afroasiatic===

* Tunisian Arabic and Libyan Arabic (68–70% of sentences)
* Tunisian Arabic and Maltese (32–33% of sentences; Maltese is written with the Latin script while Tunisian Arabic is written with the Arabic script)

===Atlantic–Congo===

* Kinyarwanda and Kirundi
* Luganda and Lusoga (partially)
* Nkore and Kiga
* Zulu, Northern Ndebele (partially), Xhosa (partially), and Swazi (partially)

===Austronesian===

* Iban and Malay, especially with Sarawakian Malay (partially)
* Tokelauan and Tuvaluan
* Tagalog and Kasiguranin (partially)
* Maranao and Iranun

===Indo-European===

====Germanic====

* Danish, Norwegian and Swedish (significantly and asymmetrically)
* Dutch and Afrikaans  (significantly and asymmetrically)
* Dutch and West Frisian (partially)
* German and Yiddish (partially)
* English and Scots (significantly)
* Manglish and Singlish (two English-based creoles)

====Romance====

* Portuguese and Galician (significantly)
* Romanian, Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian and Istro-Romanian (significantly)
* Spanish and Italian (partially) 
* Spanish and Judaeo-Spanish (spoken or written in the Latin alphabet; Judaeo-Spanish may also be written in the Hebrew alphabet). Depending on dialect and the number of non-Spanish loanwords used.
* Spanish and Portuguese (significantly and asymmetrically)

====Slavic====

* Belarusian, Ukrainian and Polish
* Belarusian, Ukrainian and Russian (partially)
* Czech and Slovak (significantly)
* Macedonian and Bulgarian (significantly)
* Macedonian and Serbo-Croatian (moderately to significantly)
* Polish and Czech (partially and asymmetrically)
* Polish and Slovak (reasonably to partially)
* Slovene and Serbo-Croatian (partially)

====Other subdivisions====
* Irish and Scottish Gaelic (partially)
* Marathi and certain dialects of Konkani (significantly)

===Kra-Dai===

* Central Thai, Lao/Isan, Northern Thai, Shan and Tai Lue

===Sino-Tibetan===

* Akha, Honi and Hani (variety of different written scripts)
* Dungan and Mandarin, especially with Central Plains Mandarin

===Turkic===

* Azerbaijani, Crimean Tatar, Gagauz, Turkish and Urum (partially)
* Uzbek and Uyghur
===Uralic===

* Finnish and Estonian (partially)
* Finnish and Karelian (significantly)

===Other===
* Manchu and Xibe

==List of dialects or varieties sometimes considered separate languages==

* Catalan: Valencianthe standard forms are structurally the same language and share the vast majority of their vocabulary, and hence highly mutually intelligible. They are considered separate languages only for political reasons.
* Hindustani: Hindi and Urdu
* Malay: Indonesian (the standard regulated by Indonesia), Brunei and Malaysian (the standard used in Malaysia and Singapore). Both varieties are based on the same material basis and hence are generally mutually intelligible, despite the numerous lexical differences. Certain linguistic sources also treat the two standards on equal standing as varieties of the same Malay language. However, vernacular or less formal varieties spoken between these two countries share limited intelligibility, evidenced by Malaysians having difficulties understanding Indonesian &quot;sinetron&quot; (soap opera) aired on their TV stations (which actually uses a colloquial offshoot heavily influenced by Betawi vernacular of Jakarta rather than the formal standard acquired in academical contexts) and vice versa. 
* Northeastern Neo-Aramaic (NENA): NENA is a dialect continuum, with some dialects being mutually intelligible and others not. While Zakho Jewish Neo-Aramaic and Zakho Christian Neo-Aramaic are mutually intelligible, especially on the eastern edge of the continuum (in Iran), Jewish and Christian NENA varieties spoken in the same town are not mutually intelligible.
* Persian: Iranian Persian (natively simply known as Persian), Dari and TajikPersian and Dari are written in Perso-Arabic script, while Tajik is written in Cyrillic script.
* Serbo-Croatian: Bosnian, Croatian, Montenegrin, and Serbianthe national varieties are structurally the same language, all constituting normative varieties of the Shtokavian dialect, and hence mutually intelligible, spoken and written (if the Latin alphabet is used). For political reasons, they are sometimes considered distinct languages.
* Sukhothai: Central Thai, Southern Thai

==See also==

* Dialect levelling
* Lexical similarity
* Lingua franca
* Multilingualism
* Non-convergent discourse
* Sister language

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==
* Harold Schiffman, &quot;Linguists&#x27; Definition: mutual intelligibility&quot;. University of Pennsylvania.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8162" start="3" end="14" title="linguistics" label="linguistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q829257" start="16" end="38" title="Mutual intelligibility" label="mutual intelligibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q3329375" start="87" end="105" title="Variety (linguistics)" label="language varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q33384" start="301" end="308" title="dialect" label="dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q160845" start="320" end="335" title="sociolinguistics" label="sociolinguistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="549" end="558" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="563" end="568" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="699" end="716" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="930" end="941" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="946" end="953" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="991" end="1000" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="1005" end="1015" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="1026" end="1039" title="sign language" label="sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="1050" end="1058" title="American Sign Language" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="1063" end="1084" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q8091" start="1498" end="1505" title="grammar" label="grammar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="1620" end="1625" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="1672" end="1681" title="Afrikaans language" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34228" start="1763" end="1776" title="Sign language" label="Sign language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322198" start="1938" end="1953" title="spoken language" label="spoken language"/>
<link wikidata="Q33000" start="2013" end="2034" title="British Sign Language" label="British Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q14759" start="2039" end="2061" title="American Sign Language" label="American Sign Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="2280" end="2286" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287" start="2326" end="2334" title="Japanese language" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="2345" end="2352" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="3177" end="3194" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q38058796" start="3222" end="3236" title="Extinct language" label="become extinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748296" start="3602" end="3622" title="varieties of Chinese" label="varieties of Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422423" start="3799" end="3818" title="varieties of Arabic" label="varieties of Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q919978" start="3846" end="3862" title="prestige variety" label="prestige variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q56467" start="3866" end="3888" title="Modern Standard Arabic" label="Modern Standard Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106085" start="3964" end="3988" title="North Germanic languages" label="North Germanic languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q399495" start="4025" end="4038" title="standard language" label="standard form"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="4224" end="4241" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="4332" end="4338" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="4343" end="4350" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q104662" start="4411" end="4418" title="Öresund" label="Öresund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2211" start="4437" end="4442" title="Malmö" label="Malmö"/>
<link wikidata="Q25411" start="4447" end="4458" title="Helsingborg" label="Helsingborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="4503" end="4513" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="4642" end="4653" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Danish rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q25167" start="4659" end="4665" title="Bokmål" label="Bokmål"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015340" start="4711" end="4725" title="Dano-Norwegian" label="Dano-Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q778873" start="4729" end="4743" title="koiné language" label="koiné language"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499736" start="4904" end="4914" title="vocabulary" label="vocabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q19814" start="5128" end="5145" title="Romance languages" label="Romance languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q749533" start="5331" end="5346" title="Iberian Romance languages" label="Iberian Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="5348" end="5358" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="5360" end="5368" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q13330" start="5370" end="5379" title="Mirandese language" label="Mirandese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35390" start="5381" end="5394" title="Astur-Leonese languages" label="Astur-Leonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="5396" end="5405" title="Spanish language" label="Castilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8765" start="5407" end="5416" title="Aragonese language" label="Aragonese"/>
<link wikidata="Q599958" start="5420" end="5436" title="Occitano-Romance languages" label="Occitano-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="5438" end="5445" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14185" start="5447" end="5454" title="Occitan language" label="Occitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q145345" start="5458" end="5474" title="Southern Romance" label="Southern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q33976" start="5476" end="5485" title="Sardinian language" label="Sardinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q500394" start="5489" end="5502" title="Gallo-Romance languages" label="Gallo-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q37351" start="5504" end="5522" title="Langues d&amp;#x27;oïl" label="Langues d&amp;#x27;oïl"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="5534" end="5540" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q15087" start="5556" end="5572" title="Franco-Provençal language" label="Franco-Provençal"/>
<link wikidata="Q515593" start="5576" end="5590" title="Rhaeto-Romance languages" label="Rhaeto-Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q13199" start="5592" end="5599" title="Romansh language" label="Romansh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36202" start="5601" end="5606" title="Ladin language" label="Ladin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33441" start="5608" end="5616" title="Friulian language" label="Friulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q516074" start="5620" end="5632" title="Gallo-Italic languages" label="Gallo-Italic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15085" start="5634" end="5645" title="Piedmontese language" label="Piedmontese"/>
<link wikidata="Q36106" start="5647" end="5655" title="Ligurian (Romance language)" label="Ligurian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33754" start="5657" end="5664" title="Lombard language" label="Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q242648" start="5666" end="5682" title="Emilian-Romagnol language" label="Emilian-Romagnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q32724" start="5684" end="5692" title="Venetian language" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313381" start="5696" end="5711" title="Italo-Dalmatian languages" label="Italo-Dalmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="5723" end="5730" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33111" start="5733" end="5741" title="Corsican language" label="Corsican"/>
<link wikidata="Q33845" start="5743" end="5753" title="Neapolitan language" label="Neapolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q33973" start="5755" end="5763" title="Sicilian language" label="Sicilian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35845" start="5765" end="5772" title="Istriot language" label="Istriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q35527" start="5774" end="5783" title="Dalmatian language" label="Dalmatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q147576" start="5797" end="5812" title="Eastern Romance languages" label="Eastern Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="5814" end="5827" title="Romanian language" label="Daco-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33622" start="5829" end="5843" title="Istro-Romanian language" label="Istro-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29316" start="5845" end="5854" title="Aromanian language" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13358" start="5856" end="5872" title="Megleno-Romanian language" label="Megleno-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="5935" end="5949" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q838165" start="5951" end="5960" title="Kajkavian dialect" label="Kajkavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q337565" start="5962" end="5971" title="Chakavian dialect" label="Chakavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078803" start="5976" end="5985" title="Torlakian dialect" label="Torlakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="6162" end="6180" title="Shtokavian dialect" label="Shtokavian dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="6276" end="6290" title="Old Shtokavian" label="Old Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="6336" end="6346" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="6351" end="6360" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q56240" start="6428" end="6443" title="Tunisian Arabic" label="Tunisian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56503" start="6448" end="6461" title="Libyan Arabic" label="Libyan Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q56240" start="6486" end="6501" title="Tunisian Arabic" label="Tunisian Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166" start="6506" end="6513" title="Maltese language" label="Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="6564" end="6576" title="Latin script" label="Latin script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="6619" end="6632" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q33573" start="6659" end="6670" title="Kinyarwanda" label="Kinyarwanda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33583" start="6675" end="6682" title="Kirundi" label="Kirundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33368" start="6685" end="6692" title="Luganda" label="Luganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q33784" start="6697" end="6703" title="Soga language" label="Lusoga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13207" start="6718" end="6723" title="Nkore language" label="Nkore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270727" start="6728" end="6732" title="Kiga language" label="Kiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10179" start="6735" end="6739" title="Zulu language" label="Zulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q35613" start="6741" end="6757" title="Northern Ndebele language" label="Northern Ndebele"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218" start="6771" end="6776" title="Xhosa language" label="Xhosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q34014" start="6794" end="6799" title="Swazi language" label="Swazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33424" start="6835" end="6839" title="Iban language" label="Iban"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="6844" end="6849" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4251702" start="6867" end="6883" title="Sarawakian Malay" label="Sarawakian Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q34097" start="6898" end="6907" title="Tokelauan language" label="Tokelauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34055" start="6912" end="6920" title="Tuvaluan language" label="Tuvaluan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34057" start="6923" end="6930" title="Tagalog language" label="Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374525" start="6935" end="6946" title="Kasiguranin" label="Kasiguranin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33800" start="6961" end="6968" title="Maranao language" label="Maranao"/>
<link wikidata="Q12953581" start="6973" end="6979" title="Iranun language" label="Iranun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="7022" end="7028" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="7030" end="7039" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="7044" end="7051" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="7089" end="7094" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7099" end="7109" title="Afrikaans " label="Afrikaans "/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="7147" end="7152" title="Dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q27175" start="7157" end="7169" title="West Frisian language" label="West Frisian"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="7184" end="7190" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641" start="7195" end="7202" title="Yiddish" label="Yiddish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="7217" end="7224" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q14549" start="7229" end="7234" title="Scots language" label="Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039185" start="7253" end="7261" title="Manglish" label="Manglish"/>
<link wikidata="Q939451" start="7266" end="7274" title="Singlish" label="Singlish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="7323" end="7333" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9307" start="7338" end="7346" title="Galician language" label="Galician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="7365" end="7373" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29316" start="7375" end="7384" title="Aromanian language" label="Aromanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13358" start="7386" end="7402" title="Megleno-Romanian language" label="Megleno-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33622" start="7407" end="7421" title="Istro-Romanian language" label="Istro-Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="7440" end="7447" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q652" start="7452" end="7459" title="Italian language" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="7475" end="7482" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q36196" start="7487" end="7501" title="Judaeo-Spanish" label="Judaeo-Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q251434" start="7673" end="7695" title="Comparison of Portuguese and Spanish" label="Spanish and Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="7750" end="7760" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="7762" end="7771" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="7776" end="7782" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9091" start="7785" end="7795" title="Belarusian language" label="Belarusian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="7797" end="7806" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7737" start="7811" end="7818" title="Russian language" label="Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="7833" end="7838" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="7843" end="7849" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="7868" end="7878" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="7883" end="7892" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9296" start="7911" end="7921" title="Macedonian language" label="Macedonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="7926" end="7940" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="7973" end="7979" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="7984" end="7989" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="8023" end="8029" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9058" start="8034" end="8040" title="Slovak language" label="Slovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9063" start="8069" end="8076" title="Slovene language" label="Slovene"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="8081" end="8095" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="8138" end="8143" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="8148" end="8163" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571" start="8178" end="8185" title="Marathi language" label="Marathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q34239" start="8210" end="8217" title="Konkani language" label="Konkani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="8252" end="8264" title="Thai language" label="Central Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="8266" end="8269" title="Lao language" label="Lao"/>
<link wikidata="Q33417" start="8270" end="8274" title="Isan language" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q565110" start="8276" end="8289" title="Northern Thai language" label="Northern Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q56482" start="8291" end="8295" title="Shan language" label="Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36948" start="8300" end="8307" title="Tai Lue language" label="Tai Lue"/>
<link wikidata="Q56643" start="8331" end="8335" title="Akha language" label="Akha"/>
<link wikidata="Q56842" start="8337" end="8341" title="Honi language" label="Honi"/>
<link wikidata="Q56516" start="8346" end="8350" title="Hani language" label="Hani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33050" start="8392" end="8398" title="Dungan language" label="Dungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="8403" end="8411" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048775" start="8429" end="8452" title="Central Plains Mandarin" label="Central Plains Mandarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9292" start="8470" end="8481" title="Azerbaijani language" label="Azerbaijani"/>
<link wikidata="Q33357" start="8483" end="8496" title="Crimean Tatar language" label="Crimean Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q33457" start="8498" end="8504" title="Gagauz language" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q256" start="8506" end="8513" title="Turkish language" label="Turkish"/>
<link wikidata="Q13257" start="8518" end="8522" title="Urum language" label="Urum"/>
<link wikidata="Q9264" start="8537" end="8542" title="Uzbek language" label="Uzbek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13263" start="8547" end="8553" title="Uyghur language" label="Uyghur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="8570" end="8577" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="8582" end="8590" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="8605" end="8612" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q33557" start="8617" end="8625" title="Karelian language" label="Karelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33638" start="8657" end="8663" title="Manchu language" label="Manchu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13223" start="8668" end="8672" title="Xibe language" label="Xibe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026" start="8751" end="8758" title="Catalan language" label="Catalan"/>
<link wikidata="Q32641" start="8760" end="8769" title="Valencian language" label="Valencian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="8981" end="8991" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="8993" end="8998" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617" start="9003" end="9007" title="Urdu" label="Urdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="9010" end="9015" title="Malay language" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="9017" end="9027" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="9055" end="9064" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3182878" start="9067" end="9073" title="Brunei language" label="Brunei"/>
<link wikidata="Q15065" start="9078" end="9087" title="Malaysian language" label="Malaysian"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="9110" end="9118" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="9123" end="9132" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261576" start="9211" end="9232" title="Comparison of Standard Malay and Indonesian" label="mutually intelligible"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="9571" end="9604" title="soap opera" label="&amp;quot;sinetron&amp;quot; (soap opera)"/>
<link wikidata="Q33014" start="9697" end="9703" title="Betawi language" label="Betawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="9718" end="9725" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560578" start="9810" end="9834" title="Northeastern Neo-Aramaic" label="Northeastern Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215844" start="9853" end="9870" title="dialect continuum" label="dialect continuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436461" start="9941" end="9965" title="Zakho Jewish Neo-Aramaic" label="Zakho Jewish Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9970" end="9997" title="Zakho Christian Neo-Aramaic" label="Zakho Christian Neo-Aramaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="10177" end="10184" title="Persian language" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3513637" start="10186" end="10201" title="Iranian Persian" label="Iranian Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178440" start="10238" end="10242" title="Dari" label="Dari"/>
<link wikidata="Q9260" start="10247" end="10252" title="Tajik language" label="Tajik"/>
<link wikidata="Q744068" start="10284" end="10303" title="Perso-Arabic script" label="Perso-Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="10331" end="10346" title="Cyrillic script" label="Cyrillic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q9301" start="10350" end="10364" title="Serbo-Croatian" label="Serbo-Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9303" start="10366" end="10373" title="Bosnian language" label="Bosnian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654" start="10375" end="10383" title="Croatian language" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8821" start="10385" end="10396" title="Montenegrin language" label="Montenegrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="10402" end="10409" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q148893" start="10512" end="10522" title="Shtokavian" label="Shtokavian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="10592" end="10606" title="Latin alphabet" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="10703" end="10715" title="Thai language" label="Central Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q56508" start="10717" end="10730" title="Southern Thai language" label="Southern Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370465" start="10748" end="10765" title="Dialect levelling" label="Dialect levelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257687" start="10768" end="10786" title="Lexical similarity" label="Lexical similarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80839" start="10789" end="10802" title="Lingua franca" label="Lingua franca"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="10805" end="10820" title="Multilingualism" label="Multilingualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q233110" start="10823" end="10847" title="Non-convergent discourse" label="Non-convergent discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722642" start="10850" end="10865" title="Sister language" label="Sister language"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="11012" end="11038" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871474" wikidata="Q7964689" url="?curid=871474" title="Walter Doran">
<text>Walter Francis Doran (born October 15, 1945) is a retired admiral in the United States Navy, who served as the Commander in Chief, United States Pacific Fleet (CINCPACFLT) from May 2002 to July 2005. He lives with his wife, Ginny and has two sons, one of whom has a daughter named Regan. He currently is Raytheon&#x27;s president of Asia.

==Navy career==
A native of Albany, New York, Doran attended Villanova University where he earned a Bachelor of Arts Degree in history. He was commissioned as an Ensign in 1967 through the Navy&#x27;s Reserve Officer Training Corps (U.S. Navy) Program. In 1979, Admiral Doran attended the Indian Defense Services Staff College in Wellington, India, where he earned a master&#x27;s degree in Defense Studies. He describes this experience in India as &quot;serendipitously important&quot; as he attended the Staff College with men who would later come to serve in high-ranking positions within their respective governments, among them former Indian CNS Arun Prakash and his successor. Admiral Doran also holds a master&#x27;s degree in communications from the University of Oklahoma, which he received in 1983.

Selected to Flag rank in January, 1993, Doran served as Director, Operations, Plans and Political-Military (N-31/52) on the staff of the Chief of Naval Operations and as the Assistant to the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff from September 2000 to May 2002.

Doran commanded the USS De Wert (FFG-45) and the USS Belknap (CG-26), flagship for the United States Sixth Fleet home ported in Gaeta, Italy. From June 1995 to December 1996, Admiral Doran served as commander of Amphibious Group One in and the Amphibious Force U.S. Seventh Fleet, both homeported out of Okinawa, Japan. He also served as Deputy Commander in Chief and Chief of Staff, United States Southern Command from December 1996 through July 1998. From August 1998 to September 2000, Admiral Doran commanded United States Seventh Fleet homeported out of Yokosuka, Japan.

Significant shore assignments include tours on the staff of the Chief of Naval Operations in Washington, D.C., including Assistant Branch Head, Pacific Ocean Area/Pacific Plans and Policy Branch (OP-612C) and Branch Head, Europe/NATO Branch (OP-614). From June, 1983 to July, 1985, Doran was Military Assistant to the then Vice President of the United States George H. W. Bush.

==Awards and decorations==

==Post-military career==
In 2005, Doran was appointed to Navy Service Executive for Raytheon Company. Since that time, he has become president of Raytheon Asia. Doran has concentrated a significant portion of his Raytheon work in fostering and developing the company&#x27;s sales to India.

In 2014, Doran was elected to the Military Officers Association of America board of directors. That organization has approximately 350,000 members, made up of active duty, retired, and former commissioned officers and warrant officers who served in a uniformed services of the United States. 
In October 2018, Doran became chairman of the Military Officers Association&#x27;s board of directors. He has also served on the Military Child Education Coalition board of directors and the U.S.-India Business Council board of directors.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7964689" start="0" end="20" title="Walter Doran" label="Walter Francis Doran"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057849" start="58" end="65" title="Admiral (United States)" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="73" end="91" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152166" start="160" end="170" title="CINCPACFLT" label="CINCPACFLT"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="304" end="312" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="368" end="374" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="401" end="421" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522839" start="653" end="666" title="Staff College" label="Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097070" start="987" end="990" title="Chief of the Naval Staff (India)" label="CNS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4802127" start="991" end="1003" title="Arun Prakash" label="Arun Prakash"/>
<link wikidata="Q640652" start="1098" end="1120" title="University of Oklahoma" label="University of Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q609474" start="1351" end="1372" title="Joint Chiefs of Staff" label="Joint Chiefs of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3019650" start="1427" end="1447" title="USS De Wert (FFG-45)" label="USS De Wert (FFG-45)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713873" start="1456" end="1475" title="USS Belknap (CG-26)" label="USS Belknap (CG-26)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2381805" start="1494" end="1519" title="United States Sixth Fleet" label="United States Sixth Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q128089" start="1535" end="1540" title="Gaeta, Italy" label="Gaeta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1619" end="1639" title="Amphibious Group One" label="Amphibious Group One"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1651" end="1686" title="Amphibious Force U.S. Seventh Fleet" label="Amphibious Force U.S. Seventh Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q766445" start="1711" end="1725" title="Okinawa, Japan" label="Okinawa, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755608" start="1791" end="1821" title="United States Southern Command" label="United States Southern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q484950" start="1920" end="1947" title="United States Seventh Fleet" label="United States Seventh Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q200578" start="1966" end="1981" title="Yokosuka, Japan" label="Yokosuka, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072415" start="2048" end="2073" title="Chief of Naval Operations" label="Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="2343" end="2360" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="2475" end="2491" title="Raytheon Company" label="Raytheon Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6852093" start="2716" end="2756" title="Military Officers Association of America" label="Military Officers Association of America"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871480" wikidata="Q1355824" url="?curid=871480" title="William J. Fallon">
<text>William Joseph Fallon (born 30 December 1944) is a retired United States Navy four-star admiral who retired after serving for over 41 years. His last military assignment was as Commander, U.S. Central Command from March 2007 to March 2008. ADM Fallon was the first Navy officer to hold that position. His other four-star assignments include Commander, U.S. Pacific Command from February 2005 to March 2007, Commander, U.S. Fleet Forces Command from October 2003 to February 2005, and 31st Vice Chief of Naval Operations from October 2000 to August 2003. On 11 March 2008, he announced his resignation from CENTCOM and retirement from active duty, citing administrative complications caused in part by an article in &quot;Esquire Magazine,&quot; which described him as the only thing standing between the Bush Administration and war with Iran.

==Early life and education==
Fallon was born in East Orange, New Jersey and raised in Merchantville, New Jersey. He graduated from Camden Catholic High School in Cherry Hill, New Jersey. A 1967 graduate of Villanova University, he received his commission through the Navy ROTC Program and was designated a Naval Flight Officer upon completion of flight training in December 1967.

Fallon is a graduate of the Naval War College in Newport, Rhode Island, and the National War College in Washington, D.C. He holds a Master of Arts Degree in International Studies from Old Dominion University. Fallon was awarded the Naval War College Distinguished Graduate Leadership Award in 2001 and granted an honorary Doctor of Military Science degree by his alma mater, Villanova University, on 17 May 2009.

==Military service==
After flight training at Naval Air Station (NAS) Pensacola in Florida and NAS Glynco in Georgia, Fallon was assigned to fly the RA-5C Vigilante at Naval Air Station Sanford in Florida and Naval Air Station Albany in Georgia, including a combat deployment to Vietnam. He moved to the A-6E Intruder in 1974 at NAS Oceana, Virginia. All told, he served in flying assignments for 24 years with Reconnaissance Attack Squadrons (RVAH), Attack Squadrons (VA) and Carrier air wings (CVW), deploying to the Pacific, Atlantic and Indian Oceans and Mediterranean Sea, embarked in , , , and . He has logged more than 1,300 carrier arrested landings and over 4,800 flight hours in tactical jet aircraft.

Fallon commanded Attack Squadron 65, embarked in USS &quot;Dwight D. Eisenhower;&quot; Medium Attack Wing One at NAS Oceana; and Carrier Air Wing Eight aboard USS &quot;Theodore Roosevelt&quot; during a combat deployment to the Persian Gulf for Operation Desert Storm in 1991. Assigned as Commander, Carrier Group Eight in 1995, he deployed to the Mediterranean as Commander, &quot;Theodore Roosevelt&quot; Battle Group and commanded Battle Force Sixth Fleet (CTF 60) during NATOs combat Operation Deliberate Force in Bosnia. Admiral Fallon served as Commander, U.S. Second Fleet and Commander, Striking Fleet Atlantic from November 1997 to September 2000.

Shore duties included assignment as Aide and Flag Lieutenant to the Commander, Fleet Air Jacksonville, and to the staffs of Commander, Reconnaissance Attack Wing One; Commander, Operational Test Force, and Commander, Naval Air Force, U.S. Atlantic Fleet. He has served as Deputy Director for Operations, Joint Task Force Southwest Asia (JTF-SWA) in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, and as Deputy Director, Aviation Plans and Requirements on the Staff of the Chief of Naval Operations in Washington, D.C. His first flag officer assignment was with NATO as Assistant Chief of Staff, Plans and Policy for Supreme Allied Commander, Atlantic. He was then assigned as Deputy and Chief of Staff, U.S. Atlantic Fleet followed by assignment as Deputy Commander in Chief and Chief of Staff, U.S. Atlantic Command. Nominated for his fourth star, he became the 31st Vice Chief of Naval Operations in October 2000.

In February 2001, while serving as Vice Chief of Naval Operations, Fallon was given Presidential special envoy status and dispatched to Japan to apologize for the collision between the U.S. Navy submarine &quot;USS Greeneville&quot; and the Japanese fisheries training vessel &quot;Ehime Maru&quot;. The accident killed nine Japanese crewmembers, including four high school students. Fallon, along with Ambassador Tom Foley, met with family members of the victims at the Ambassador&#x27;s official residence in Tokyo and in the &quot;Ehime Maru&quot;&#x27;s home port of Uwajima, Ehime Prefecture, bowing deeply and expressing regret on behalf of the United States and President George W. Bush. His deferential show of contrition to the families, carried out in front of news cameras, was widely credited with defusing an incident that could have damaged U.S.-Japan relations.

In 2002, he told the U.S. Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works Committee that the military should be exempted from certain environmental laws because the laws affected the military&#x27;s ability to conduct operations at its bases.

In February 2003, he authorized the Navy&#x27;s Task Force Uniform initiative that led to the creation of the Navy Working Uniform and Navy Service Uniform.

He was then nominated and confirmed for assignment as the Commander, U.S. Fleet Forces Command and U.S. Atlantic Fleet from October 2003 to February 2005; during that time, he was assigned to Operation Iraqi Freedom. Following that, he received a rare third assignment as a four-star military officer, as Commander, U.S. Pacific Command from February 2005 until March 2007.

At Pacific Command, Fallon took a conciliatory approach towards China.

===United States Central Command===

On 4 January 2007, President Bush nominated Fallon for his fourth four-star command to replace John Abizaid, who was retiring from the U.S. Army, as Commander of the United States Central Command, (CENTCOM).

The United States Senate confirmed Admiral Fallon as the first Navy admiral to command CENTCOM on February 7. He relieved General Abizaid on 16 March 2007.

As combatant commander of Central Command, Fallon was General David Petraeus&#x27;s superior officer, who was at that time the commander of Multinational Force Iraq. Petraeus succeeded Fallon as CENTCOM commander, relieving the &quot;Acting&quot; CENTCOM Commander, then-Lieutenant General Martin Dempsey on 31 October 2008.

As CENTCOM commander, Fallon often criticized Iran while also encouraging negotiations. On 28 May 2007, he noted that the United States would continue to have a military presence in the Middle East, despite Iran wishing otherwise. However, he also said, &quot;We have to figure out a way to come to an arrangement with them [Iran]&quot;. In an Al-Jazeera broadcast on 30 September 2007, he criticized those publicly urging war, stating &quot;This constant drum beat of conflict is what strikes me which is not helpful and not useful. [...] I expect that there will be no war and that is what we ought to be working for.&quot; He also stated that Iran was not as strong as it claimed, &quot;Not militarily, economically or politically.&quot; and he referred to Iranians as ants, &quot;These guys are ants. When the time comes, you crush them.&quot;

====Resignation====
On 11 March 2008 Secretary of Defense Robert Gates announced the resignation of Fallon as CENTCOM Commander. He stated that Fallon&#x27;s reason for resigning centered on the controversy regarding a recent article in &quot;Esquire&quot; magazine which depicted him as openly criticizing the Bush administration with specific regard to American policy towards Iran.

After his widely publicized resignation, interpreted as opposition to military action against Iran, the conservative &quot;The Washington Times&quot; countered with a report that Fallon&#x27;s active and retired military critics believed that he was &quot;pushed to resign&quot; by higher officials because &quot;he failed to prevent foreign fighters and munitions from entering Iraq&quot;. After his resignation as CENTCOM commander, he retired from military service.

==Post service life==
Fallon joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Center for International Studies as a Robert Wilhelm Fellow for nine months, starting August 2008. He was to collaborate with the MIT community in research, seminars, conferences and other intellectual projects.

Fallon was the commencement speaker at the 2009 commencement ceremonies at his alma mater, Villanova University. He also was the 2009 commencement speaker for the University of California, San Diego&#x27;s Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific Studies.

Starting in June 2009, Admiral Fallon served as co-chair of the Center for Strategic &amp; International Studies Commission on Smart Global Health Policy alongside the President and CEO of CARE, Helene D. Gayle where he discussed his experiences with the security dimensions of global health. Admiral Fallon contributed in multiple conferences and policy discussions and attended a summer tour of Kenya that included the Kibera slums. At a global health event in the North Carolina Research Triangle, Admiral Fallon gave the keynote address:
I spent more than 40 years of my life serving in the U.S. Navy, serving around the world, as well as Commander of both U.S. Pacific Command and U.S. Central Command. When I was a student at the U.S. Naval War College, security was defined in very traditional terms. It was the business of competing sovereign state actors with defined borders who pursue hard national interests.

Working on the ground in the far corners of the world, however, I came to appreciate that security today is much more about basic day-to-day existence – it&#x27;s primarily about the security of the individual. Included in this, the way people relate to each other, their families, their jobs and their communities. It is broader and far more personal than traditional notions of security. And at the heart of human security is health.
Admiral Fallon joined Tilwell Petroleum LLC in August, 2009 as a partner and advisor for the company&#x27;s strategic business development program. &quot;We are excited to have Admiral Fallon join our team at Tilwell,&quot; said Tony Cardwell, Managing Member of Tilwell. &quot;Admiral Fallon&#x27;s extensive experience in the Navy and his work with government and non-governmental agencies is a great addition to Tilwell as we continue to expand our customer base and support for both military and commercial applications.&quot;

Admiral Fallon was named chief executive officer of NeuralIQ Government Services, Inc. in March 2010.

Admiral Fallon was on the Board of Directors of Frontier Services Group from April 2014 through April 2016 .

==Ranks and promotions==
:Villanova University, NROTC, Midshipman – Class of 1967


==Awards and decorations==

==References==
==External links==


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1355824" start="0" end="21" title="William J. Fallon" label="William Joseph Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="59" end="77" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057849" start="88" end="95" title="Admiral (United States)" label="admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="188" end="208" title="U.S. Central Command" label="U.S. Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410469" start="352" end="372" title="U.S. Pacific Command" label="U.S. Pacific Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="418" end="443" title="U.S. Fleet Forces Command" label="U.S. Fleet Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373217" start="489" end="519" title="Vice Chief of Naval Operations" label="Vice Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="721" end="737" title="Esquire Magazine" label="Esquire Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q988515" start="892" end="915" title="East Orange, New Jersey" label="East Orange, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083230" start="930" end="955" title="Merchantville, New Jersey" label="Merchantville, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025732" start="975" end="1002" title="Camden Catholic High School" label="Camden Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710598" start="1006" end="1029" title="Cherry Hill, New Jersey" label="Cherry Hill, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="1050" end="1070" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981909" start="1111" end="1120" title="Navy ROTC" label="Navy ROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981815" start="1150" end="1170" title="Naval Flight Officer" label="Naval Flight Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="1253" end="1270" title="Naval War College" label="Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q54264" start="1274" end="1295" title="Newport, Rhode Island" label="Newport, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q137269" start="1305" end="1325" title="National War College" label="National War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474100" start="1409" end="1432" title="Old Dominion University" label="Old Dominion University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981967" start="1457" end="1514" title="Naval War College Distinguished Graduate Leadership Award" label="Naval War College Distinguished Graduate Leadership Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="1547" end="1573" title="Doctorate" label="Doctor of Military Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q321162" start="1685" end="1718" title="Naval Air Station Pensacola" label="Naval Air Station (NAS) Pensacola"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015119" start="1734" end="1744" title="NAS Glynco" label="NAS Glynco"/>
<link wikidata="Q858769" start="1788" end="1803" title="RA-5C Vigilante" label="RA-5C Vigilante"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016415" start="1807" end="1832" title="Naval Air Station Sanford" label="Naval Air Station Sanford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855880" start="1848" end="1872" title="Naval Air Station Albany" label="Naval Air Station Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1918" end="1925" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q332809" start="1943" end="1956" title="A-6 Intruder" label="A-6E Intruder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394215" start="1968" end="1978" title="NAS Oceana" label="NAS Oceana"/>
<link wikidata="Q477983" start="2116" end="2132" title="Carrier air wing" label="Carrier air wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="2158" end="2165" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="2167" end="2175" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="2180" end="2192" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2198" end="2215" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7906423" start="2369" end="2387" title="Attack Squadron 65 (U.S. Navy)" label="Attack Squadron 65"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045042" start="2481" end="2503" title="Carrier Air Wing Eight" label="Carrier Air Wing Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="2580" end="2592" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2597" end="2619" title="Gulf War" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940261" start="2652" end="2671" title="Carrier Strike Group 8" label="Carrier Group Eight"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="2700" end="2713" title="Mediterranean Sea" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17144483" start="2786" end="2819" title="Task Force 60" label="Battle Force Sixth Fleet (CTF 60)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2827" end="2831" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q160774" start="2840" end="2866" title="Operation Deliberate Force" label="Operation Deliberate Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="2870" end="2876" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594828" start="2914" end="2931" title="United States Second Fleet" label="U.S. Second Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017076" start="3089" end="3111" title="Naval Air Station Jacksonville" label="Fleet Air Jacksonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3486" end="3502" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="3546" end="3550" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373217" start="3853" end="3883" title="Vice Chief of Naval Operations" label="Vice Chief of Naval Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051391" start="3999" end="4012" title="Envoy (title)" label="special envoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="4038" end="4043" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588295" start="4065" end="4200" title="Ehime Maru and USS Greeneville collision" label="collision between the U.S. Navy submarine &amp;quot;USS Greeneville&amp;quot; and the Japanese fisheries training vessel &amp;quot;Ehime Maru&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q577751" start="4316" end="4325" title="Tom Foley" label="Tom Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="4413" end="4418" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q845857" start="4473" end="4480" title="Uwajima, Ehime" label="Uwajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q123376" start="4482" end="4498" title="Ehime Prefecture" label="Ehime Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="4571" end="4595" title="George W. Bush" label="President George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227243" start="4757" end="4777" title="Japan–United States relations" label="U.S.-Japan relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19297117" start="5135" end="5155" title="Navy Working Uniform" label="Navy Working Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885163" start="5160" end="5180" title="Navy Service Uniform" label="Navy Service Uniform"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297940" start="5252" end="5277" title="U.S. Fleet Forces Command" label="U.S. Fleet Forces Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="5375" end="5398" title="Iraq War" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410469" start="5499" end="5519" title="U.S. Pacific Command" label="U.S. Pacific Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="5686" end="5700" title="George W. Bush" label="President Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q539021" start="5762" end="5774" title="John Abizaid" label="John Abizaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="5802" end="5811" title="United States Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="5833" end="5862" title="United States Central Command" label="United States Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="5880" end="5900" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="5963" end="5970" title="CENTCOM" label="CENTCOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q143467" start="6036" end="6055" title="combatant commander" label="combatant commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q28591" start="6095" end="6109" title="David Petraeus" label="David Petraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="6173" end="6197" title="Multinational Force Iraq" label="Multinational Force Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q13477" start="6703" end="6713" title="Al Jazeera Arabic" label="Al-Jazeera"/>
<link wikidata="Q735015" start="7245" end="7265" title="United States Secretary of Defense" label="Secretary of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q212979" start="7266" end="7278" title="Robert Gates" label="Robert Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q762195" start="7451" end="7458" title="Esquire (magazine)" label="Esquire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719918" start="7519" end="7538" title="Presidency of George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="7587" end="7591" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098642" start="7650" end="7692" title="opposition to military action against Iran" label="opposition to military action against Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q494170" start="7717" end="7737" title="The Washington Times" label="The Washington Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="8104" end="8141" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8186" end="8207" title="Robert Wilhelm Fellow" label="Robert Wilhelm Fellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053614" start="8696" end="8744" title="Center for Strategic &amp;amp; International Studies" label="Center for Strategic &amp;amp; International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725393" start="8765" end="8778" title="global health" label="Global Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q699385" start="8821" end="8825" title="CARE (relief agency)" label="CARE"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703847" start="8827" end="8842" title="Helene D. Gayle" label="Helene D. Gayle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725393" start="8910" end="8923" title="global health" label="global health"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="9029" end="9034" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q579521" start="9053" end="9059" title="Kibera" label="Kibera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="9099" end="9113" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q767860" start="9114" end="9131" title="Research Triangle" label="Research Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410469" start="9293" end="9313" title="U.S. Pacific Command" label="U.S. Pacific Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476046" start="9318" end="9338" title="U.S. Central Command" label="U.S. Central Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q575662" start="9368" end="9390" title="U.S. Naval War College" label="U.S. Naval War College"/>
<link wikidata="Q42309964" start="10673" end="10696" title="Frontier Services Group" label="Frontier Services Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="10761" end="10781" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6981909" start="10783" end="10788" title="NROTC" label="NROTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q11141137" start="10790" end="10800" title="Midshipman" label="Midshipman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871481" wikidata="Q1855882" url="?curid=871481" title="Timok Valley">
<text>The Timok Valley (; ; ) is a geographical region in east Serbia around the Timok River. The Timok Valley corresponds to parts of two Serbian districts (Bor and Zaječar), with a total 2022 census population of 200,785.

==Name==
The Serbian name is derived from the hydronym &quot;Timok&quot; and &quot;krajina&quot; (&quot;frontier, march&quot;), named such due to its location and history as a borderland. It was introduced in the Interwar period as denoting the Timok confluence with the Negotin Valley and Ključ, which are part of the Timok Valley. The term has no historical or geographical basis. In Romanian, the term &quot;Timoc Valley&quot; () is used for the area inhabited by the Romanian-speaking Vlachs. &quot;Tribalia&quot; is also used in Romanian. The region was sometimes known as Podunavia in medieval times.

==Geography==
The Timok Valley roughly corresponds to the Bor and Zaječar districts of Serbia. It includes six municipalities and two cities: 
*Zaječar – 66,000
*Bor – 44,000
*Negotin – 37,000
*Knjaževac – 32,000
*Sokobanja – 19,000
*Kladovo – 21,000
*Boljevac – 15,000
*Majdanpek – 20,000

The largest city in the region is Zaječar, and therefore functions as its cultural, urban, and economic centre. It consists of four municipalities: Stari grad (old parts of the city: Vlačić, Kraljevica, Karađorđev venac, Šljivarsko brdo, Lubničko brdo, Oskoruša, Pazaršte, Zvezdan, Podliv, Veliki izvor), Kotlujevac (Ključ 1,2,3,4, Živinarnik, Selište, Vlaško brdo, Beli breg), Grljan (south suburban parts and Višnjar) and Salaš (north suburban parts). The largest municipality is Koltlujevac, with a population of over 25,000.

===Climate===
Zaječar, the biggest city in the region, has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Dfa&quot;), bordering on a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification: &quot;Cfa&quot;).
==History==
Early Bronze Age pottery of the Kostolac-Kocofeni culture has been found throughout the region. During the Roman era, the area was administratively part of the Dacia Ripensis. During emperor Justinian&#x27;s reign there were numerous fortifications in the area. Notable Roman sites include Timacum Minus, Trajan&#x27;s Bridge, Diana Fortress, and others.
The Bulgarian ruler Ivan Stratsimir (Vidin principate) and Wallachian Voivode Mircea the Elder controlled the territory of Podunavia until the Ottoman conquest in the 14th century. Several settlements in the region received Habsburg monarchy frontier status after the Treaty of Passarowitz (1718); the area became a frontier towards the Ottoman Empire.

A peasant uprising took place in 1883 in the Timok Valley, in Eastern Serbia, known as the Timok Rebellion. The peasant movement of 1883 resulted from economic, political and social factors.

Between 1918 and 1922, two districts of the Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes existed in the area – Krajina District, with seat in Negotin, and Timok District with seat in Zaječar. In 1922, these two districts were merged into the newly formed Timok Oblast with seat in Zaječar. Timok Oblast existed until 1929 when it was included into the newly formed Morava Banovina with seat in Niš. At present there are two districts in the area: Bor District with seat in Bor; and Zaječar District with seat in Zaječar.

==Culture==
===Ethnic groups===
The region is inhabited by a majority of Serbs and minority of Romanians/Vlachs. Based on the 2002 census and results in the Bor and Zaječar Districts (which together had 284,112 inhabitants), there were 85,58% Serbs, 8,31% Vlachs and 0,96% Romani. The Serb community traditionally speak the Kosovo–Resava dialect in the north and the Prizren-Timok dialect in the south; however, Standard Serbian is used in formal communication. The Vlachs speak a variety of two dialects (Banat and Oltenian dialects) of the Romanian language, which awaits standardization into a hypothetical new language for the Vlachs. Both Serbs and Vlachs are Eastern Orthodox by denomination. There is currently controversy regarding the ethnic identification of the Vlach community and whether they are Romanians or not.

==Gallery==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1855882" start="4" end="16" title="Timok Valley" label="Timok Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q82794" start="29" end="48" title="geographical region" label="geographical region"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="57" end="63" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q753919" start="75" end="86" title="Timok River" label="Timok River"/>
<link wikidata="Q477586" start="152" end="155" title="Bor District" label="Bor"/>
<link wikidata="Q967339" start="160" end="167" title="Zaječar District" label="Zaječar"/>
<link wikidata="Q932103" start="265" end="273" title="hydronym" label="hydronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786352" start="302" end="309" title="krajina" label="krajina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695" start="333" end="338" title="March (territorial entity)" label="march"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="432" end="447" title="Kingdom of Yugoslavia" label="Interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q729544" start="490" end="504" title="Negotin Valley" label="Negotin Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="509" end="514" title="Ključ (region)" label="Ključ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="605" end="613" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q126010" start="708" end="714" title="Vlachs of Serbia" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q477586" start="885" end="888" title="Bor District" label="Bor"/>
<link wikidata="Q967339" start="893" end="900" title="Zaječar District" label="Zaječar"/>
<link wikidata="Q15284" start="938" end="952" title="municipality" label="municipalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="961" end="967" title="city" label="cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q144495" start="971" end="978" title="Zaječar" label="Zaječar"/>
<link wikidata="Q462461" start="989" end="992" title="Bor, Serbia" label="Bor"/>
<link wikidata="Q649168" start="1003" end="1010" title="Negotin" label="Negotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011275" start="1021" end="1030" title="Knjaževac" label="Knjaževac"/>
<link wikidata="Q772805" start="1041" end="1050" title="Sokobanja" label="Sokobanja"/>
<link wikidata="Q27163" start="1061" end="1068" title="Kladovo" label="Kladovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047431" start="1079" end="1087" title="Boljevac" label="Boljevac"/>
<link wikidata="Q994331" start="1098" end="1107" title="Majdanpek" label="Majdanpek"/>
<link wikidata="Q144495" start="1152" end="1159" title="Zaječar" label="Zaječar"/>
<link wikidata="Q20823050" start="1371" end="1379" title="Oskoruša" label="Oskoruša"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856115" start="1709" end="1734" title="humid continental climate" label="humid continental climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1736" end="1765" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="1800" end="1825" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1827" end="1856" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1894" end="1904" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="1905" end="1912" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603061" start="1920" end="1945" title="Kostolac-Kocofeni culture" label="Kostolac-Kocofeni culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156891" start="2048" end="2062" title="Dacia Ripensis" label="Dacia Ripensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804557" start="2178" end="2191" title="Timacum Minus" label="Timacum Minus"/>
<link wikidata="Q849786" start="2193" end="2213" title="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Bridge" label="Trajan&amp;#x27;s Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q508458" start="2215" end="2229" title="Diana Fortress" label="Diana Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q556835" start="2263" end="2278" title="Ivan Sratsimir of Bulgaria" label="Ivan Stratsimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q322043" start="2321" end="2337" title="Mircea I of Wallachia" label="Mircea the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="2467" end="2484" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q211395" start="2511" end="2532" title="Treaty of Passarowitz" label="Treaty of Passarowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2580" end="2594" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270123" start="2688" end="2703" title="Timok Rebellion" label="Timok Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q191077" start="2833" end="2870" title="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes" label="Kingdom of Serbs, Croats and Slovenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q649168" start="2924" end="2931" title="Negotin" label="Negotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q144495" start="2965" end="2972" title="Zaječar" label="Zaječar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269919" start="3147" end="3162" title="Morava Banovina" label="Morava Banovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q129259" start="3176" end="3179" title="Niš" label="Niš"/>
<link wikidata="Q477586" start="3229" end="3241" title="Bor District" label="Bor District"/>
<link wikidata="Q462461" start="3255" end="3258" title="Bor, Serbia" label="Bor"/>
<link wikidata="Q967339" start="3264" end="3280" title="Zaječar District" label="Zaječar District"/>
<link wikidata="Q127885" start="3377" end="3382" title="Serbs" label="Serbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q485150" start="3399" end="3408" title="Romanians" label="Romanians"/>
<link wikidata="Q126010" start="3409" end="3415" title="Vlachs of Serbia" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361508" start="3577" end="3583" title="Romani in Serbia" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9299" start="3725" end="3732" title="Serbian language" label="Serbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853970" start="3810" end="3815" title="Banat Romanian dialect" label="Banat"/>
<link wikidata="Q97552542" start="3820" end="3828" title="Oltenian dialect" label="Oltenian"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871490" wikidata="Q1860604" url="?curid=871490" title="1946 Dutch general election">
<text>General elections were held in the Netherlands on 17 May 1946, the first after World War II. The Catholic People&#x27;s Party, a continuation of the pre-war Roman Catholic State Party, remained the largest party in the House of Representatives, winning 32 of the 100 seats.

Following the elections, the Catholic People&#x27;s Party formed a grand coalition government with the Labour Party.

==Results==
Indicated changes in seats are compared to the Schermerhorn-Drees cabinet appointed by Queen Wilhelmina after World War II.

===By province===
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="35" end="46" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="79" end="91" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548365" start="97" end="125" title="Catholic People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Catholic People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673126" start="157" end="183" title="Roman Catholic State Party" label="Roman Catholic State Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q233262" start="219" end="243" title="House of Representatives of the Netherlands" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323229" start="452" end="478" title="Schermerhorn-Drees cabinet" label="Schermerhorn-Drees cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q302958" start="492" end="497" title="Monarchy of the Netherlands" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q150747" start="498" end="508" title="Wilhelmina of the Netherlands" label="Wilhelmina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871497" wikidata="Q757522" url="?curid=871497" title="Atmospheric railway">
<text>An atmospheric railway uses differential air pressure to provide power for propulsion of a railway vehicle. A static power source can transmit motive power to the vehicle in this way, avoiding the necessity of carrying mobile power generating equipment. The air pressure, or partial vacuum (i.e., negative relative pressure) can be conveyed to the vehicle in a continuous pipe, where the vehicle carries a piston running in the tube. Some form of re-sealable slot is required to enable the piston to be attached to the vehicle. Alternatively the entire vehicle may act as the piston in a large tube or be coupled electromagnetically to the piston.

Several variants of the principle were proposed in the early 19th century, and a number of practical forms were implemented, but all were overcome by unforeseen disadvantages and discontinued within a few years.

A modern proprietary system has been developed and is in use for short-distance applications. Porto Alegre Metro airport connection in Porto Alegre, Brazil, is one of them.

==History==
In the early days of railways, single vehicles or groups were propelled by men or horses. As mechanical power came to be understood, locomotive engines were developed; the &quot;iron horse&quot;. These had serious limitations; in particular, being much heavier than the wagons in use, they frequently broke the rails. Also, lack of adhesion (i.e. slip) at the iron-to-iron wheel-rail interface was a limitation, for example in trials on the Kilmarnock and Troon Railway.

Many engineers turned their attention to transmitting power from a static power source, a &quot;stationary engine&quot;, to a moving train. Such an engine could be more robust and with more available space, potentially more powerful. The solution to transmitting the power, before the days of practical electricity, was the use of either a cable system or air pressure.

===Medhurst===
In 1799, George Medhurst of London discussed the idea of moving goods pneumatically through cast iron pipes, and in 1812, he proposed blowing passenger carriages through a tunnel.

Medhurst proposed two alternative systems: either the vehicle itself was the piston, or the tube was relatively small with a separate piston. He never patented his ideas and they were not taken further by him.

==19th century==

===Vallance===
In 1824, a man called Vallance took out a patent and built a short demonstration line; his system consisted of a diameter cast-iron tube with rails cast in to the lower part; the vehicle was the full size of the tube, and bear skin was used to seal the annular space. Braking was accomplished by opening doors at each end of the vehicle. Vallance&#x27;s system worked, but was not adopted commercially.

===Pinkus===

In 1835, Henry Pinkus patented a system with a square section tube with a low degree of vacuum, limiting leakage loss. He later changed to a small-bore vacuum tube. He proposed to seal the slot that enabled the piston to connect with the vehicle with a continuous rope; rollers on the vehicle lifted the rope in front of the piston connection and returned it afterwards.

He built a demonstration line alongside the Kensington Canal, and issued a prospectus for his &quot;National Pneumatic Railway Association&quot;. He was unable to interest investors, and his system failed when the rope stretched. However, his concept, a small bore pipe with a resealable slot was the prototype for many successor systems.

===Samuda and Clegg===

====Developing a practical scheme====
Jacob and Joseph Samuda were shipbuilders and engineers, and owned the Southwark Ironworks; they were both members of the Institution of Civil Engineers. Samuel Clegg was a gas engineer and they worked in collaboration on their atmospheric system. About 1835, they read Medhurst&#x27;s writings, and developed a small bore vacuum pipe system. Clegg worked on a longitudinal flap valve, for sealing the slot in the pipe.

In 1838, they took out a patent &quot;for a new improvement in valves&quot; and built a full-scale model at Southwark. In 1840, Jacob Samuda and Clegg leased half a mile of railway line on the West London Railway at Wormholt Scrubs (later renamed Wormwood Scrubs), where the railway had not yet been opened to the public. In that year Clegg left for Portugal, where he was pursuing his career in the gas industry.

Samuda&#x27;s system involved a continuous (jointed) cast iron pipe laid between the rails of a railway track; the pipe had a slot in the top. The leading vehicle in a train was a &quot;piston carriage&quot;, which carried a piston inserted in the tube. It was held by a bracket system that passed through the slot, and the actual piston was on a pole ahead of the point at which the bracket left the slot. The slot was sealed from the atmosphere by a continuous leather flap that was opened immediately in advance of the piston bracket and closed again immediately behind it. A pumping station ahead of the train would pump air from the tube, and atmospheric pressure behind the piston would push it forward.

The Wormwood Scrubs demonstration ran for two years. The traction pipe was of 9 inches diameter, and a 16 hp stationary engine was used for power. The gradient on the line was a steady 1 in 115. In his treatise, described below, Samuda implies that the pipe would be used in one direction only, and the fact that only one pumping station was erected suggests that trains were gravitated back to the lower end of the run after the atmospheric ascent, as was later done on the Dalkey line (below). Many of the runs were public. Samuda quotes the loads and degree of vacuum and speed of some of the runs; there seems to be little correlation; for example:

* 11 June 1840: 11 tons 10 cwt; maximum speed 22.5 mph; 15 inches of vacuum
* 10 August 1840: 5 tons 0 cwt; maximum speed 30 mph; 20 inches of vacuum.

====Competing solutions====
There was enormous public interest in the ideas surrounding atmospheric railways, and at the same time as Samuda was developing his scheme, others put other ideas forward.

* Nickels and Keane propelled trains by pumping air into a continuous canvas tube. The trains had a pair of pinch rollers squeezing the outside of the tube, and the air pressure forced the vehicles forward. The effect was the converse of squeezing a toothpaste tube. They claimed a successful demonstration in a timber yard in Waterloo Road.
* James Pilbrow proposed a loose piston fitted with a toothed rack. Cog wheels would be turned by it, and they were on spindle passing through glands to the outside of the tube. The leading carriage of the train would have a corresponding rack and be impelled forward by the rotation of the cog wheels. Thus the vehicle would keep pace with the piston exactly, without any direct connection to it.
* Henry Lacey conceived a wooden tube, made by coopers as a long, continuous barrel with the opening slot and a timber flap retained by an india-rubber hinge.
* Clarke and Varley proposed sheet iron tubes with a continuous longitudinal slit. If the tubes were made to precision standards, the vacuum would keep the slit closed, but the piston bracket on the train would spring the slit open enough to pass The elasticity of the tube would close it again behind the piston carriage.
* Joseph Shuttleworth suggested a hydraulic tube where water pressure rather than a partial atmospheric vacuum would propel the train. In mountainous areas where plentiful water was available, a pumping station would be unnecessary: the water would be used directly. Instead of the flap to seal the slot in the tube, a continuous shaped sealing rope, made of cloth impregnated with india-rubber would be within the pipe. Guides on the piston would lift it into position and the water pressure would hold it in place behind the train. Use of a positive pressure enabled a greater pressure differential than a vacuum system. However, the water in the pipe would have to be drained manually by staff along the pipe after every train.

===Samuda&#x27;s treatise===

In 1841, Joseph Samuda published &quot;A Treatise on the Adaptation of Atmospheric Pressure to the Purposes of Locomotion on Railways&quot;.

It ran to 50 pages, and Samuda described his system; first the traction pipe:
The moving power is communicated to the train through a continuous pipe or main, laid between the rails, which is exhausted by air pumps worked by stationary steam engines, fixed on the road side, the distance between them varying from one to three miles, according to the nature and traffic of the road. A piston, which is introduced into this pipe, is attached to the leading carriage in each train, through a lateral opening, and is made to travel forward by means of the exhaustion created in front of it. The continuous pipe is fixed between the rails and bolted to the sleepers which carry them; the inside of the tube is unbored, but lined or coated with tallow 1/10th of an inch thick, to equalize the surface and prevent any unnecessary friction from the passage of the travelling piston through it.

The operation of the closure valve was to be critical:
Along the upper surface of the pipe is a continuous slit or groove about two inches wide. This groove is covered by a valve, extending the whole length of the railway, formed of a strip of leather riveted between iron plates, the top plates being wider than the groove and serving to prevent the external air forcing the leather into the pipe when the vacuum is formed within it; and the lower plates fitting into the groove when the valve is shut, makes up the circle of the pipe, and prevents the air from passing the piston; one edge of this valve is securely held down by iron bars, fastened by screw bolts to a longitudinal rib cast on the pipe, and allows the leather between the plates and the bar to act as a hinge, similar to a common pump valve; the other edge of the valve falls into a groove which contains a composition of beeswax and tallow: this composition is solid at the temperature of the atmosphere, and becomes fluid when heated a few degrees above it. Over this valve is a protecting cover, which serves to preserve it from snow or rain, formed of thin plates of iron about five feet long hinged with leather, and the end of each plate underlaps the next in the direction of the piston&#x27;s motion, thus ensuring the lifting of each in succession.

The piston carriage would open and then close the valve:
To the underside of the first carriage in each train is attached the piston and its appurtenances; a rod passing horizontally from the piston is attached to a connecting arm, about six feet behind the piston. This connecting arm passes through the continuous groove in the pipe, and being fixed to the carriage, imparts motion to the train as the tube becomes exhausted; to the piston rod are also attached four steel wheels, (two in advance and two behind the connecting arm,) which serve to lift the valve, and form a space for the passage of the connecting arm, and also for the admission of air to the back of the piston; another steel wheel is attached to the carriage, regulated by a spring, which serves to ensure the perfect closing of the valve, by running over the top plates immediately after the arm has passed. A copper tube or heater, about ten feet long, constantly kept hot by a small stove, also fixed to the underside of the carriage, passes over and melts the surface of the composition (which has been broken by lifting the valve,) which upon cooling becomes solid, and hermetically seals the valve. Thus each train in passing leaves the pipe in a fit state to receive the next train.

Entering and leaving the pipe was described:
The continuous pipe is divided into suitable sections (according to the respective distance of the fixed steam engines) by separating valves, which are opened by the train as it goes along: these valves are so constructed that no stoppage or diminution of speed is necessary in passing from one section to another. The exit separating valve, or that at the end of the section nearest to its steam engine, is opened by the compression of air in front of the piston, which necessarily takes place after it has passed the branch which communicates with the air-pump; the entrance separating valve, (that near the commencement of the next section of pipe,) is an equilibrium or balance valve, and opens immediately the piston has entered the pipe. The main pipe is put together with deep socket joints, in each of which an annular space is left about the middle of the packing, and filled with a semi-fluid: thus any possible leakage of air into the pipe is prevented.

At that time railways were developing rapidly, and solutions to the technical limitations of the day were eagerly sought, and not always rationally evaluated. Samuda&#x27;s treatise put forward the advantages of his system:

* transmission of power to trains from static (atmospheric) power stations; the static machinery could be more fuel efficient;
* the train would be relieved of the necessity of carrying the power source, and fuel, with it;
* power available to the train would be greater so that steeper gradients could be negotiated; in building new lines this would hugely reduce construction costs by enabling reducing earthworks and tunnels;
* elimination of a heavy locomotive from the train would enable lighter and cheaper track materials to be used;
* passengers, and lineside residents, would be spared the nuisance of smoke emission from passing trains; this would be especially useful in tunnels;
* collisions between trains would be impossible, because only one train at a time could be handled on any section between two pumping stations; collisions were at the forefront of the mind of the general public in those days before modern signalling systems, when a train was permitted to follow a preceding train after a defined time interval, with no means of detecting whether that train had stalled somewhere ahead on the line;
* the piston travelling in the tube would hold the piston carriage down and, Samuda claimed, prevent derailments, enabling curves to be negotiated safely at high speed;
* persons on the railway would not be subjected to the risk of steam engine boiler explosions (then a very real possibility).

Samuda also rebutted criticisms of his system that had become widespread:

* that if a pumping station failed the whole line would be closed because no train could pass that point; Samuda explained that a pipe arrangement would enable the next pumping station ahead to supply that section; if this was at reduced pressure, the train would nonetheless be able to pass, albeit with a small loss of time;
* that leakage of air at the flap or the pipe joints would critically weaken the vacuum effect; Samuda pointed to experience and test results on his demonstration line, where this was evidently not a problem;
* the capital cost of the engine houses was a huge burden; Samuda observed that the capital cost of steam locomotives was eliminated, and running costs for fuel and maintenance could be expected to be lower.

====A patent====
In April 1844, Jacob and Joseph Samuda took out a patent for their system. Soon after this, Joseph Samuda died and it was left to his brother Jacob to continue the work. The patent was in three parts: the first describing the atmospheric pipe and piston system, the second describing how in areas of plentiful water supply, the vacuum might be created by using tanks of water at differing levels; and the third section dealt with level crossings of an atmospheric railway.

===Dalkey Atmospheric Railway===

The Dublin and Kingstown Railway opened in 1834 connecting the port of Dún Laoghaire (then called Kingstown) to Dublin, Ireland; it was a standard gauge line. In 1840, it was desired to extend the line to Dalkey, a distance of about two miles. A horse tramway on the route was acquired and converted: it had been used to bring stone from a quarry for the construction of the harbour. It was steeply graded (at 1 in 115 with a 440-yard stretch of 1 in 57) and heavily curved, the sharpest being 570 yards radius. This presented significant difficulties to the locomotives then in use. The treasurer of the company, James Pim, was visiting London and hearing of Samuda&#x27;s project he viewed it. He considered it to be perfect for the requirements of his company, and after petitioning government for a loan of £26,000, it was agreed to install it on the Dalkey line. Thus became the Dalkey Atmospheric Railway.

A 15-inch traction pipe was used, with a single pumping station at Dalkey, at the upper end of the 2,400-yard run. The engine created 110 ihp and had a flywheel of 36 feet diameter. Five minutes before the scheduled departure of a train from Kingstown, the pumping engine started work, creating a 15-inch vacuum in two minutes. The train was pushed manually to the position where the piston entered the pipe, and the train was held on the brakes until it was ready to start. When that time came, the brakes were released and the train moved off. (The electric telegraph was later installed, obviating reliance on the timetable for engine operation.)

On 17 August 1843, the tube was exhausted for the first time, and the following day a trial run was made. On Saturday 19 August, the line was opened to the public. In service, a typical speed of 30 mph was attained; return to Kingstown was by gravitation down the gradient, and slower. By March 1844, 35 train movements operated daily, and 4,500 passengers a week travelled on the line, mostly simply for the novelty.

It is recorded that a young man called Frank Elrington was on one occasion on the piston carriage, which was not attached to the train. On releasing the brake, the light vehicle shot off at high speed, covering the distance in 75 seconds, averaging .

As this was the first commercially operating atmospheric railway, it attracted the attention of many eminent engineers of the day, including Isambard Kingdom Brunel, Robert Stephenson, and Sir William Cubitt.

The line continued to operate successfully for ten years, outliving the atmospheric system on British lines, although the Paris – Saint Germain line continued until 1860.

When the system was abolished in 1855, a 2-2-2 steam locomotive named &quot;Princess&quot; was employed, incidentally the first steam engine to be manufactured in Ireland. Although a small machine, it successfully worked the steeply graded line for some years.

===Paris – Saint Germain===
In 1835, the brothers Pereire obtained a concession from the &quot;Compagnie du Chemin de fer de Paris à Saint-Germain&quot;. They opened their 19 km line in 1837, but only as far as Le Pecq, a river quay on the left bank of the Seine, as a daunting incline would have been necessary to reach Saint-Germain-en-Laye, and locomotives of the day were considered incapable of climbing the necessary gradient, adhesion being considered the limiting factor.

On hearing of the success of the Dalkey railway, the French minister of public works (M. Teste) and under-secretary of state (M. Le Grande) dispatched M. Mallet, inspecteur général honoraire des Ponts et Chaussées, to Dalkey. He wrote an exhaustive technical evaluation of the system installed there, and its potential, which included the results of measurements made with Joseph Samuda.

It was through his interest that the Pereire brothers decided to adopt the system for an extension to Saint Germain itself, and construction started in 1845, with a wooden bridge crossing the Seine followed by a twenty-arch masonry viaduct and two tunnels under the castle. The extension was opened on 15 April 1847; it was 1.5 km in length on a gradient of 1 in 28 (35 mm/m).

The traction pipe was laid between the rails; it had a diameter of with a slot at the top. The slot was closed by two leather flaps. The pumps were powered by two steam engines with a capacity of 200 hp, located between the two tunnels at Saint-Germain. Train speed on the ascent was . On the descent the train ran by gravity as far as Pecq, where the steam locomotive took over for the run to Paris.

The system was technically successful, but the development of more powerful steam locomotives led to its abandonment from 3 July 1860, when steam locomotive ran throughout from Paris to Saint Germain, being assisted by a pusher locomotive up the gradient. This arrangement continued for more than sixty years until the electrification of the line.

A correspondent of the &quot;Ohio State Journal&quot; described some details; there seem to have been two tube sections:

An iron tube is laid down in the centre of the track, which is sunk about one-third of its diameter in the bed of the road. For a distance of 5,500 yards the tube has a diameter of only 1¾ feet [i.e. 21 inches], the ascent here being so slight as not to require the same amount of force as is required on the steep grade to Saint Germain, where the pipe, for a distance of 3,800 yards, is 2 feet 1 inch [i.e. 25 inches] in diameter.

The steam engines had accumulators:

To each engine is adapted two large cylinders, which exhaust fourteen cubic feet of air per second. The pressure in the air cauldron (claudieres) attached to the exhausting machines is equal to six absolute atmospheres.

He described the valve:

Throughout the entire length of the tube, a section is made in the top, leaving an open space of about five inches. In each cut edge of the section there is an offset, to catch the edges of a valve which fits down upon it. The valve is made of a piece of sole leather half an inch thick, having plates of iron attached to it on both the upper and corresponding under side to give it strength ... which are perhaps one-fourth of an inch in thickness ... The plates are about nine inches long, and their ends, above and below, are placed three quarters of an inch apart, forming joints, so as to give the leather valve pliability, and at the same time firmness.

Clayton records the name of the engineer, Mallet, who had been Inspector general of Public Works, and gives a slightly different account: Clayton says that Mallet used a plaited rope to seal the slot. He also says that vacuum was created by condensing steam in a vacuum chamber between runs, but that may have been a misunderstanding of the pressure accumulators.

===London and Croydon Railway===

====A steam railway at first====
The London and Croydon Railway (L&amp;CR) obtained its authorising Act of Parliament in 1835, to build its line from a junction with the London and Greenwich Railway (L&amp;GR) to Croydon. At that time the L&amp;GR line was under construction, and Parliament resisted the building of two railway termini in the same quarter of London, so that the L&amp;CR would have to share the L&amp;GR&#x27;s London Bridge station. The line was built for ordinary locomotive operation. A third company, the London and Brighton Railway (L&amp;BR), was promoted, and it too had to share the route into London by running over the L&amp;CR.

When the lines opened in 1839, it was found that congestion arose due to the frequent stopping services on the local Croydon line; this was particularly a problem on the 1 in 100 ascent from New Cross to Dartmouth Arms. The L&amp;CR engineer, William Cubitt, proposed a solution to the problem: a third track would be laid on the east side of the existing double track main line, and all the local trains in both directions would use it. The faster Brighton trains would be freed of the delay following a stopping train. Cubitt had been impressed during his visit to the Dalkey line, and the new L&amp;CR third track would use atmospheric power. The local line would also be extended to Epsom, also as a single track atmospheric line. These arrangements were adopted and Parliamentary powers obtained on 4 July 1843, also authorising a line to a terminal at Bricklayers Arms. Arrangements were also made with the L&amp;GR for them to add an extra track on the common section of their route. On 1 May 1844, the Bricklayers Arms terminus opened, and a frequent service was run from it, additional to the London Bridge trains.

====Now atmospheric as well====
The L&amp;CR line diverged to the south-west at Norwood Junction (then called &quot;Jolly Sailor&quot;, after an inn), and needed to cross the L&amp;BR line. The atmospheric pipe made this impossible on the flat, and a flyover was constructed to enable the crossing: this was the first example in the railway world. This was in the form of a wooden viaduct with approach gradients of 1 in 50. A similar flyover was to be built at Corbetts Lane Junction, where the L&amp;CR additional line was to be on the north-east side of the existing line, but this was never made.

A 15-inch diameter traction pipe was installed between Forest Hill (then called &quot;Dartmouth Arms&quot;, also after a local inn) and Croydon (later renamed West Croydon. Although Samuda supervised the installation of the atmospheric apparatus, a weather flap, a hinged iron plate that covered the leather slot valve in the Dalkey installation, was omitted. The L&amp;CR had an Atmospheric Engineer, James Pearson. Maudslay, Son and Field supplied the three 100 hp steam engines and pumps at Dartmouth Arms, Jolly Sailor and Croydon, and elaborate engine houses had been erected for them. They were designed in a gothic style by W H Brakespear, and had tall chimneys which also exhausted the evacuated air at high level.

A two-needle electric telegraph system was installed on the line, enabling station staff to indicate to the remote engine house that a train was ready to start.

This section, from Dartmouth Arms to Croydon, began operation on the atmospheric system in January 1846.

The traction pipe slot and the piston bracket were handed; that is the slot closure flap was continuously hinged on one side, and the piston support bracket was cranked to minimise the necessary opening of the flap. This meant that the piston carriage could not simply be turned on a turntable at the end of a trip. Instead it was double ended, but the piston was manually transferred to the new leading end. The piston carriage itself had to be moved manually (or by horse power) to the leading end of the train. At Dartmouth Arms the station platform was an island between the two steam operated lines. Cubitt designed a special system of pointwork that enabled the atmospheric piston carriage to enter the ordinary track.

The Board of Trade inspector, General Pasley, visited the line on 1 November 1845 to approve it for opening of the whole line. &quot;The Times&quot; newspaper reported the event. A special train left London Bridge hauled by a steam locomotive; at Forest Hill the locomotive was detached and:

the piston carriage substituted and the train thence became actuated by atmospheric pressure. The train consisted of ten carriages (including that to which the piston is attached) and its weight was upward of fifty tons. At seven and a half minutes past two the train left the point of rest at the Dartmouth Arms, and at eight and three-quarter minutes past, the piston entered the valve, when it immediately occurred to us that one striking advantage of the system was the gentle, the almost imperceptible, motion on starting. On quitting the station on locomotive lines we have frequently experienced a &quot;jerk&quot; amounting at times to an absolute &quot;shock&quot; and sufficient to alarm the nervous and timid passenger. Nothing of the sort, however, was experienced here. Within a minute and a quarter of the piston entering the pipe, the speed attained against a strong headwind was at the rate of twelve miles an hour; in the next minute, viz. at eleven minutes past two, twenty-five miles an hour; at thirteen minutes past two, thirty-four miles an hour; fourteen minutes past two, forty miles an hour; and fifteen minutes past two, fifty-two miles an hour, which was maintained until sixteen minutes past two, when the speed began to diminish, and at seventeen and a half minutes past two, the train reached the Croydon terminus, thus performing the journey from Dartmouth Arms, five miles, in eight minutes and three-quarters. The barometer in the piston carriage indicated a vacuum of 25 inches and that in the engine house a vacuum of 28 inches.

The successful official public run was widely reported, and immediately new schemes for long-distance railways on the atmospheric system were being promoted; the South Devon Railway&#x27;s shares appreciated overnight.

====Opening====
Pasley&#x27;s report of 8 November was favourable, and the line was clear to open. The directors hesitated, desiring to gain a little more experience beforehand. On 19 December 1845 the crankshaft of the Forest Hill stationary engine fractured, and the engine was unusable. However, the part was quickly replaced and on 16 January 1846, the line opened.

At 11:00 that morning, the crankshaft of one of the Croydon engines broke. Two engines had been provided, so traffic was able to continue using the other, until at 7:20 p.m. that engine suffered the same fate. Again repairs were made until 10 February 1846, when both of the Croydon engines failed.

This was a bitter blow for the adherents of the atmospheric system; shortcomings in the manufacture of the stationary engines procured from a reputable engine-maker said nothing about the practicality of the atmospheric system itself, but as Samuda said to the Board:

&quot;The public cannot discriminate (because it cannot know) the cause of the interruptions, and every irregularity is attributed to the atmospheric system.&quot;

Two months later, the beam of one of the Forest Hill engines fractured. At this time the directors were making plans for the Epsom extension; they quickly revised their intended purchase of engines from Maudslay, and invited tenders; Boulton and Watt of Birmingham were awarded the contract, their price having been considerably less than their competitors&#x27;.

====Amalgamation====
The London and Brighton Railway amalgamated with the L&amp;CR on 6 July 1846, forming the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway (LB&amp;SCR). For the time being the directors of the larger company continued with the L&amp;CR&#x27;s intentions to use the atmospheric system.

====Technical difficulties====
The summer of 1846 was exceptionally hot and dry, and serious difficulties with the traction pipe flap valve started to show themselves. It was essential to make a good seal when the leather flap was closed, and the weather conditions made the leather stiff. As for the tallow-and-beeswax compound that was supposed to seal the joint after every train, Samuda had originally said &quot;this composition is solid at the temperature of the atmosphere, and becomes fluid when heated a few degrees above it&quot; and the hot weather had that effect. Samuda&#x27;s original description of his system had included a metal weather valve that closed over the flap, but this had been omitted on the L&amp;CR, exposing the valve to the weather, and also encouraging the ingestion of debris, including, an observer reported, a handkerchief dropped by a lady on to the track. Any debris lodging in the seating of the flap could only have reduced its effectiveness.

Moreover, the tallow – that is, rendered animal fat – was attractive to the rat population. An 1859 source reports rats entering the iron tube overnight to eat the tallow, and &quot;hundreds&quot; being killed each morning when the pump was activated for the first train. Delays became frequent, due to inability to create enough vacuum to move the trains, and stoppages on the steep approach inclines at the flyover were commonplace, and widely reported in the press.

The Directors now began to feel uneasy about the atmospheric system, and in particular the Epsom extension, which was to have three engines. In December 1846, they asked Boulton and Watt about cancelling the project, and were told that suspending the supply contract for a year would cost £2,300. The Directors agreed to this.

The winter of 1846/7 brought new meteorological difficulties: unusually cold weather made the leather flap stiff, and snow got into the tube resulting in more cancellations of the atmospheric service. A track worker was killed in February 1847 while steam substitution was in operation. This was tragically unfortunate, but it had the effect of widespread reporting that the atmospheric was, yet again, non-operational.

====Sudden end====
Through this long period, the Directors must have become less and less committed to pressing on with the atmospheric system, even as money was being spent on extending it towards London Bridge. (It opened from Dartmouth Arms to New Cross in January 1847, using gravitation northbound and the Dartmouth Arms pumping station southbound.) In a situation in which public confidence was important, the Directors could not express their doubts publicly, at least until a final decision had been taken. On 4 May 1847, the directors announced &quot;that the Croydon Atmospheric pipes were pulled up and the plan abandoned&quot;.

The reason seems not to have been made public at once, but the trigger seems to have been the insistence of the Board of Trade inspector on a second junction at the divergence of the Brighton and Epsom lines. It is not clear what this refers to, and may simply have been a rationalisation of the timing of a painful decision. Whatever the reason, there was to be no more atmospheric work on the LB&amp;SCR.

===South Devon Railway ===

====Getting authorisation====

The Great Western Railway (GWR) and the Bristol and Exeter Railway working collaboratively had reached Exeter on 1 May 1844, with a broad gauge railway connecting the city to London. Interested parties in Devonshire considered it important to extend the connection to Plymouth, but the terrain posed considerable difficulties: there was high ground with no easy route through.

After considerable controversy, the South Devon Railway Company (SDR) obtained its Act of Parliament authorising a line, on 4 July 1844.

====Determining the route====
The Company&#x27;s engineer was the innovative engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel. He had visited the Dalkey line and he had been impressed with the capabilities of the atmospheric system on that line. Samuda had always put forward the advantages of his system, which (he claimed) included much better hill climbing abilities and lighter weight on the track. This would enable a line in hilly terrain to be planned with steeper than usual gradients, saving substantial cost of construction.

If Brunel had decided definitely to use the atmospheric system at the planning stage, it would have allowed him to strike a route that would have been impossible with the locomotive technology of the day. The route of the South Devon Railway, still in use today, has steep gradients and is generally considered &quot;difficult&quot;. Commentators often blame this on it being designed for atmospheric traction; for example:

Sekon, describing the topography of the line, says that beyond Newton Abbot,

the conformation of the country is very unsuitable for the purpose of constructing a railway with good gradients. This drawback did not at the time trouble Mr. Brunel, the engineer to the South Devon Railway Company, since he proposed to work the line on the atmospheric principle, and one of the advantages claimed for the system being that steep banks were as easy to work as a level.

* The line &quot;was left with a legacy of a line built for atmospheric working with the consequent heavy gradients and sharp curves&quot;.
* Brunel &quot;seriously doubted the ability of any engine to tackle the kind of gradients which would be necessary on the South Devon&quot;.

In fact the decision to &quot;consider&quot; the adoption of the atmospheric system came &quot;after&quot; Parliamentary authorisation, and the route must have been finalised before submission to Parliament.

Eight weeks after passage of the Act, the shareholders heard that &quot;Since the passing of the Act, a proposal has been received ... from Messrs. Samuda Brothers ... to apply their system of traction to the South Devon Line.&quot; Brunel and a deputation of the directors had been asked to visit the Dalkey line. The report went on that as a result,

In view of the fact that at many points of the line both the gradients and curves will render the application of this principle particularly advantageous, your directors have resolved that the atmospheric system, including an electric telegraph, should be adopted on the whole line of the South Devon Railway.

====Construction and opening====

Construction started at once on the section from Exeter to Newton Abbot (at first called &quot;Newton&quot;); this first part is broadly level: it was the section onwards from Newton that was hilly. Contracts for the supply of the pumping engines and machinery were concluded on 18 January 1845, to be delivered by 1 July in the same year. Manufacture of the traction pipes ran into difficulties: they were to be cast with the slot formed, and distortion was a serious problem at first.

Delivery of the machinery and laying of the pipes was much delayed, but on 11 August 1846, with that work still in progress, a contract was let for the engines required over the hilly section beyond Newton. These were to be more powerful, at , and in one case, and the traction pipe was to be of a larger diameter.

The train service started between Exeter and Teignmouth on 30 May 1846, but this was operated by steam engines, hired from the GWR. At length, on 13 September 1847 the first passenger trains started operating on the atmospheric system. Atmospheric goods trains may have operated a few days previously.

Four atmospheric trains ran daily in addition to the advertised steam service, but after a time they replaced the steam trains. At first the atmospheric system was used as far as Teignmouth only, from where a steam engine hauled the train including the piston carriage to Newton, where the piston carriage was removed, and the train continued on its journey. From 9 November some atmospheric working to Newton took place, and from 2 March 1848, all trains on the section were atmospheric.

Through that winter of 1847-8 a regular service was maintained to Teignmouth. The highest speed recorded was an average of over hauling , and when hauling .

Two significant limitations of the atmospheric system were overcome at this period. The first was an auxiliary traction pipe was provided at stations; it was laid outside the track, therefore not obstructing pointwork. The piston carriage connected to it by a rope—the pipe must have had its own piston—and the train could be hauled into a station and on to the start of the onward main pipe. The second development was a level crossing arrangement for the pipe: a hinged cover plate lay across the pipe for road usage, but when the traction pipe was exhausted, a branch pipe actuated a small piston which raised the cover, enabling the piston carriage to pass safely, and acting as a warning to road users. Contemporary technical drawings show the traction pipe considerably lower than normal, with its top about level with the rail heads, and with its centre at the level of the centre of the transoms. No indication is shown as to how track gauge was maintained.

====Underpowered traction system====
Although the trains were running ostensibly satisfactorily, there had been technical miscalculations. It seems that Brunel originally specified for the level section to Newton and pipes for the hilly part of the route, and in specifying the stationary engine power and vacuum pumps, he considerably underpowered them. The pipes seem to have been scrapped, and pipes installed in their place, and pipes started to be installed on the hilly sections. Changes to the engine control governors were made to uprate them to run 50% faster than designed. It was reported that coal consumption was much heavier than forecast, at 3s 1½d per train mile instead of 1s 0d (and instead of 2s 6d which was the hire charge for the leased GWR steam locomotives). This may have been partly due to the electric telegraph not yet having been installed, necessitating pumping according to the timetable, even though a train might be running late. When the telegraph was ready, on 2 August, coal consumption in the following weeks fell by 25%.

====Problems with the slot closure====
During the winter of 1847–1848, the leather flap valve that sealed the traction pipe slot began to give trouble. During the cold days of winter, the leather froze hard in frost after saturation in rain. This resulted in its failing to seat properly after the passage of a train, allowing air into the pipe and reducing the effectiveness of pumping. In the following spring and summer there was hot and dry weather, and the leather valve dried out, with a similar outcome. Brunel had the leather treated with whale oil in an attempt to maintain flexibility. There was said to be a chemical reaction between iron oxide on the pipe and the tannin in the leather. There were also difficulties with the leather cup seal on the pistons.

Commentators observe that the South Devon system omitted the iron weather flap that was used on the Dalkey line to cover the flap valve. On that line, iron plates were turned away immediately ahead of the piston bracket. It is not recorded why this was omitted in South Devon, but at speed that arrangement must have involved considerable mechanical force, and generated environmental noise.

In May and June, even more serious trouble was experienced when sections of the flap tore away from its fixing, and sections had to be quickly replaced. Samuda had a contract with the company to maintain the system, and he advised installation of a weather cover, but this was not adopted. This would not have rectified the immediate problem, and complete replacement of the leather flap was required; this was estimated to cost £32,000—a very large sum of money then—and Samuda declined to act.

====Abandonment====
With a contractual impasse during struggles to keep a flawed system in operation, it was inevitable that the end was near. At a shareholders&#x27; meeting on 29 August 1848, the directors were obliged to report all the difficulties, and that Brunel had advised abandonment of the atmospheric system; arrangements were being made with the Great Western Railway to provide steam locomotives, and the atmospheric system would be abandoned from 9 September 1848.

Brunel&#x27;s report to the Directors, now shown the meeting, was comprehensive, and he was also mindful of his own delicate position, and of the contractual obligations of Samuda. He described the stationary engines, obtained from three suppliers: &quot;These engines have not, on the whole, proved successful; none of them have as yet worked very economically, and some are very extravagant in the use of fuel.&quot; As to the difficulties with the leather valve in extremes of weather, heat, frost and heavy rain,

The same remedies apply to all three, keeping the leather of the valve oiled and varnished, and rendering it impervious to the water, which otherwise soaks through it in wet weather, or which freezes it in cold, rendering it too stiff to shut down; and the same precaution prevents the leather being dried up and shrivelled by the heat; for this, and not the melting of the composition, is the principal inconvenience resulting from heat. A little water spread on the valve from a tank in the piston carriage has also been found to be useful in very dry weather, showing that the dryness, and not the heat, was the cause of the leakage.

But there was a much more serious problem: &quot;A considerable extent of longitudinal valve failed by the tearing of the leather at the joints between the plates. The leather first partially cracked at these points, which caused a considerable leakage, particularly in dry weather. After a time it tears completely through.&quot;

Maintenance of the traction pipe and the valve was Samuda&#x27;s contractual responsibility, but Brunel indicated that he was blaming the company for careless storage, and for the fact that the valve had been installed for some time before being used by trains; Brunel declined to go into the liability question, alluding to possible palliative measures, but concluded:

The cost of construction has far exceeded our expectations, and the difficulty of working a system so totally different from that to which everybody—traveller as well as workmen—is accustomed, have (sic) proved too great; and therefore, although, no doubt, after some further trial, great reductions may be made in the cost of working the portion now laid, I cannot anticipate the possibility of any inducement to continue the system beyond Newton.

Huge hostility was generated among some shareholders, and Samuda, and Brunel in particular were heavily criticised, but the atmospheric system on the line was finished.

====Retention recommended====
Thomas Gill had been Chairman of the South Devon board and wished to continue with the atmospheric system. In order to press for this he resigned his position, and in November 1848, he published a pamphlet urging retention of the system. He created enough support for this that an Extraordinary General Meeting of the Company was held on 6 January 1849. Lengthy technical discussion took place, in which Gill stated that Clark and Varley were prepared to contract to complete the atmospheric system and maintain it over a section of the line. There were, Gill said, twenty-five other inventors anxious to have their creations tried out on the line. The meeting lasted for eight hours, but finally a vote was taken: a majority of shareholders present were in favour of continuing with the system, 645 to 567 shares. However, a large block of proxies were held by shareholders who did not wish to attend the meeting, and with their votes abandonment was confirmed by 5,324 to 1,230.

That was the end of the atmospheric system on the South Devon Railway.

====Rats====
It is often asserted among enthusiasts&#x27; groups that one factor in the failure of the leather flap was rats, attracted to the tallow, gnawing at it. Although rats are said to have been drawn into the traction pipe in the early days, there was no reference to this at the crisis meeting described above. Historian Colin Divall believes there to be &quot;no documentary evidence whatsoever&quot; for rats causing such problems on the railway.

===Technical details===

====Wormwood Scrubs demonstration line====
The piston carriage on the demonstration line was an open four-wheeled track. No controls of any kind are shown on a drawing. The beam that carried the piston was called the &quot;perch&quot;, and it was attached directly to the axles, and pivoted at its centre point; it had a counterweight to the rear of the attachment bracket (called a &quot;coulter&quot;).

====Dalkey line====
The customary train consist was two coaches, the piston carriage, which included a guard&#x27;s compartment and third class accommodation, and a second class carriage, with end observation windows at the rear. There was no first class carriage. The guard had a screw brake, but no other control. Returning (descending) was done under gravity, and the guard had a lever which enabled him to swing the piston assembly to one side, so that the descent was made with the piston outside the tube.

====Saint Germain line====
The section put into service, Le Pecq to Saint Germain, was almost exactly the same length as the Dalkey line, and was operated in a similar way except that the descent by gravity was made with the piston in the tube so that air pressure helped retard speed. The upper terminal had sidings, with switching managed by ropes.

====London and Croydon====
The piston carriages were six-wheeled vans, with a driver&#x27;s platform at each end, as they were double ended. The driver&#x27;s position was within the carriage, not in the open. The centre axle was unsprung, and the piston assembly was directly connected to it. The driver had a vacuum gauge (a mercury manometer, connected by a metal tube to the head of the piston. Some vehicles were fitted with speedometers, an invention of Moses Ricardo. As well as a brake, the driver had a by-pass valve which admitted air to the partially exhausted traction tube ahead of the piston, reducing the tractive force exerted. This seems to have been used on the 1 in 50 descent from the flyover. The lever and valve arrangement are shown in a diagram in Samuda&#x27;s &quot;Treatise&quot;.

====Variable size piston====
Part of Samuda&#x27;s patent included the variable diameter piston, enabling the same piston carriage to negotiate route sections with different traction tube sizes. Clayton describes it: the change could be controlled by the driver while in motion; a lever operated a device rather like an umbrella at the rear of the piston head; it had hinged steel ribs. To accommodate the bracket for the piston, the traction tube slot, and therefore the top of the tube, had to be at the same level whatever the diameter of the tube, so that all of the additional space to be sealed was downwards and sideways; the &quot;umbrella&quot; arrangement was asymmetrical. In fact this was never used on the South Devon Railway, for the 22-inch tubes there were never opened; and the change at Forest Hill only lasted four months before the end of the atmospheric system there. A variable diameter piston was also intended to be used on the Saint-Germain railway, where a 15-inch pipe was to be used from Nanterre to Le Pecq, and then a 25-inch pipe on the three-and-a-half per cent grade up to Saint-Germain. Only the 25-inch section was completed, so a simple piston was used.

====Engine house locations, South Devon Railway====
* Exeter; south end of St Davids station, up side of the line
* Countess Wear; south of Turnpike bridge, at 197m 22c, down side
* Turf; south of Turf level crossing, down side
* Starcross; south of station, up side
* Dawlish; east of station, up side
* Teignmouth; adjacent to station, up side
* Summer House; at 212m 38c, down side
* Newton; east of station, down side
* Dainton; west of tunnel, down side
* Totnes; adjacent to station, up side
* Rattery; 50.43156,-3.78313; building never completed
* Torquay; 1 mile north of Torre station (the original terminal, called Torquay), up side

In the Dainton engine house, a vacuum receiver was to be installed in the inlet pipe to the pumps. This was apparently an interceptor for debris that might be ingested into the traction pipe; it had an openable door for staff to clear the debris from time to time.
===Displays of atmospheric railway tube===

*Didcot Railway Centre, Didcot, Oxfordshire: three full lengths of unused South Devon 22-inch pipe, found under the sand in 1993 at Goodrington Sands, near Paignton, displayed since 2000 with GWR rails recovered from another source.
* &quot;Being Brunel&quot; exhibit, opened in 2018 at Brunel&#x27;s SS Great Britain, Bristol: one full length of unused South Devon 22-inch pipe.
* STEAM – Museum of the Great Western Railway, Swindon: a very short portion of unused South Devon 22-inch pipe, probably the portion described in 1912 as on view at a Great Western Railway company museum at Paddington.
* Newton Abbot Town and GWR Museum, Newton Abbot, Devon: another very short portion of unused South Devon 22-inch pipe.
* Museum of Croydon, Croydon: one full length of London and Croydon 15-inch pipe, found in the ground in 1933 at West Croydon station.

===Other early applications===
Two demonstration railways were built with the entire car inside the tube rather than only a piston. In both cases the cars were pushed by atmospheric pressure in one direction and increased pressure in the other, and in both cases the object was to run cars underground without the smoke and gas of steam locomotives.

* Rammell&#x27;s Crystal Palace atmospheric railway of 1864 was intended to raise interest in his proposed Waterloo and Whitehall Railway which would have run under the Thames from Waterloo Station to Great Scotland Yard. Construction on the latter started in 1865 and 1866 but did not continue.
* Alfred E. Beach&#x27;s Beach Pneumatic Transit, running for one block under Broadway in New York City from 1870 to 1873, demonstrated both pneumatic operation and also a method of tunnelling that would not disturb the street surface. Air pressure was controlled by a large impeller, the Roots blower, rather than the disk fans used in all previous installations. Nothing further was ever constructed.

==Aeromovel==
The nineteenth century attempts to make a practical atmospheric system (described above) were defeated by technological shortcomings. In the present day, modern materials have enabled a practical system to be implemented.

Towards the end of the twentieth century the Aeromovel Corporation of Brazil developed an automated people mover that is atmospherically powered. Lightweight trains ride on rails mounted on an elevated hollow concrete box girder that forms the air duct. Each car is attached to a square plate—the piston—within the duct, connected by a mast running through a longitudinal slot that is sealed with rubber flaps. Stationary electric air pumps are located along the line to either blow air into the duct to create positive pressure or to exhaust air from the duct to create a partial vacuum. The pressure differential acting on the piston plate causes the vehicle to move.

Electric power for lighting and braking is supplied to the train by a low voltage (50 V) current through the track the vehicles run on; this is used to charge onboard batteries. The trains have conventional brakes for accurate stopping at stations; these brakes are automatically applied if there is no pressure differential acting on the plate. Fully loaded vehicles have a ratio of payload to dead-weight of about 1:1, which is up to three times better than conventional alternatives. The vehicles are driverless with motion determined by lineside controls. Aeromovel was designed in the late 1970s by Brazilian .

The system was first implemented in 1989 at Taman Mini Indonesia Indah, Jakarta, Indonesia. It was constructed to serve a theme park; it is a loop with six stations and three trains. In the late 2010s the system was closed. It was subsequently converted to diesel operation with a single train, and re-opened in 2019.
A second installation, the Metro-Airport Connection opened in August 2013. The line connects the Estação Aeroporto (Airport Station) on the Porto Alegre Metro and Terminal 1 of Salgado Filho International Airport. The single line is long with a travel time of 90 seconds. The first 150-passenger vehicle was delivered in April 2013 with a 300-passenger second vehicle delivered later.

In December 2018 a pneumatic railway research and development centre was unveiled in China, developed by collaboration between Aeromovel and the China Railway Engineering Group (CREG). The firms had been working together on projects since the start of 2017, including a started but stalled system proposed for Canoas.

The proposed Accra Skytrain, a five line, elevated light rail network in the capital of Ghana will also use the technology. In 2019 the government of Ghana signed a build–operate–transfer concession agreement with a South African consortium to develop the project, at an estimated cost of $2.6 billion dollars. the project has not progressed passed the feasibility study stage.

In December 2020 it was announced that Aerom, which owns the Aeromovel technology, had been selected to install the GRU Airport People Mover at São Paulo/Guarulhos International Airport. The line will be long and have 4 stations.

==High speed concept==

Flight Rail Corporation. in the United States has developed the concept of a high-speed atmospheric train that uses vacuum and air pressure to move passenger modules along an elevated guideway. Stationary power systems create vacuum (ahead of the piston) and pressure (behind the piston) inside a continuous pneumatic tube located centrally below rails within a truss assembly. The free piston is magnetically coupled to the passenger modules above; this arrangement allows the power tube to be closed, avoiding leakage. The transportation unit operates above the power tube on a pair of parallel steel rails.

The company currently has a 1/6 scale pilot model operating on an outdoor test guideway. The guideway is long and incorporates 2%, 6% and 10% grades. The pilot model operates at speeds up to . The corporation says a full-scale implementation would be capable of speeds in excess of .

== See also ==
* Cable railway – a more successful albeit slow way of overcoming steep grades
* Funicular – a system of overcoming steep grades using the force of gravity on downward cars to raise upward cars
* Hyperloop
* Pneumatic tube
* Steam catapult – used for launching aircraft from ships: the arrangement of seal and traveller is similar, although positive pressure is used.
* Vactrain – a futuristic concept in which vehicles travel in an evacuated tube, to minimise air resistance; the suggested propulsion system is not atmospheric.

==Notes==
== References ==
==Further reading==
* Adrian Vaughan, &quot;Railway Blunders&quot;, Ian Allan Publishing, Hersham, 2008, ; page 21 shows a photograph of L&amp;CR traction tubes unearthed in 1933.
* Arthur R Nicholls, &quot;The London &amp; Portsmouth Direct Atmospheric Railway&quot;, Fonthill Media, 2013, ; Story of an unsuccessful attempt at a trunk route</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q757522" start="3" end="22" title="Atmospheric railway" label="atmospheric railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q81809" start="41" end="53" title="air pressure" label="air pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="91" end="98" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11475" start="283" end="289" title="vacuum" label="vacuum"/>
<link wikidata="Q18356223" start="613" end="632" title="Magnetic coupling" label="electromagnetically"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418233" start="956" end="974" title="Porto Alegre Metro" label="Porto Alegre Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q40269" start="997" end="1009" title="Porto Alegre" label="Porto Alegre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1489" end="1517" title="Kilmarnock and Troon Railway#A locomotive" label="Kilmarnock and Troon Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089865" start="1860" end="1872" title="Cable railway" label="cable system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542382" start="1915" end="1930" title="George Medhurst" label="George Medhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6391434" start="3165" end="3181" title="Kensington Canal" label="Kensington Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342306" start="3523" end="3546" title="Samuda Brothers" label="Jacob and Joseph Samuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471083" start="3677" end="3689" title="Samuel Clegg" label="Samuel Clegg"/>
<link wikidata="Q15497087" start="4072" end="4084" title="Joseph d&amp;#x27;Aguilar Samuda" label="Jacob Samuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020208" start="4137" end="4156" title="West London Railway" label="West London Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400689" start="4191" end="4206" title="Wormwood Scrubs" label="Wormwood Scrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q38883" start="6864" end="6871" title="cooper (profession)" label="coopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q863266" start="8943" end="8949" title="tallow" label="tallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q143739" start="9982" end="9989" title="beeswax" label="beeswax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715773" start="15686" end="15714" title="Dublin and Kingstown Railway" label="Dublin and Kingstown Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q745989" start="15753" end="15766" title="Dún Laoghaire" label="Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="15794" end="15800" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="15802" end="15809" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q67219752" start="16296" end="16305" title="James Pim" label="James Pim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701059" start="16566" end="16592" title="Dalkey Atmospheric Railway" label="Dalkey Atmospheric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="18058" end="18081" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q328728" start="18083" end="18100" title="Robert Stephenson" label="Robert Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007343" start="18110" end="18124" title="William Cubitt" label="William Cubitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239778" start="18727" end="18743" title="Paris–Saint-Germain-en-Laye railway" label="their 19 km line"/>
<link wikidata="Q275366" start="18772" end="18779" title="Le Pecq" label="Le Pecq"/>
<link wikidata="Q60847808" start="18882" end="18903" title="Saint-Germain-en-Laye" label="Saint-Germain-en-Laye"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671053" start="22496" end="22522" title="London and Croydon Railway" label="London and Croydon Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671057" start="22629" end="22657" title="London and Greenwich Railway" label="London and Greenwich Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671047" start="22986" end="23013" title="London and Brighton Railway" label="London and Brighton Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425560" start="24493" end="24500" title="Overpass" label="flyover"/>
<link wikidata="Q801592" start="25003" end="25015" title="West Croydon station" label="West Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="26695" end="26704" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567046" start="28582" end="28601" title="South Devon Railway Company" label="South Devon Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q895118" start="29979" end="29995" title="Boulton and Watt" label="Boulton and Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q489565" start="30221" end="30261" title="London, Brighton and South Coast Railway" label="London, Brighton and South Coast Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751632" start="31426" end="31445" title="Rendering (animal products)" label="rendered animal fat"/>
<link wikidata="Q843251" start="33725" end="33746" title="Great Western Railway" label="Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q917988" start="33761" end="33787" title="Bristol and Exeter Railway" label="Bristol and Exeter Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q906942" start="33853" end="33864" title="broad gauge" label="broad gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7567046" start="34135" end="34162" title="South Devon Railway Company" label="South Devon Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q207380" start="34323" end="34346" title="Isambard Kingdom Brunel" label="Isambard Kingdom Brunel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187607" start="41296" end="41302" title="tannin" label="tannin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424019" start="48414" end="48423" title="Pressure measurement" label="manometer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3026852" start="51033" end="51054" title="Didcot Railway Centre" label="Didcot Railway Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q744086" start="51319" end="51349" title="SS Great Britain" label="Brunel&amp;#x27;s SS Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978805" start="51414" end="51457" title="Museum of the Great Western Railway" label="STEAM – Museum of the Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51634" end="51666" title="Newton Abbot#Newton Abbot Town and GWR Museum" label="Newton Abbot Town and GWR Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6940827" start="51754" end="51771" title="Museum of Croydon" label="Museum of Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794945" start="52241" end="52248" title="Thomas Webster Rammell" label="Rammell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191317" start="52256" end="52290" title="Crystal Palace atmospheric railway" label="Crystal Palace atmospheric railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974311" start="52346" end="52376" title="Waterloo and Whitehall Railway" label="Waterloo and Whitehall Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q795691" start="52420" end="52436" title="London Waterloo station" label="Waterloo Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q926977" start="52440" end="52459" title="Great Scotland Yard" label="Great Scotland Yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644938" start="52537" end="52552" title="Alfred Ely Beach" label="Alfred E. Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q379184" start="52560" end="52583" title="Beach Pneumatic Transit" label="Beach Pneumatic Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="52613" end="52621" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q639030" start="53276" end="53288" title="people mover" label="people mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q19747942" start="54479" end="54504" title="SHS-23 Aeromovel Indonesia" label="first implemented in 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q685790" start="54508" end="54534" title="Taman Mini Indonesia Indah" label="Taman Mini Indonesia Indah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3630" start="54536" end="54543" title="Jakarta" label="Jakarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="54545" end="54554" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q23891467" start="54809" end="54833" title="Metro-Airport Connection" label="Metro-Airport Connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418233" start="54922" end="54940" title="Porto Alegre Metro" label="Porto Alegre Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432702" start="54959" end="54994" title="Salgado Filho International Airport" label="Salgado Filho International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q194325" start="55478" end="55484" title="Canoas" label="Canoas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4672827" start="55500" end="55514" title="Accra Skytrain" label="Accra Skytrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="55575" end="55580" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q831675" start="55652" end="55674" title="build–operate–transfer" label="build–operate–transfer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55927" end="55936" title="#Aeromovel" label="Aeromovel"/>
<link wikidata="Q65042113" start="55982" end="56006" title="GRU Airport People Mover" label="GRU Airport People Mover"/>
<link wikidata="Q385406" start="56010" end="56051" title="São Paulo/Guarulhos International Airport" label="São Paulo/Guarulhos International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089865" start="57034" end="57047" title="Cable railway" label="Cable railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q142031" start="57113" end="57122" title="Funicular" label="Funicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156052" start="57228" end="57237" title="Hyperloop" label="Hyperloop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136075" start="57240" end="57254" title="Pneumatic tube" label="Pneumatic tube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031873" start="57257" end="57271" title="Steam catapult" label="Steam catapult"/>
<link wikidata="Q58181" start="57402" end="57410" title="Vactrain" label="Vactrain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871505" wikidata="Q780273" url="?curid=871505" title="The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons">
<text>&quot;The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons&quot; is the seventh episode of the ninth season of the American animated television series &quot;The Simpsons&quot;. It originally aired on Fox in the United States on November 16, 1997. It was written by Richard Appel and directed by Steven Dean Moore. The episode sees Apu Nahasapeemapetilon marry Manjula, and incorporates several aspects of Hindu wedding ceremonies, which the writers researched during the episode&#x27;s production. Appel pitched the episode several years before season nine but the idea was not used until Mike Scully became showrunner. The episode&#x27;s subplot, which sees Homer stay at the Springfield Retirement Castle, was initially conceived as a separate episode, but could not be developed in enough detail. The episode received positive reviews.

==Plot==
At a bachelor auction, the available bachelors on display are deemed undesirable, and the auction generates no money at all. Marge then nominates Apu, who is deemed a success by the women at the auction. He goes out on dates with many of the town&#x27;s women, and begins to enjoy his bachelor lifestyle. However, he receives a letter from his mother in India, reminding him of his arranged marriage to Manjula, the daughter of a family friend. Not wanting to get married, Apu asks Homer for advice, who suggests Apu tell his mother that he is already married. Days later, Apu thinks that he has escaped the marriage until he sees his mother walking towards the Kwik-E-Mart. To cover him, Homer tells Apu to pretend that Marge is his wife.

At the Simpson residence, Marge disapproves of the plan, but decides to do it for Apu&#x27;s sake. While the plan is underway Homer decides to stay in the Springfield Retirement Castle with his father, posing as resident Cornelius Talmadge. Homer enjoys his stay at the home immensely, until the real Cornelius returns, at which point he flees. He returns home and gets into bed with Marge. Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilon enters to say goodbye, but is shocked to see Marge in bed with another man, and Apu on the floor. Tired of the whole charade, Marge forces Apu to tell his mother the truth, who declares that the arranged marriage will proceed as planned.

The wedding is held in the Simpsons&#x27; backyard, but Apu still has second thoughts about it. However, when he sees Manjula for the first time in years, he is shocked by her beauty and wit, and feels less reluctant. The pair then decide that perhaps the marriage can work after all. Homer, poorly disguised as Ganesha, tries to stop the wedding but is chased off by one of Apu&#x27;s relatives.

==Production==

Writer Richard Appel pitched &quot;The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons&quot; at a story retreat several years before the ninth season, but it could not be fitted into a season at that point. Mike Scully liked the idea and so decided to use it in his first season as showrunner. Homer&#x27;s subplot at the retirement home was an idea that Scully had had for a long time. The plot could not be sustained for a whole episode, so it was fitted into this one.

The bachelor auction was created solely to provide more evidence that Apu was the best bachelor in Springfield. Appel found that the scene &quot;wrote itself&quot;, as every other man in Springfield is essentially a loser compared to Apu. The scene acted as the episode&#x27;s opening set piece, a concept that Scully liked to use in every episode. The montage of Apu getting several different hair styles originally included three more, but they ended up being cut for time. The shot in which Apu&#x27;s mother falls to the ground, a joke that the staff love, was inspired by an incident when Moore saw a man fall in much the same way. The joke was only inserted to buy Apu and Homer more time to come up with a lie. Homer writing &quot;Where are the sticky buns&quot; on a sheet of paper after Apu asks him for advice is one of Mike Scully&#x27;s favorite jokes. Before the wedding, Bart fuels a &quot;sacred fire&quot; with pages from a hymn book. Originally, he used pages from the Bible, but after the scene had been animated, Scully found the joke &quot;horrible&quot; and changed the book title to &quot;Hymns&quot;.

Andrea Martin provided the voice of Apu&#x27;s mother, recording her part in New York City. She wanted to get the voice perfect, so in between takes she listened to tapes of Hank Azaria reading lines for Apu, to make sure her voice could realistically be Apu&#x27;s mother&#x27;s. During the flashback to Apu&#x27;s childhood, the animators made sure not to show Manjula, as they wished to reveal her at the end of the episode.

The staff researched arranged Hindu marriages, learning about ideas such as the lotus flower being used as a message, but a majority of the information turned out &quot;not to be as hilarious [as the writers] had hoped&quot;, and so was dropped. Steven Dean Moore, the episode&#x27;s director, researched the design of every aspect of Indian culture shown in the episode. The events of the wedding, as well as many of the items present, were all taken from traditional Hindu marriage ceremonies.

==Cultural references==
The instrumental accompanying Barney in the bachelor raffle is &quot;My Guy&quot; by Mary Wells. The Foreigner song &quot;Hot Blooded&quot; plays over Apu&#x27;s bachelor binge, and he dances in a manner similar to &quot;Riverdance&quot;. An Indian version of The Carpenters&#x27; song &quot;(They Long to Be) Close to You&quot; is sung at the wedding; an Indian vocal group was hired to sing, while Alf Clausen wrote the instrumental part.

During Apu&#x27;s bachelor binge, he gets a haircut at the barbershop Hairy Shearers, a reference to cast member Harry Shearer. The scene where Moe walks on and off the stage without breaking his stride was loosely based on a moment that occurred during a stand up show of comedian Redd Foxx. During a show in Las Vegas, Foxx came on stage to the &quot;Sanford and Son&quot; theme song, only to find that there were only a few people in the audience. Foxx reacted angrily, and refused to do a show for such a small audience. He then walked off stage. The house orchestra, puzzled by Foxx leaving, simply played him off with the &quot;Sanford and Son&quot; theme song again. This incident was also referenced in the later episode &quot;Trash of the Titans&quot;, when Ray Patterson is reinstated, although the reference is more similar to the real event.

==Reception==
In its original broadcast, &quot;The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons&quot; finished 22nd in ratings for the week of November 10–16, 1997, with a Nielsen rating of 11.6, equivalent to approximately 11.4 million viewing households. It was the third highest-rated show on the Fox network that week, following &quot;The X-Files&quot; and &quot;King of the Hill&quot;. Todd Gilchrist of &quot;IGN&quot; named the episode one of his favorites of the ninth season in his review of the DVD boxset, while Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the authors of the book &quot;I Can&#x27;t Believe It&#x27;s a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide&quot;, called it &quot;a good fun episode&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q780273" start="6" end="38" title="The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons" label="The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670746" start="75" end="87" title="The Simpsons season 9" label="ninth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="137" end="149" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q166419" start="180" end="183" title="Fox Broadcasting Company" label="Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305154" start="245" end="258" title="Richard Appel" label="Richard Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842560" start="275" end="292" title="Steven Dean Moore" label="Steven Dean Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408697" start="311" end="333" title="Apu Nahasapeemapetilon" label="Apu Nahasapeemapetilon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="340" end="347" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Manjula Nahasapeemapetilon" label="Manjula"/>
<link wikidata="Q945237" start="385" end="398" title="Hindu wedding" label="Hindu wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q655207" start="569" end="580" title="Mike Scully" label="Mike Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="588" end="598" title="showrunner" label="showrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="639" end="644" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828" start="954" end="959" title="Marge Simpson" label="Marge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408697" start="975" end="978" title="Apu Nahasapeemapetilon" label="Apu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923231" start="1211" end="1228" title="arranged marriage" label="arranged marriage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1232" end="1239" title="List of recurring The Simpsons characters#Manjula Nahasapeemapetilon" label="Manjula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810" start="1311" end="1316" title="Homer Simpson" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978842" start="1491" end="1502" title="Kwik-E-Mart" label="Kwik-E-Mart"/>
<link wikidata="Q151076" start="1725" end="1754" title="Springfield Retirement Castle" label="Springfield Retirement Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q842104" start="1764" end="1770" title="Abraham Simpson" label="father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="2536" end="2543" title="Ganesha" label="Ganesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305154" start="2645" end="2658" title="Richard Appel" label="Richard Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q655207" start="2826" end="2837" title="Mike Scully" label="Mike Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440873" start="2901" end="2911" title="showrunner" label="showrunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480" start="3977" end="3981" title="Bart Simpson" label="Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q484692" start="4032" end="4036" title="hymn" label="hymn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4078" end="4083" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q442309" start="4217" end="4230" title="Andrea Martin" label="Andrea Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="4294" end="4307" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q202056" start="4391" end="4402" title="Hank Azaria" label="Hank Azaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="4676" end="4681" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16528" start="4726" end="4738" title="lotus flower" label="lotus flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842560" start="4892" end="4909" title="Steven Dean Moore" label="Steven Dean Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945602" start="5236" end="5242" title="My Guy" label="My Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q435857" start="5252" end="5262" title="Mary Wells" label="Mary Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q275059" start="5268" end="5277" title="Foreigner (band)" label="Foreigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17010940" start="5289" end="5300" title="Hot Blooded" label="Hot Blooded"/>
<link wikidata="Q310516" start="5388" end="5398" title="Riverdance" label="Riverdance"/>
<link wikidata="Q223495" start="5427" end="5441" title="The Carpenters" label="The Carpenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q928282" start="5459" end="5489" title="(They Long to Be) Close to You" label="(They Long to Be) Close to You"/>
<link wikidata="Q925968" start="5567" end="5578" title="Alf Clausen" label="Alf Clausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q345325" start="5722" end="5735" title="Harry Shearer" label="Harry Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q712024" start="5891" end="5900" title="Redd Foxx" label="Redd Foxx"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624848" start="5919" end="5928" title="Las Vegas Valley" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248395" start="5962" end="5977" title="Sanford and Son" label="Sanford and Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219469" start="6344" end="6363" title="Trash of the Titans" label="Trash of the Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="6620" end="6634" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen rating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="6787" end="6798" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135966" start="6815" end="6831" title="King of the Hill" label="King of the Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="6863" end="6866" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871512" wikidata="Q386240" url="?curid=871512" title="Andrew Keir">
<text>Andrew Keir (né Buggy, 3 April 19265 October 1997) was a Scottish actor who appeared in a number of films made by Hammer Film Productions in the 1960s. 
He played Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa in the 1963 Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor vehicle &quot;Cleopatra&quot;.
He was also active in television, and especially in the theatre, in a professional career that lasted from the 1940s to the 1990s. 

Keir starred as Professor Bernard Quatermass in Hammer&#x27;s film version of &quot;Quatermass and the Pit&quot; (1967). He also appeared in the big screen version of the &quot;Doctor Who&quot; story &quot;The Dalek Invasion of Earth&quot;, &quot;Daleks&#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D.&quot; (1966). He originated the role of Thomas Cromwell in Robert Bolt&#x27;s play &quot;A Man for All Seasons&quot; (1960).
He played Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa in the 1963 Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor vehicle &quot;Cleopatra&quot;.
His obituary in &quot;The Times&quot; described him as possessing &quot;considerable range and undeniable distinction.&quot;

==Early life and career==
Keir was born in Shotts, Lanarkshire, Scotland. He was the son of a coal miner, and had five brothers and one sister. At 14, he left school to work down the coal mine alongside his father. He started acting by chance, when he went to meet a friend at the Miners&#x27; Welfare Hall, and one member of the cast of an amateur dramatics production being performed at the Hall had failed to turn up. Keir was persuaded to take the minor role of a farmer in the play, and enjoyed the experience so much that he later became a regular in the group&#x27;s performances.

The group entered a competition in Inverness, where Keir&#x27;s talent was spotted and he was offered the chance to become a professional actor at the Unity Theatre in Glasgow. Since this was after the start of the Second World War, he could not easily leave his occupation as a miner; he was only able to accept the offer after he obtained a medical diagnosis of pneumoconiosis, which freed him from his work in the mine.

After a few months at the Unity Theatre, he was offered a place at Glasgow&#x27;s Citizens&#x27; Theatre by director Tyrone Guthrie. He accepted, and remained with the Citizens Theatre company for nine years. At the Citizens&#x27;, he was a contemporary of Phyllida Law and Fulton Mackay; Keir and Mackay used to escort Law from the theatre to the local tram stop so that she would not be accosted by local gangs because of the English accent that she had developed at drama school.

Keir made his film debut in 1950 in &quot;The Lady Craved Excitement&quot;, and performed in his first major screen role in &quot;The Brave Don&#x27;t Cry&quot; (1952). The film concerned the rescue of a group of miners trapped underground after an accident in the pit, with Keir playing a miner who places a bet on a horse race via the mine&#x27;s telephone system while trapped; he was given the final line of dialogue, as he emerges from the pit following his rescue and asks who won the race.

==Major film and theatre roles==
Keir began to win increasingly prominent film roles throughout the course of the 1950s, appearing in the Ealing comedy &quot;The Maggie&quot; (1954) and the &quot;Titanic&quot; film &quot;A Night to Remember&quot; (1958), in which he portrayed 2nd Engineer John Henry Hesketh. He played Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa in the 1963 Richard Burton and Elizabeth Taylor vehicle &quot;Cleopatra&quot;.

Keir also continued to act on the stage. He played Robert Burns in the pageant &quot;I, Robert Burns&quot; in 1959, celebrating the 200th anniversary of the birth of the poet. In 1960 Keir initiated the role of Thomas Cromwell in the original theatrical production of Robert Bolt&#x27;s play &quot;A Man for All Seasons&quot;. Keir&#x27;s performance in this part was praised by &quot;The Times&quot; as being &quot;an arresting figure&quot;. In 1964, he was a member of the original West End cast of Lionel Bart&#x27;s musical &quot;Maggie May&quot;, playing the trade union leader.

Keir had first appeared on television on the BBC in the early 1950s, and through that decade and into the 1960s continued to make guest appearances in a range of programmes, including &quot;Danger Man&quot;, &quot;Dr Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot;, &quot;The Avengers&quot; and &quot;Z Cars&quot;. He appeared in a 1968 episode of the ITV series, &quot;The Saint.&quot; However, it was in films where he became most prominent during the 1960s and early 1970s, particularly in Hammer&#x27;s famous range of &quot;Hammer Horror&quot; productions. He appeared in &quot;Pirates of Blood River&quot; (1962), &quot;&quot; (1966), &quot;The Viking Queen&quot; (1967), &quot; Zeppelin&quot; (1971) and &quot;Blood from the Mummy&#x27;s Tomb&quot; (1971). (He was called in to star in the latter after original star Peter Cushing pulled out.) By far his most prominent role for Hammer came in 1967&#x27;s &quot;Quatermass and the Pit&quot;; this remained one of Keir&#x27;s personal favourite roles of his career, and his obituary in &quot;The Independent&quot; claimed that &quot;Keir&#x27;s mixture of gruff determination, intelligence and quirkiness made him the definitive professor.&quot;

In 1966, Keir joined the cast list of the second &quot;Doctor Who&quot; big screen adventure, &quot;Daleks&#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D.&quot;, alongside Peter Cushing.

==Later career==
Keir continued to appear on screen throughout the 1970s and 80s, in films such as &quot;Zeppelin&quot; (1971) and &quot;The Thirty Nine Steps&quot; (1978). He also continued to have success with television roles; the Australian series &quot;The Outsiders&quot; demonstrated again the wide range of types that he could convincingly play, but brought him less praise than the BBC series &quot;Workhorses&quot;, for which he was nominated for BAFTA Scotland&#x27;s Best Actor award. He continued appearing in TV series well into the 1990s, appearing as Macrae of Balbuie in two series of the BBC Scotland drama series &quot;Strathblair&quot;, and guest starring in an episode of &quot;Hamish Macbeth&quot; in a part that was written especially for him; the series was produced by his daughter, Deidre.

Keir&#x27;s final major acting role was as John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll (1678–1743) in the film &quot;Rob Roy&quot; (1995), although he also played a prominent role as Fergus in &quot;The Princess Stallion&quot; in 1997, the year of his death. Argyll was another role that became one of his favourites. His final professional engagement was resuming the role of Quatermass for the 1996 BBC Radio serial &quot;The Quatermass Memoirs&quot;. This final performance was praised by &quot;The Independent&quot;: &quot;This series has so far been hugely enjoyable - thanks in large part to Andrew Keir, who recreates the role of Quatermass in dramatic interludes; lesser actors would treat Kneale&#x27;s downbeat script with a certain detachment, but Keir is prepared to charge even the most banal lines with a terror that&#x27;s both a treat and a lesson.&quot;

Keir died in hospital in London, aged 71, on 5 October 1997. From 1948 until 1977, he was married to Julia Wallace, with whom he had two sons and three daughters. In 1977, he married Joyce Parker Scott, who survived him, along with his five children from his previous marriage. One of his daughters is the actress Julie T. Wallace.

==Theatre==
==Selected filmography==

*&quot;The Gorbals Story&quot; (1950) - Pub chucker-outer (uncredited)
*&quot;The Lady Craved Excitement&quot; (1950) - Peterson
*&quot;The Brave Don&#x27;t Cry&quot; (1952) - Charlie Ross
*&quot;Laxdale Hall&quot; a.k.a. &quot;Scotch on the Rocks&quot; (1953) - McKellaig
*&quot;The Maggie&quot; a.k.a. &quot;High and Dry&quot; (1954) - The Reporter
*&quot;Suspended Alibi&quot; (1957) - Sandy Thorpe
*&quot;High Flight&quot; (1957) - Valetta Instructor
*&quot;Heart of a Child&quot; (1958) - Constable
*&quot;A Night to Remember&quot; (1958) - 2nd Engineer Officer John Henry Hesketh
*&quot;Tread Softly Stranger&quot; (1958) - Inspector Harris
*&quot;The Day They Robbed the Bank of England&quot; (1960) - Sergeant of the Guard
*&quot;Tunes of Glory&quot; (1960) - L / Cpl. Campbell
*&quot;Greyfriars Bobby: The True Story of a Dog&quot; (1961) - Constable (uncredited)
*&quot;The Devil&#x27;s Hands&quot; (1961, short)
*&quot;Pirates of Blood River&quot; (1962) - Jason Standing
*&quot;Cleopatra&quot; (1963) - Agrippa
*&quot;Torpedo Bay&quot; (1963) - O&#x27;Brien
*&quot;The Fall of the Roman Empire&quot; (1964) - Polybius
*&quot;The Devil-Ship Pirates&quot; (1964) - Tom, Harry&#x27;s father
*&quot;Lord Jim&quot; (1965) - Brierly
*&quot;&quot; (1966) - Father Sandor
*&quot;Daleks&#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D.&quot; (1966) - Wyler
*&quot;The Fighting Prince of Donegal&quot; (1966) - Lord McSweeney
*&quot;The Viking Queen&quot; (1967) - Octavian
*&quot;The Long Duel&quot; (1967) - Gungaram
*&quot;Quatermass and the Pit&quot; (aka Five Million Years to Earth) (1967) - Prof. Bernard Quatermass
*&quot;Attack on the Iron Coast&quot; (1968) - Captain Franklin
*&quot;The Royal Hunt of the Sun&quot; (1969) - Valverde
*&quot;The Last Grenade&quot; (1970) - Gordon Mackenzie
*&quot;Adam&#x27;s Woman&quot; (1970) - O&#x27;Shea
*&quot;The Night Visitor&quot; (1971) - Dr. Kemp
*&quot;Zeppelin&quot; (1971) - Von Gorian
*&quot;Blood from the Mummy&#x27;s Tomb&quot; (1971) - Professor Julian Fuchs
*&quot;Mary, Queen of Scots&quot; (1971) - Ruthven
*&quot;Conflict&quot; (1973) - Father Matthew
*&quot;The Thirty Nine Steps&quot; (1978) - Lord Rohan
*&quot;Absolution&quot; (1978) - Headmaster
*&quot;Meetings with Remarkable Men&quot; (1979) - Head of Sarmoung Monastery
*&quot;Lion of the Desert&quot; (1981) - Salem
*&quot;Marco Polo&quot; (1982) - Old Shepherd
*&quot;Haunters of the Deep&quot; (1984) - Captain Tregellis
*&quot;Dragonworld&quot; (1994) - Angus McGowan
*&quot;Rob Roy&quot; (1995) - John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll
*&quot;&quot; (filmed in 1996, but released in 1999) - Angus McGowan
*&quot;The Princess Stallion&quot; (1997, TV Movie) - Fergus
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q386240" start="0" end="11" title="Andrew Keir" label="Andrew Keir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="13" end="15" title="né" label="né"/>
<link wikidata="Q386240" start="16" end="21" title="Andrew Keir" label="Buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433745" start="114" end="137" title="Hammer Film Productions" label="Hammer Film Productions"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="163" end="187" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="200" end="214" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="219" end="235" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430" start="250" end="259" title="Cleopatra (1963 film)" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898482" start="416" end="444" title="Bernard Quatermass" label="Professor Bernard Quatermass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171321" start="484" end="506" title="Quatermass and the Pit (film)" label="Quatermass and the Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="577" end="587" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q922832" start="606" end="633" title="The Dalek Invasion of Earth" label="The Dalek Invasion of Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231896" start="647" end="684" title="Daleks&amp;#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D." label="Daleks&amp;#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="725" end="740" title="Thomas Cromwell, 1st Earl of Essex" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26062" start="744" end="755" title="Robert Bolt" label="Robert Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779414" start="774" end="795" title="A Man for All Seasons (play)" label="A Man for All Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="820" end="844" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="857" end="871" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="876" end="892" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430" start="907" end="916" title="Cleopatra (1963 film)" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="946" end="955" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009915" start="1093" end="1099" title="Shotts" label="Shotts"/>
<link wikidata="Q530296" start="1101" end="1112" title="Lanarkshire" label="Lanarkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="1144" end="1154" title="Coal mining" label="coal miner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800684" start="1391" end="1408" title="Community theatre" label="amateur dramatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q160493" start="1674" end="1683" title="Inverness" label="Inverness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566943" start="1790" end="1803" title="Glasgow Unity Theatre" label="Unity Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1807" end="1814" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1854" end="1870" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q651223" start="2003" end="2017" title="pneumoconiosis" label="pneumoconiosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2974455" start="2145" end="2167" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Theatre" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q330059" start="2180" end="2194" title="Tyrone Guthrie" label="Tyrone Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q432357" start="2320" end="2332" title="Phyllida Law" label="Phyllida Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508449" start="2337" end="2350" title="Fulton Mackay" label="Fulton Mackay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="2417" end="2421" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745117" start="2589" end="2615" title="The Lady Craved Excitement" label="The Lady Craved Excitement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719880" start="2677" end="2701" title="The Brave Don&amp;#x27;t Cry" label="The Brave Don&amp;#x27;t Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q72081" start="3183" end="3196" title="Ealing Studios" label="Ealing comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399199" start="3203" end="3213" title="The Maggie" label="The Maggie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25173" start="3241" end="3248" title="RMS Titanic" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q633614" start="3266" end="3285" title="A Night to Remember (1958 film)" label="A Night to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="3365" end="3389" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151973" start="3402" end="3416" title="Richard Burton" label="Richard Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q34851" start="3421" end="3437" title="Elizabeth Taylor" label="Elizabeth Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430" start="3452" end="3461" title="Cleopatra (1963 film)" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q81960" start="3521" end="3533" title="Robert Burns" label="Robert Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q294435" start="3681" end="3696" title="Thomas Cromwell" label="Thomas Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26062" start="3738" end="3749" title="Robert Bolt" label="Robert Bolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779414" start="3768" end="3789" title="A Man for All Seasons (play)" label="A Man for All Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359589" start="3954" end="3962" title="West End theatre" label="West End"/>
<link wikidata="Q326299" start="3971" end="3982" title="Lionel Bart" label="Lionel Bart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730278" start="4004" end="4014" title="Maggie May (musical)" label="Maggie May"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="4100" end="4103" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247647" start="4245" end="4255" title="Danger Man" label="Danger Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304088" start="4269" end="4294" title="Dr. Finlay" label="Dr Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q113700" start="4308" end="4320" title="The Avengers (TV series)" label="The Avengers"/>
<link wikidata="Q180347" start="4337" end="4343" title="Z Cars" label="Z Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q674608" start="4388" end="4391" title="ITV (TV channel)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248868" start="4406" end="4415" title="The Saint (TV series)" label="The Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253496" start="4619" end="4641" title="Pirates of Blood River" label="Pirates of Blood River"/>
<link wikidata="Q732241" start="4683" end="4699" title="The Viking Queen" label="The Viking Queen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4720" end="4729" title=" Zeppelin" label=" Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168595" start="4753" end="4785" title="Blood from the Mummy&amp;#x27;s Tomb" label="Blood from the Mummy&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q309589" start="4860" end="4873" title="Peter Cushing" label="Peter Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171321" start="4955" end="4977" title="Quatermass and the Pit (film)" label="Quatermass and the Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="5084" end="5099" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="5294" end="5304" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231896" start="5339" end="5376" title="Daleks&amp;#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D." label="Daleks&amp;#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q309589" start="5394" end="5407" title="Peter Cushing" label="Peter Cushing"/>
<link wikidata="Q191418" start="5515" end="5523" title="Zeppelin (film)" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210739" start="5547" end="5568" title="The Thirty Nine Steps (1978 film)" label="The Thirty Nine Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755710" start="5668" end="5681" title="The Outsiders (Australian TV series)" label="The Outsiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="5801" end="5804" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876690" start="5867" end="5881" title="BAFTA Scotland" label="BAFTA Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q681822" start="6016" end="6028" title="BBC Scotland" label="BBC Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q60787514" start="6048" end="6059" title="Strathblair" label="Strathblair"/>
<link wikidata="Q5645378" start="6109" end="6123" title="Hamish Macbeth (TV series)" label="Hamish Macbeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335974" start="6270" end="6303" title="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll" label="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141727" start="6334" end="6341" title="Rob Roy (1995 film)" label="Rob Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191294" start="6618" end="6627" title="BBC Radio" label="BBC Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758907" start="6641" end="6663" title="The Quatermass Memoirs" label="The Quatermass Memoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278904" start="6915" end="6921" title="Nigel Kneale" label="Kneale"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="7114" end="7120" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4990116" start="7403" end="7419" title="Julie T. Wallace" label="Julie T. Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q130287343" start="7467" end="7484" title="The Gorbals Story" label="The Gorbals Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745117" start="7538" end="7564" title="The Lady Craved Excitement" label="The Lady Craved Excitement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719880" start="7596" end="7620" title="The Brave Don&amp;#x27;t Cry" label="The Brave Don&amp;#x27;t Cry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505135" start="7656" end="7668" title="Laxdale Hall" label="Laxdale Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2399199" start="7740" end="7750" title="The Maggie" label="The Maggie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649173" start="7818" end="7833" title="Suspended Alibi" label="Suspended Alibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388502" start="7869" end="7880" title="High Flight (film)" label="High Flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5692387" start="7922" end="7938" title="Heart of a Child" label="Heart of a Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q633614" start="7971" end="7990" title="A Night to Remember (1958 film)" label="A Night to Remember"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129703" start="8053" end="8074" title="Tread Softly Stranger" label="Tread Softly Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962672" start="8114" end="8153" title="The Day They Robbed the Bank of England" label="The Day They Robbed the Bank of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q739678" start="8198" end="8212" title="Tunes of Glory" label="Tunes of Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q629076" start="8253" end="8294" title="Greyfriars Bobby (film)" label="Greyfriars Bobby: The True Story of a Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253496" start="8390" end="8412" title="Pirates of Blood River" label="Pirates of Blood River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430" start="8450" end="8459" title="Cleopatra (1963 film)" label="Cleopatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q48174" start="8475" end="8482" title="Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa" label="Agrippa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745652" start="8490" end="8501" title="Torpedo Bay (film)" label="Torpedo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q367748" start="8537" end="8565" title="The Fall of the Roman Empire (film)" label="The Fall of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253718" start="8597" end="8619" title="The Devil-Ship Pirates" label="The Devil-Ship Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691958" start="8667" end="8675" title="Lord Jim (1965 film)" label="Lord Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231896" start="8743" end="8780" title="Daleks&amp;#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D." label="Daleks&amp;#x27; Invasion Earth 2150 A.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q3225894" start="8809" end="8839" title="The Fighting Prince of Donegal" label="The Fighting Prince of Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q732241" start="8877" end="8893" title="The Viking Queen" label="The Viking Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38365" start="8925" end="8938" title="The Long Duel" label="The Long Duel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1171321" start="8970" end="8992" title="Quatermass and the Pit (film)" label="Quatermass and the Pit"/>
<link wikidata="Q773012" start="9074" end="9098" title="Attack on the Iron Coast" label="Attack on the Iron Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197738" start="9138" end="9163" title="The Royal Hunt of the Sun (film)" label="The Royal Hunt of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208216" start="9195" end="9211" title="The Last Grenade" label="The Last Grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3281502" start="9251" end="9268" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Woman" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199722" start="9303" end="9320" title="The Night Visitor" label="The Night Visitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q191418" start="9352" end="9360" title="Zeppelin (film)" label="Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168595" start="9394" end="9426" title="Blood from the Mummy&amp;#x27;s Tomb" label="Blood from the Mummy&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856597" start="9472" end="9492" title="Mary, Queen of Scots (1971 film)" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210739" start="9569" end="9590" title="The Thirty Nine Steps (1978 film)" label="The Thirty Nine Steps"/>
<link wikidata="Q332658" start="9624" end="9634" title="Absolution (1978 film)" label="Absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282889" start="9668" end="9696" title="Meetings with Remarkable Men (film)" label="Meetings with Remarkable Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q471362" start="9746" end="9764" title="Lion of the Desert" label="Lion of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626134" start="9793" end="9803" title="Marco Polo (1982 TV series)" label="Marco Polo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255165" start="9900" end="9911" title="Dragonworld" label="Dragonworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141727" start="9948" end="9955" title="Rob Roy (1995 film)" label="Rob Roy"/>
<link wikidata="Q335974" start="9971" end="10004" title="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll" label="John Campbell, 2nd Duke of Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10081" end="10102" title="The Princess Stallion" label="The Princess Stallion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871515" wikidata="Q71466" url="?curid=871515" title="Ellen Auerbach">
<text>Ellen (Rosenberg) Auerbach (May 20, 1906 – July 30, 2004) was a German-born American photographer who is best remembered for her innovative artwork for the ringl+pit studio in Berlin during the Weimar Republic.

== Early life ==
Auerbach (born Ellen Rosenberg) was born May 20, 1906, in Karlsruhe, Germany. She was born to a liberal Jewish family, and was the daughter of Max Rosenberg and Melanie Gutmann. Her father was a successful businessman while her mother looked after the family.

Rosenberg took no interest in the family business, so her parents allowed her to study, but provided little financial support or encouragement. Between 1924 and 1927, Auerbach studied art at the Badische Landeskunstschule in Karlsruhe. Her professors were Paul Speck and Karl Hubbuch.

In 1928 she went to the Academy of Art (Am Weissenhof) in Stuttgart to continue her studies. Whilst at the academy she carved a bust of her uncle; he gave her a 9 x 12 cm camera to get &quot;the angles right&quot;. This first experience led her to pursue photography as a way of earning a living.

=== Studying photography ===
In 1929 Rosenberg moved to Berlin to study photography with Walter Peterhans, who was a member of the Bauhaus design movement. Whilst studying under Peterhans, Rosenberg met Grete Stern, Peterhans&#x27; only other private student. Berlin&#x27;s liberal environment allowed women to live free social and sexual lives, and Rosenberg was able to break away from her family&#x27;s traditional expectations.

Rosenberg&#x27;s studies with Peterhans were interrupted in 1930 when he moved to Dessau to become the Master of Photography at the Bauhaus School for art and design, but not before impressing on her that photography was an art form, a novel idea at the time. He also encouraged her to pursue photography throughout her life.

== Career ==
In 1930 Rosenberg and Stern bought Peterhans´ studio and equipment, and founded their own photography and design studio specialising in advertising, fashion and portrait photography. This was one of the world&#x27;s first female-run photographic businesses. They named the studio after their childhood names, &quot;ringl+pit&quot; (pit for Rosenberg), which also advantageously disguised their genders Unusually, they signed all of their work together.

The pair were influenced by the creative environment in Berlin at the time. They portrayed women in unconventional ways, impacting the emerging image of the New Woman. Whilst Stern&#x27;s specialty was in graphic design and the formal aspects of photography, Rosenberg provided the humorous and ironic touches to their representations of women in advertising and film.

At first they received few commissions. They photographed friends and lovers they met through bohemian circles, including the dancer Claire Eckstein and the poet Marieluise Fleisser. In 1931 &quot;ringl+pit&quot;&#x27;s work received positive reviews in the magazine &quot;Gebrauchsgraphik&quot; and in 1933 they won first prize for one of their posters in Brussels. Walter Auerbach started to visit the studio regularly and occasionally lived there with the two women. In 1932 Rosenberg went to live in Walter&#x27;s small attic apartment.

Rosenberg also experimented with film. She made two short black and white films. &quot;Heiterer Tag auf Rügen&quot; mixed elements of nature with images of friends from a visit to the island of Rugen. &quot;Gretchen hat Ausgang&quot; was a short silent drama, which featured Stern as a clumsy maid, and her future husband Horacio Coppola as a handsome man who tries to seduce her at the local ice-cream parlour.

When Hitler rose to power in 1933, Walter Auerbach, an activist in left wing political circles, warned them of the dangers ahead. At the end of 1933 Rosenberg left Germany for Palestine; as it was the only place she could go; a loan from Stern allowing her to enter as a &quot;capitalist&quot;. Shortly after her arrival Rosenberg became the official photographer for the Women&#x27;s International Zionist Organisation (WIZO), and made &quot;Tel Aviv,&quot; a 16 mm black and white film about the growing city. When Walter joined her in Palestine, they opened a children&#x27;s photography studio called &quot;Ishon&quot; (&quot;apple of my eye&quot;).

In 1936 the Abyssinian war broke out, and Walter Auerbach and Rosenberg left for London to visit Stern. Stern and Rosenberg collaborated once again in a few commissions, including one for a maternity hospital, their final work together. During her time in London Rosenberg made a short film of Brecht, reciting his poetry; however, the film was silent.

After Stern emigrated to Argentina in 1936, Rosenberg tried but failed to obtain a work and residency permit to run the London studio. In 1937 she married Walter Auerbach and the pair immigrated to the United States. They lived in Philadelphia, where she had some relatives, and continued to work as a children&#x27;s photographer. In 1938 one of her child photographs was selected for the cover of &quot;Life Magazine&#x27;&quot;s second anniversary issue. Here she also experimented with ultraviolet and infrared photography.

In 1940 Ellen and Walter Auerbach moved to New York, where she worked freelance for magazines, including Time, Life and Photo Technique. She also made record covers for Columbia Masterworks. The Auerbachs ended their marriage in 1945 although they remained friends.

Between 1946 and 1949 Ellen Auerbach worked with Dr. Sybil Escalona, a child psychologist, at the Menninger psychiatric institute in Kansas. There she photographed and made two films on young children&#x27;s behaviour. In the early 1950s Auerbach taught photography at the Junior College for Arts and Crafts in Trenton, New Jersey.

In 1955 Auerbach joined nature photographer, Eliot Porter, on a trip to Mexico to photograph churches. Photographs were taken with natural light, which was unusual at this time. This work did not receive recognition at the time, but were published in two books many years later. This trip was her last professional photography project.

At the age of sixty Auerbach embarked on a new career, providing educational therapy for children with learning disabilities at the Educational Institute for Learning and Research in New York.

== Later life ==
Auerbach continued to create photographs non-commercially throughout her later life, as a creative outlet for her thoughts and impressions. She traveled extensively between the 1940s and 1960s, photographing landscapes and nature, as well as interiors, architecture, street scenes and portraits.

In 1990, at the age of 84, she lectured at the Art Institute and the Goethe Institute in Chicago about photographic technique and her life as a photographer.

Auerbach died July 30, 2004, in New York City.

== Rediscovery ==
In the 1980s the work of ringl+pit and Auerbach began to be exhibited by German museums. The rediscovery of her work was partly triggered by the publication of two photography books – &quot;Mexican Churches&quot; (1987) and &quot;Mexican Celebrations&quot; (1990) which were originally taken in 1955 with fellow photographer Eliot Porter.

Auerbach&#x27;s hometown organized a show in 1988 called &quot;Emigriert&quot;, and the Folkwang Museum in Essen mounted a comprehensive ringl+pit exhibition in 1993. A retrospective of her work was presented at the Academy of Arts, Berlin in 1998.

In 1996, a documentary about her partnership with Grete Stern, Ringl + pit, won a number of awards. Very few of &quot;ringl+pit&quot;&#x27;s photographs survive today; most those still in existence are held by museums and collectors.

== Family ==
Auerbach had an older brother who died when he was a child and a brother Walter who was 12 years younger. In 1936 Walter Rosenberg secured a visa for Argentina and sailed there to live with Stern, who was then married to Horacio Coppola.

During the war the Rosenbergs&#x27; parents stayed in Karlsruhe. In 1941 they were sent by the Germans to the Gurs concentration camp in France. The camp was liberated in 1944 by American troops. They returned to Karlsruhe after the war.

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* Clara Sandler and Juan Mandelbaum, an entry about Ellen Auerbach, Jewish Women: A Comprehensive Historical Encyclopedia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q71466" start="0" end="26" title="Ellen Auerbach" label="Ellen (Rosenberg) Auerbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="176" end="182" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="194" end="209" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="287" end="296" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731714" start="761" end="773" title="Karl Hubbuch" label="Karl Hubbuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q68409" start="1163" end="1179" title="Walter Peterhans" label="Walter Peterhans"/>
<link wikidata="Q215618" start="1277" end="1288" title="Grete Stern" label="Grete Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q487070" start="1589" end="1595" title="Dessau" label="Dessau"/>
<link wikidata="Q15990516" start="2804" end="2819" title="Claire Eckstein" label="Claire Eckstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q62985" start="2833" end="2852" title="Marieluise Fleisser" label="Marieluise Fleisser"/>
<link wikidata="Q633809" start="3535" end="3550" title="Horacio Coppola" label="Horacio Coppola"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3631" end="3637" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="3802" end="3811" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="4293" end="4307" title="Second Italo-Abyssinian War" label="Abyssinian war"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="5040" end="5053" title="Life Magazine" label="Life Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="5269" end="5273" title="Time magazine" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149768" start="5333" end="5353" title="Columbia Masterworks" label="Columbia Masterworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q762632" start="5809" end="5821" title="Eliot Porter" label="Eliot Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q125634" start="7262" end="7277" title="Folkwang Museum" label="Folkwang Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q414110" start="7390" end="7413" title="Academy of Arts, Berlin" label="Academy of Arts, Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q708638" start="8021" end="8044" title="Gurs concentration camp" label="Gurs concentration camp"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871528" wikidata="Q2206097" url="?curid=871528" title="Rene Paul Chambellan">
<text>Rene Paul Chambellan (September 15, 1893 – November 29, 1955) was an American sculptor who specialized in architectural sculpture. He was also one of the foremost practitioners of what was then called the &quot;French Modern Style&quot; and has subsequently been labeled Zig-Zag Moderne, or Art Deco. He also frequently designed in the Greco Deco style.

==Life and career==
Chambellan was born in West Hoboken, New Jersey (now part of Union City, New Jersey). He studied at New York University from 1912 to 1914, in Paris at the Beaux-Arts Institute of Design from 1914 to 1917 and the Académie Julian (1918-1919), as well as with sculptor Solon Borglum in New York City. During the First World War, he was a sergeant in France with the U.S. Army.

A resident of Cliffside Park, New Jersey, Chambellan died in a nursing home in Jersey City, New Jersey.

==Selected architectural sculpture==

*1922-1926 – Russell Sage Foundation Building, Grosvenor Atterbury architect, (now Sage House), 122-130 East 22nd Street, New York City
*1923-1924 – American Radiator Building, Howels &amp; Hood and André Fouilhoux architects, NYC
*1925 – Chicago Tribune Building, Raymond Hood architect, Chicago, Illinois
*1927 – Sterling Memorial Library, James Gamble Rogers architect, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut
::– Home Savings Bank of Albany, Dennison &amp; Hirons architects, Albany, New York
*1927-1929 – Williamsburgh Savings Bank Tower, Robert Helmer of Halsey, McCormack and Helmer, architects, Brooklyn
*1928 – New York Life Building, Cass Gilbert architect, NYC
::– State Bank &amp; Trust Company Building, Dennison &amp; Hirons, architects, NYC
::– Beekman Tower, John Mead Howells, architect, NYC
*1929 – Chanin Building, Sloan &amp; Robertson architects, NYC
::– Stewart &amp; Company Building, Warren &amp; Wetmore architects, NYC
*1930 – Daily News Building, Raymond Hood architect, NYC
*1931 – Buffalo City Hall, Deitel, &amp; Wade architects, Buffalo, New York
::– Carew Tower, Delano &amp; Aldrich with W.H. Ahlschlager architects, Cincinnati, Ohio
::– King’s County Hospital, LeRoy P. Ward architect, NYC
::– Tower, National Shrine of the Little Flower, Henry McGill architect, Royal Oak, Michigan
:: – Sterling Memorial Library, James Gamble Rogers architect, New Haven, Connecticut
*c.1932 – New York State Office Building, Albany, New York
*1939 – Manhattan Criminal Courthouse (100 Centre Street), Harvey Wiley Corbett and Charles B. Meyers architects, NYC 1939
*1940 – Airlines Building, John B. Peterkin architect, NYC
*1948 – Firestone Memorial Library, O’Connor &amp; Kilham architects, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
*Queens County Hospital, NYC
*Naval Hospital, Beaufort, South Carolina

==Other works==
*1921 – John Newbery Medal
*c.1928 Series of five designs in cast-iron depicting historic New York City seals, for the Miller Elevated Highway
*1929 – Bronze Doors, East New York Savings Bank, Holmes &amp; Winslow architects, Brooklyn, New York
*c.1930s Tritons, Nereids and Dolphins, Rockefeller Center, NYC
*1937 – Bronze Doors, Hirons &amp; Woolwine architects, Davidson County Courthouse, Nashville, Tennessee
::– Caldecott Medal
*1940 – John Bates Clark Medal for American Economic Association
*c.1950 World War II Monument, Midland, Michigan

==Gallery==
==References==
Notes
Bibliography
*Balfour, Alan. &quot;Rockefeller Center – Architecture as Theater&quot;, New York: McGraw-Hill,1978 
*Kvaran, Einar Einarsson Kvaran. &quot;Architectural Sculpture of the United States&quot;, unpublished manuscript
*Stern, Robert A. M.; Gilmartin, Gregory F. and Mellins, Thomas. &quot;New York 1930&quot; New York: Rizzoli Press, 1987

== External links ==

*&quot;Rene Paul Chambellan&quot; - One of Art Deco&#x27;s Greatest Sculptors.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2206097" start="0" end="20" title="Rene Paul Chambellan" label="Rene Paul Chambellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11634" start="78" end="86" title="sculpture" label="sculptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476515" start="106" end="129" title="architectural sculpture" label="architectural sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q173782" start="291" end="299" title="Art Deco" label="Art Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134543" start="336" end="346" title="Greco Deco" label="Greco Deco"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985406" start="398" end="422" title="West Hoboken, New Jersey" label="West Hoboken, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q588834" start="436" end="458" title="Union City, New Jersey" label="Union City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q49210" start="475" end="494" title="New York University" label="New York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="517" end="522" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877968" start="530" end="560" title="Beaux-Arts Institute of Design" label="Beaux-Arts Institute of Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q337480" start="587" end="602" title="Académie Julian" label="Académie Julian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591008" start="641" end="654" title="Solon Borglum" label="Solon Borglum"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="658" end="671" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="684" end="699" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="738" end="747" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087360" start="764" end="790" title="Cliffside Park, New Jersey" label="Cliffside Park, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q26339" start="829" end="852" title="Jersey City, New Jersey" label="Jersey City, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381762" start="906" end="938" title="Russell Sage Foundation Building" label="Russell Sage Foundation Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547558" start="940" end="959" title="Grosvenor Atterbury" label="Grosvenor Atterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1015" end="1028" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q466979" start="1042" end="1068" title="American Radiator Building" label="American Radiator Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q745903" start="1083" end="1087" title="Raymond Hood" label="Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6104614" start="1092" end="1107" title="J. André Fouilhoux" label="André Fouilhoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143136" start="1132" end="1156" title="Chicago Tribune Building" label="Chicago Tribune Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q745903" start="1158" end="1170" title="Raymond Hood" label="Raymond Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1182" end="1199" title="Chicago, Illinois" label="Chicago, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290192" start="1208" end="1233" title="Sterling Memorial Library" label="Sterling Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134465" start="1235" end="1254" title="James Gamble Rogers" label="James Gamble Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="1266" end="1281" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="1283" end="1305" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q5888695" start="1310" end="1337" title="Home Savings Bank Building" label="Home Savings Bank of Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497001" start="1339" end="1360" title="Frederic Charles Hirons" label="Dennison &amp;amp; Hirons"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="1373" end="1389" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021187" start="1403" end="1435" title="Williamsburgh Savings Bank Tower" label="Williamsburgh Savings Bank Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021187" start="1454" end="1482" title="Williamsburgh Savings Bank Tower" label="Halsey, McCormack and Helmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="1496" end="1504" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499859" start="1513" end="1535" title="New York Life Building" label="New York Life Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q464603" start="1537" end="1549" title="Cass Gilbert" label="Cass Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497001" start="1610" end="1631" title="Frederic Charles Hirons" label="Dennison &amp;amp; Hirons"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879827" start="1653" end="1666" title="Beekman (Panhellenic) Tower" label="Beekman Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q15463168" start="1668" end="1685" title="John Mead Howells" label="John Mead Howells"/>
<link wikidata="Q2956104" start="1710" end="1725" title="Chanin Building" label="Chanin Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567818" start="1801" end="1821" title="Warren &amp;amp; Wetmore" label="Warren &amp;amp; Wetmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070225" start="1846" end="1865" title="Daily News Building" label="Daily News Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q745903" start="1867" end="1879" title="Raymond Hood" label="Raymond Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001988" start="1903" end="1920" title="Buffalo City Hall" label="Buffalo City Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q40435" start="1953" end="1970" title="Buffalo, New York" label="Buffalo, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q152129" start="1975" end="1986" title="Carew Tower" label="Carew Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q45153580" start="1988" end="2008" title="Delano &amp;amp; Aldrich" label="Delano &amp;amp; Aldrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="2043" end="2059" title="Cincinnati, Ohio" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978446" start="2128" end="2164" title="National Shrine of the Little Flower" label="National Shrine of the Little Flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q529165" start="2190" end="2209" title="Royal Oak, Michigan" label="Royal Oak, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290192" start="2215" end="2240" title="Sterling Memorial Library" label="Sterling Memorial Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134465" start="2242" end="2261" title="James Gamble Rogers" label="James Gamble Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="2273" end="2295" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q24861" start="2338" end="2354" title="Albany, New York" label="Albany, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5677699" start="2414" end="2434" title="Harvey Wiley Corbett" label="Harvey Wiley Corbett"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="2607" end="2627" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q138518" start="2629" end="2650" title="Princeton, New Jersey" label="Princeton, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q813376" start="2697" end="2721" title="Beaufort, South Carolina" label="Beaufort, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q622813" start="2747" end="2765" title="Newbery Medal" label="John Newbery Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="2965" end="2983" title="Brooklyn, New York" label="Brooklyn, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11277" start="3024" end="3042" title="Rockefeller Center" label="Rockefeller Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="3132" end="3152" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026417" start="3157" end="3172" title="Caldecott Medal" label="Caldecott Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q839677" start="3181" end="3203" title="John Bates Clark Medal" label="John Bates Clark Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q464096" start="3208" end="3237" title="American Economic Association" label="American Economic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1005953" start="3269" end="3286" title="Midland, Michigan" label="Midland, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q166567" start="3551" end="3570" title="Robert A. M. Stern" label="Stern, Robert A. M."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871535" wikidata="Q1394220" url="?curid=871535" title="Early 1990s recession">
<text>The early 1990s recession describes the period of economic downturn affecting much of the Western world in the early 1990s. The impacts of the recession contributed in part to the 1992 U.S. presidential election victory of Bill Clinton over incumbent president George H. W. Bush. The recession also included the resignation of Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney, the reduction of active companies by 15% and unemployment up to nearly 20% in Finland, civil disturbances in the United Kingdom and the growth of discount stores in the United States and beyond.

Primary factors believed to have led to the recession include the following: restrictive monetary policy enacted by central banks, primarily in response to inflation concerns, the loss of consumer and business confidence as a result of the 1990 oil price shock, the end of the Cold War and the subsequent decrease in defense spending, the savings and loan crisis and a slump in office construction resulting from overbuilding during the 1980s. The US economy returned to 1980s level growth by 1993 and global GDP growth by 1994.

==North America==
===United States===

===Canada===
Canada&#x27;s economy is considered to have been in recession for two full years in the early 1990s, specifically from April 1990 to April 1992. Canada&#x27;s recession began about four months before that of the US, and was deeper, likely because of higher inflationary pressures in Canada, which prompted the Bank of Canada to raise interest rates to levels 5 to 6 percentage points higher than the corresponding rates in the US by early 1990.

Canada&#x27;s economy began to weaken in the second quarter of 1989 as sharp cutbacks in manufacturing output reduced real GDP growth to about 0.3% for each of the last three quarters of the year. Despite GDP growth being minimal, employment growth Canada-wide remained moderate throughout 1989 (although Ontario had a decline in employment in 1989) and there was a solid growth spurt (0.8%) in the first quarter of 1990. In April 1990, economic activity and employment both began substantial declines with the largest drops in real GDP, 1.2%, and employment, 1.1%, occurring in the first quarter of 1991. Both real GDP and employment bounced back in the second quarter of 1991, but then for a full year there was virtually no change in real GDP while employment levels continued to drop as most industries continued to cut output. Only in April 1992 did total employment begin to increase again with real GDP growing 0.4% thereby ending the recession. Technically, the moderate expansion in the second quarter of 1991 would qualify the contractions from April 1990 to March 1991 and July 1991 to April 1992 as two separate recessions, but the 1991 second quarter expansion was likely the result of pent up demand from the Gulf War and the introduction of the federal Goods and Services Tax early in the year severely suppressing consumer spending in the first quarter.

Overall real GDP growth for Canada was 2.3% for 1989, 0.16% for 1990, -2.09% for 1991, 0.90% for 1992, before increasing to 2.66% in 1993. The unemployment rate rose from 7.5% in 1989, to 10.3% in 1990, 10.3% in 1991, 11.2% in 1992, and 11.4% in 1993 before dropping to 10.3% in 1994. In fact, due to unemployment remaining at higher levels until early 1994, some sources assert the early 1990s recession lasted until February 1994 in Canada, as the percentage of the working age population (15–64) being employed continued to decline until the following month. The slow growth in employment following the end of the GDP contraction in April 1992 right through until 1995, is referred to as a &quot;jobless recovery&quot;.

====Inflation and monetary policy====
A key cause of the recession in Canada was inflation and Bank of Canada&#x27;s resulting monetary policy. The inflation rate in Canada had remained in the 4% range between 1984 and 1988, but began to rise again in 1989, averaging 5.0% that year. Gordon Thiesen, asserted in 2001 when he was the Bank of Canada governor, that inflationary pressures in Canada were partly fueled by Canadians having had a greater &quot;inflation psychology&quot; than Americans, that is a higher propensity to spend now in the belief the price for the same product will be substantially higher in short period of time. To reduce inflation, the Bank of Canada raised its prime rate from 10% in 1986 and 1987, to 12.25% at the start of 1989, peaking at 14.75% in June 1990, thereby prompting Canadians to reduce spending, reduce borrowing and begin saving sooner and more greatly than Americans. Particularly hard hit were Canada&#x27;s real estate markets, the building industry, especially factory construction, and consumer confidence.

Then in February 1991, the Bank of Canada and the Department of Finance announced their monetary policy would be governed by formal inflation targets, with a target of 3% for 1992. Inflation was contained to 4.8% in 1990, 5.6% in 1991 and then decreased to 1.5% in 1992 and 1.9 in 1993, well below the target of 3%. This suggests the Bank of Canada&#x27;s restrictive monetary policy overshot its target, suppressing GDP and employment growth in 1992 and 1993 in what would normally have been an economic recovery period. In fact, complex macro-economic modelling undertaken estimates that &quot;excessive monetary restraint&quot; of the Bank of Canada reduced real GDP growth by 1.5 percentage points in 1990, 2.9 percentage points in 1991 and 4.0 percentage points in 1993.

====Tax increases====
Another cause of Canada&#x27;s recession were several tax increases instituted by the federal government between 1989 and 1991. These increases related to sales, excise and payroll taxes were modelled to have reduced real GDP growth by 1.6, 2.4 and 5.1 percentage points, respectively, in 1990, 1991 and 1992, although if these tax increases had not been implemented the federal government&#x27;s national debt would have increased a significant amount. A third, less important factor in Canada&#x27;s recession was the weakness of the US economy at the time, which was calculated to have had the effect of reducing Canada&#x27;s economic growth by .6, 2.2 and 1.1 percentage points in 1990, 1991 and 1992.

====High value of the Canadian dollar and low productivity====

An additional reason for the recession, especially it being deeper and longer in Canada than in the US, was the high value of the Canadian dollar, as high as 86-cents American in 1991, which made Canada&#x27;s export manufactured goods, such as automotive parts, textiles and intermediate industrial goods and materials, uncompetitive in international markets. Combined with Canada&#x27;s manufacturing productivity at the time being among the lowest in the G7 (caused by a lack of investment in new equipment or in research and development) and the removal of certain protective tariffs through the 1989 Canada-US Free Trade Agreement, this caused substantial job losses in the manufacturing sector with a significant number of manufacturers closing down or moving to the US, Mexico or the Caribbean.

====Impact of recession on unemployment====
The recession severely depressed job markets throughout the country unemployment rising from a low of 7.2% in October 1989, to a high of 12.1% in November 1992; it would take 10 years before unemployment recovered a 7.2% level (it was reached in October 1999). 
For instance, in Montreal (Quebec) unemployment affected 16.7% of the active population by December 1992 while the number of households relying on welfare increased from 88,000 to 102,000 between April 1990 and December 1992.

The early 1990s recession was notable for being substantially more negative for employment in Ontario than the early 1980s recession; Ontario&#x27;s percentage of total age 15-64 population employed began to decline early in 1989 and only began to grow again early in 1994, five years of decline with an 8.2 percentage point drop. By contrast, in the early 1980s Ontario&#x27;s employment percentage decline was shorter than Canada&#x27;s as a whole and only had a 4.4 percentage point contraction.

====Comparison to early 1980s recession====

C.D, Howe Institute&#x27;s Business Cycle Council classifies Canada&#x27;s recession according to their severity, with Category 4 recessions being the second highest after Category 5, which is a depression. It defines Category 4 recessions as having substantial declines in real GDP and employment for a year or longer. The early 1990s recession in Canada is classified as a Category 4 recession, the same category as the early 1980s recession. Notably, the early 1990s recession did not have as deep a contraction as the early 1980s recession, but was of longer duration as it had four years of less than 2.3% growth in real GDP (1989–92), while the early 1980s recession only had two years of less than 2.3% growth (1980 and 1982), and only the early 1990s recession actually saw a decrease in GDP per capita, that being by $29 in 1991. Both recessions had high unemployment after the recessionary period had officially ended with unemployment rates of 12% and 11.4%, in 1983 and 1993, respectively. Other sources describe the early 1990s recession as &quot;the deepest in Canada since the Great Depression of the 1930s&quot; naming it &quot;the Great Canadian Slump of 1990–92.&quot;

==Western Europe==
===Finland===

Finland underwent severe economic depression in 1990–93. Badly managed financial deregulation of the 1980s, in particular removal of bank borrowing controls and liberation of foreign borrowing, combined with strong currency and a fixed exchange rate policy led to a foreign debt financed boom. Bank borrowing increased at its peak over 100% a year and asset prices skyrocketed. The collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 led to a 70% drop in trade with Russia and eventually Finland was forced to devaluate, which increased the private sector&#x27;s foreign currency denominated debt burden. At the same time authorities tightened bank supervision and prudential regulation, lending dropped by 25% and asset prices halved. Combined with raising savings rate and worldwide economic troubles, this led to a sharp drop of aggregate demand and a wave of bankruptcies. Credit losses mounted and a banking crisis inevitability followed. The number of companies went down by 15%, real GDP contracted about 14% and unemployment rose from 3% to nearly 20% in four years.

Recovery has been based on exports, after currency devaluation of 40% and reviving world economy share of exports as percentage of GDP has risen from 20% to 45%, and Finland has been running consistent current account surpluses. Despite this impressive performance and strong growth mass unemployment has remained a problem.

===France===
France, just as the rest of continental Europe, entered recession later compared to economies of anglophone countries. The economic climate started to worsen in late 1989 (first in industry) in several phases:
* A progressive slowing of economic activity between late 1989 and Autumn 1990 due mostly to slowing exports (especially to depressed North American markets);
* A sudden slump in the latter part of 1990 as the Gulf War amplified previous tendencies;
* A stand-by situation between mid 1991 and Autumn 1992 as the end of the War in the Gulf provided for some temporary relief;
* Another slump in late 1992 as external demand dries up and the aftermaths of Black Wednesday.

The recession officially starts at the end of 1992 and beginning of the 1993. It is a brief but important recession: GDP drops 0.5% in the last quarter of 1992 and 0.9% in the first quarter of 1993. The drop is amplified by weak exports figures as most of France&#x27;s trading partners also entered recession at the end of 1992. On a yearly basis, GDP growth was limited to 1.5% in 1992 and –0.9% in 1993, the first negative figure since 1975.

Industry is vastly affected by the recession: output dropped 5.3% in volume in 1993 with a catastrophic first semester and a very limited recovery in the second. The construction industry is also affected by the recession with a 3.9% decrease in volume of output.

All the composants of GDP were depressed in 1993:
* Household consumption recorded its slowest increase in 30 years (+0.4% in volume);
* Investment from both households (residential investments) and enterprises decreased significantly (–4.4 and –6.8% respectively). For the latter early 1993 represents the trough of a slump started in 1990;
* Inventory levels were reduced in 1993;
* Exports decreased (–0.4%) but not as much as imports (–3.1%) meaning that external trade contributed positively to GDP growth in 1993.

The weak economic climate resulted in significant increase in unemployment and public deficits. Reduced activity levels had a direct impact on public finances: social benefits grew 6.8% in 1993 whereas tax revenues only increased 2.4% despite increases in tax rates and charges throughout the year (the Generalized Social Contribution rate was increased by 1.3 points on 1 July 1993).

===Sweden===

Sweden experienced a financial crisis during the early-mid 1990s.

===United Kingdom===

Despite several major economies showing quarterly detraction during 1989, the British economy continued to grow until the third quarter of 1990. Economic growth was not re-established until early 1993, with the end of the recession being officially declared on 26 April that year. The Conservative government which had been in power continuously since 1979 managed to achieve re-election in April 1992 after the replacement of long-serving Margaret Thatcher with John Major as prime minister in November 1990 helped fend off a strong challenge from Neil Kinnock and Labour.

==Asian Pacific==
===Japan===


Japan had loose monetary policy in the decades preceding, causing the Japanese asset price bubble. The Bank of Japan raised interest rates to cause an inverted yield curve and reduced M2 money supply increases to tame the property asset bubble. The decade following is known as the Lost Decade.

==Political ramifications==
===Canada and the United States===

The Progressive Conservative government of Brian Mulroney in Canada and the successful presidential election campaign of George H. W. Bush in the United States may have been aided by growth in 1988. However, neither leader could hold on to power through the last part of the recession, being challenged by political opponents running on pledges to restore the economy to health. Bush initially enjoyed great popularity after the successful Persian Gulf War, but this soon wore off as the recession worsened; his 1992 re-election bid was particularly hampered by his 1990 decision to renege on his &quot;Read my lips: no new taxes&quot; pledge made during his first campaign in 1988. Meanwhile, Mulroney became deeply unpopular in Canada after two failed constitutional reform attempts (the Meech Lake Accord and Charlottetown Accord) and the 1991 introduction of the Goods and Services Tax (GST). He resigned as prime minister and party leader in 1993, and the Progressive Conservatives collapsed in the election held later that year, winning only two seats.

===Australia===

In Australia, Paul Keating (then Treasurer of Australia, and future Prime Minister) referred to it as &quot;the recession that Australia had to have&quot;. This quote became a cornerstone of the opposition Liberal Party&#x27;s campaign during the 1993 election, designed to underscore alleged mismanagement of the national economy by the incumbent Labor Party. Unlike the opposition parties in North America, however, the Liberal Party failed to enter government (at least, not until the 1996 election)

===New Zealand===
In neighbouring New Zealand, the recession came after the re-election of the reformist Lange Labour government. The impact of economic reforms (known as Rogernomics) in the recession led to deep policy divisions between the Prime Minister, David Lange, and the Minister of Finance, Roger Douglas. In response to the recession, Douglas wanted to increase the pace of reform, whereas Lange sought to prevent further reform. Douglas resigned from Cabinet in 1988, but was re-appointed to Cabinet in 1989, prompting Lange to resign. Labour lost the 1990 general elections by a landslide to the National Party, who continued with Douglas&#x27; reforms.

===France===
François Mitterrand was elected to a second term on 8 May 1988 and his political party, the Socialist Party, and its allies won a very narrow majority in the National Assembly the next month.

Weakened by the recession and corruption scandals, the Socialist Party suffered severe defeats in the 1992 local elections (regional and cantonal) and the 1993 legislative elections (winning only 53 seats out of 577, its worst turnout until 2017) where the RPR-UDF right-wing coalition were returned to power with a massive majority of 449 seats out of 577.

==Influence on culture==
In the United States during the recession more people chose to shop at discount stores. This caused Kmart and Walmart (which became the country&#x27;s largest retailer in 1989) to outsell the traditional stalwart Sears.

==Civil unrest==
In the United Kingdom, there was a significant wave of rioting at the height of the recession in 1991, with unemployment and social discontent being seen as major factors. Areas affected included Handsworth in Birmingham, Blackbird Leys in Oxford, Kates Hill in Dudley, Meadow Well on Tyneside, Ely in Cardiff and Hartcliffe in Bristol. These were isolated communities devastated by poverty and unemployment, separated from urban centres.

==See also==
* Early 1980s recession
* Savings and loan crisis
* Credit crunch
* Gulf War
* List of recessions in the United States
* Lost Decades

==Notes==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="4" end="25" title="Early 1990s recession" label="early 1990s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="90" end="103" title="Western world" label="Western world"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="180" end="211" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992 U.S. presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="223" end="235" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="261" end="278" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="351" end="365" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q261428" start="513" end="528" title="discount stores" label="discount stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q66344" start="679" end="691" title="central bank" label="central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118951" start="803" end="823" title="1990 oil price shock" label="1990 oil price shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="840" end="848" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="902" end="925" title="savings and loan crisis" label="savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586468" start="1022" end="1060" title="1990s United States boom" label="returned to 1980s level growth by 1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164722" start="2921" end="2938" title="consumer spending" label="consumer spending"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="7440" end="7448" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="7450" end="7456" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q5167679" start="9799" end="9807" title="Dissolution of the Soviet Union" label="collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="9815" end="9827" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="9912" end="9921" title="devaluation" label="devaluate"/>
<link wikidata="Q319622" start="10160" end="10172" title="savings rate" label="savings rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801078" start="10234" end="10250" title="aggregate demand" label="aggregate demand"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="11237" end="11245" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q400500" start="11482" end="11497" title="Black Wednesday" label="Black Wednesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996030" start="13035" end="13066" title="Generalized Social Contribution" label="Generalized Social Contribution"/>
<link wikidata="Q543609" start="13597" end="13622" title="1992 United Kingdom general election" label="re-election in April 1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="13661" end="13678" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="13684" end="13694" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q317258" start="13770" end="13782" title="Neil Kinnock" label="Neil Kinnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="13787" end="13793" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="13828" end="13833" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500827" start="13898" end="13925" title="Japanese asset price bubble" label="Japanese asset price bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q333101" start="13931" end="13944" title="Bank of Japan" label="Bank of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109040562" start="13979" end="13999" title="inverted yield curve" label="inverted yield curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q39911" start="14077" end="14083" title="decade" label="decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141122" start="14110" end="14121" title="Lost Decades" label="Lost Decade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="14192" end="14216" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="14231" end="14245" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="14264" end="14305" title="1988 U.S. presidential election" label="successful presidential election campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="14309" end="14326" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="14628" end="14644" title="Persian Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="14700" end="14720" title="1992 U.S. presidential election" label="1992 re-election bid"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14791" end="14817" title="Read my lips: no new taxes" label="Read my lips: no new taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q835352" start="14978" end="14995" title="Meech Lake Accord" label="Meech Lake Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081029" start="15000" end="15020" title="Charlottetown Accord" label="Charlottetown Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q3516365" start="15055" end="15077" title="Goods and Services Tax (Canada)" label="Goods and Services Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q374646" start="15192" end="15221" title="1993 Canadian federal election" label="election held later that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q242654" start="15279" end="15291" title="Paul Keating" label="Paul Keating"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="15298" end="15320" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q241149" start="15471" end="15484" title="Liberal Party of Australia" label="Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357950" start="15512" end="15525" title="1993 Australian federal election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="15613" end="15624" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358698" start="15753" end="15766" title="1996 Australian federal election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="15803" end="15814" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476119" start="15874" end="15886" title="Fourth Labour Government of New Zealand" label="Lange Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q745640" start="15940" end="15951" title="Rogernomics" label="Rogernomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q367589" start="16027" end="16038" title="David Lange" label="David Lange"/>
<link wikidata="Q352998" start="16069" end="16082" title="Roger Douglas" label="Roger Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="16332" end="16354" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="16377" end="16391" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2038" start="16449" end="16468" title="François Mitterrand" label="François Mitterrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170972" start="16541" end="16556" title="Socialist Party (France)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q375690" start="16579" end="16599" title="1988 French legislative election" label="very narrow majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q3587402" start="16766" end="16774" title="1992 French regional elections" label="regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586831" start="16779" end="16787" title="1992 French cantonal elections" label="cantonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2539717" start="16797" end="16823" title="1993 French legislative election" label="1993 legislative elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052584" start="16899" end="16902" title="Rally for the Republic" label="RPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q827415" start="16903" end="16906" title="Union for French Democracy" label="UDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="17033" end="17046" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q261428" start="17097" end="17112" title="discount stores" label="discount stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753080" start="17126" end="17131" title="Kmart (United States)" label="Kmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q483551" start="17136" end="17143" title="Walmart" label="Walmart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="17239" end="17244" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647672" start="17460" end="17470" title="Handsworth, West Midlands" label="Handsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="17474" end="17484" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404781" start="17486" end="17500" title="Blackbird Leys" label="Blackbird Leys"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="17504" end="17510" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376004" start="17512" end="17522" title="Kates Hill" label="Kates Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q213832" start="17526" end="17532" title="Dudley" label="Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q86752371" start="17534" end="17545" title="Meadow Well" label="Meadow Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578988" start="17549" end="17557" title="Tyneside" label="Tyneside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368392" start="17559" end="17562" title="Ely, Cardiff" label="Ely"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="17566" end="17573" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5674334" start="17578" end="17588" title="Hartcliffe" label="Hartcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="17592" end="17599" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="17719" end="17740" title="Early 1980s recession" label="Early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="17743" end="17766" title="Savings and loan crisis" label="Savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q590998" start="17769" end="17782" title="Credit crunch" label="Credit crunch"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="17785" end="17793" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3097311" start="17796" end="17835" title="List of recessions in the United States" label="List of recessions in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141122" start="17838" end="17850" title="Lost Decades" label="Lost Decades"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871536" wikidata="Q7609642" url="?curid=871536" title="Stephen K. Yamashiro">
<text>Stephen Kei Yamashiro (July 15, 1941 – May 24, 2011) was an American politician and lawyer who served as the former Mayor of Hawaii County from 1992 to 2000. Yamashiro served on the Hawaii County council from 1976 to 1990, including eleven years as the council&#x27;s chairman. He then served as the Mayor of Hawaii for two consecutive, four-year terms from 1992 until 2000.

The &quot;Honolulu Star-Bulletin&quot; has referred to Yamashiro as &quot;among the most influential political leaders&quot; in the history of the Big Island of Hawaii. More specifically, &quot;Honolulu Star-Bulletin&quot; reporter Hugh Clark has called Yamashiro, &quot;probably … the most significant newsmaker on the Big Island&quot; during the final thirty years of the 20th century.

==Biography==
===Early years===
Yamashiro was born on July 15, 1941, in Honolulu, Hawaii. He attended University Elementary School and graduated from the Punahou School in 1959. In 1964, Yamashiro also graduated from the U.S. Army Artillery Officer&#x27;s Candidate School, located at Fort Sill in Oklahoma.

He received a bachelor&#x27;s degree from the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa in 1965 and a law degree from Willamette University College of Law in Salem, Oregon in 1969.

===Political career===
Yamashiro worked as the Hawaii State Deputy Attorney General. Yamashiro began his career in Hawaii County government as a deputy corporation legal counsel for Hawaii County. He was then employed by the Hawaii Public Employment Relations Board as a Hearings Officer.

Yamashiro was elected to the Hawaii County Council from 1976 to 1990. He served as the chairman of the county council simultaneously for eleven of those years.

===Mayor of Hawaii County===
Former Mayor of Hawaii Bernard Akana died in office on April 12, 1990. Akana&#x27;s death necessitated a special election to fill the remainder of Akana&#x27;s unexpired term. Yamashiro left the council and announced his candidacy for Mayor of Hawaii County. Yamshiro was defeated in the 1990 special election by Lorraine Inouye, who won the election by just 76 votes.

Two years later, Yamashiro was elected Mayor of Hawaii County in 1992 in a rematch against incumbent Mayor Lorraine Inouye. He also defeated Russell Kokubun, who had also served on the county council, in the 1992 mayoral election. Though rivals in the election, Kokuban became deputy planning director for several years during Yamashiro&#x27;s tenure as mayor.

He was inaugurated into office on December 7, 1992. Yamashiro was re-elected to a second, four-year term in 1996, defeating challenger Keiko Bonk of the Green Party by a slimmer than expected margin of 3,148 votes.

Yamashiro came into office facing major economic challenges for the Big Island of Hawaii. The island&#x27;s once thriving sugar industry had declined, causing the loss of agricultural jobs. The last major sugarcane plantation closed on the island closed during the 1990s. Yamashiro, a strong proponent of development, pushed for the rapid development of resorts and other tourism infrastructure in South Kohala and North Kona to replace jobs lost in the sugar industry.

Yamshiro is credited with introducing the 100% Kona coffee emblem and logo now widely used by Kona Coffee producers on the Big Island. He expanded the tourism industry between Japan and the Big Island of Hawaii. Yamashiro spearheaded efforts to recruit the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement to open an office and international service at Kona International Airport. He also successfully lobbied for nonstop, international flights between Kona and Narita International Airport by Japan Airlines.

He also considered an advocate for the Big Island of Hawaii&#x27;s agricultural industry, the University of Hawaii and the island&#x27;s film industry.

In 2000, Yamashiro could not seek re-election due to term limits. He was succeeded by Harry Kim in December 2000. Yamashiro left Hawaii County with a budget surplus.

===Post-Mayoral career===
Republican Governor Linda Lingle appointed Yamashiro to the Hawaii Tourism Authority. Lingle later reappointed Yamashiro to a second, four-year term on the tourism authority. He served as the chairman of the Hawaii Tourism Authority&#x27;s budget committee. Additionally, the Western United Life Assurance Company hired him as project manager to promote its planned residential development in Hilo.

Yamashiro died from pneumonia at Hilo Medical Center in Hilo, Hawaii, on May 24, 2011, aged 69. He was survived by his wife, Della E. Allison.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7609642" start="0" end="21" title="Stephen K. Yamashiro" label="Stephen Kei Yamashiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="69" end="79" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="84" end="90" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797717" start="116" end="121" title="Mayor of Hawaii" label="Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q487334" start="125" end="138" title="Hawaii County, Hawaii" label="Hawaii County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797717" start="300" end="315" title="Mayor of Hawaii" label="Mayor of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625579" start="386" end="408" title="Honolulu Star-Bulletin" label="Honolulu Star-Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="523" end="543" title="Big Island of Hawaii" label="Big Island of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="696" end="706" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Big Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="837" end="845" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273124" start="919" end="933" title="Punahou School" label="Punahou School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018681" start="1050" end="1059" title="Fort Sill" label="Fort Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="1088" end="1110" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="1120" end="1150" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115013" start="1165" end="1175" title="law degree" label="law degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003310" start="1181" end="1217" title="Willamette University College of Law" label="Willamette University College of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q43919" start="1221" end="1234" title="Salem, Oregon" label="Salem, Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="1312" end="1328" title="Attorney General" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q487334" start="1360" end="1373" title="Hawaii County" label="Hawaii County"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="1409" end="1422" title="legal counsel" label="legal counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q487334" start="1564" end="1585" title="Hawaii County Council" label="Hawaii County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892894" start="1748" end="1761" title="Bernard Akana" label="Bernard Akana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="1830" end="1846" title="special election" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797717" start="1960" end="1982" title="Mayor of Hawaii County" label="Mayor of Hawaii County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18687929" start="2038" end="2053" title="Lorraine Inouye" label="Lorraine Inouye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381760" start="2236" end="2251" title="Russell Kokubun" label="Russell Kokubun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383670" start="2592" end="2602" title="Keiko Bonk" label="Keiko Bonk"/>
<link wikidata="Q849158" start="2610" end="2621" title="Green Party (United States)" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="2741" end="2761" title="Big Island of Hawaii" label="Big Island of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634955" start="2795" end="2809" title="Sugar plantations in Hawaii" label="sugar industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="2878" end="2887" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634955" start="2888" end="2898" title="Sugar plantations in Hawaii" label="plantation"/>
<link wikidata="Q875157" start="3027" end="3034" title="resorts" label="resorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q121359" start="3053" end="3067" title="infrastructure" label="infrastructure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425893" start="3071" end="3083" title="South Kohala" label="South Kohala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260402" start="3088" end="3098" title="North Kona" label="North Kona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781121" start="3191" end="3202" title="Kona coffee" label="Kona coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="3203" end="3209" title="emblem" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="3214" end="3218" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5140955" start="3238" end="3259" title="Coffee production in Hawaii" label="Kona Coffee producers"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="3267" end="3277" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Big Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q68740" start="3334" end="3344" title="Hawaii (island)" label="Big Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q943091" start="3401" end="3441" title="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement" label="U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781135" start="3489" end="3515" title="Kona International Airport" label="Kona International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q36454" start="3598" end="3626" title="Narita International Airport" label="Narita International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q213140" start="3630" end="3644" title="Japan Airlines" label="Japan Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670272" start="3886" end="3895" title="Harry Kim (politician)" label="Harry Kim"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566674" start="3950" end="3964" title="budget surplus" label="budget surplus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="3993" end="4003" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589655" start="4004" end="4012" title="Governor of Hawaii" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q231701" start="4013" end="4025" title="Linda Lingle" label="Linda Lingle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4053" end="4077" title="Hawaii Tourism Authority" label="Hawaii Tourism Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q216258" start="4386" end="4390" title="Hilo" label="Hilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="4413" end="4422" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q216258" start="4449" end="4461" title="Hilo, Hawaii" label="Hilo, Hawaii"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871552" wikidata="Q2824573" url="?curid=871552" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan">
<text>Ronald Reagan&#x27;s tenure as the 40th president of the United States began with his first inauguration on January 20, 1981, and ended on January 20, 1989. Reagan, a Republican from California, took office following his landslide victory over Democrat incumbent president Jimmy Carter and independent congressman John B. Anderson in the 1980 presidential election. Four years later in the 1984 presidential election, he defeated former Democratic vice president Walter Mondale to win re-election in a larger landslide. Reagan served two terms and was succeeded by his vice president, George H. W. Bush, who won the 1988 presidential election. Reagan&#x27;s 1980 landslide election resulted from a dramatic conservative shift to the right in American politics, including a loss of confidence in liberal, New Deal, and Great Society programs and priorities that had dominated the national agenda since the 1930s.

Domestically, the Reagan administration enacted a major tax cut, sought to cut non-military spending, and eliminated federal regulations. The administration&#x27;s economic policies, known as &quot;Reaganomics&quot;, were inspired by supply-side economics. The combination of tax cuts and an increase in defense spending led to budget deficits, and the federal debt increased significantly during Reagan&#x27;s tenure. Reagan signed the Tax Reform Act of 1986, simplifying the tax code by reducing rates and removing several tax breaks, and the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, which enacted sweeping changes to U.S. immigration law and granted amnesty to three million illegal immigrants. Reagan also appointed more federal judges than any other president, including four Supreme Court Justices.

Reagan&#x27;s foreign policy stance was resolutely anti-communist. Its plan of action, known as the Reagan Doctrine, sought to roll back the global influence of the Soviet Union in an attempt to end the Cold War. Under his doctrine, the Reagan administration initiated a massive buildup of the United States military; promoted new technologies such as missile defense systems; and in 1983 undertook an invasion of Grenada, the first major overseas action by U.S. troops since the end of the Vietnam War. The administration also created controversy by granting aid to paramilitary forces seeking to overthrow leftist governments, particularly in war-torn Central America and Afghanistan. Specifically, the Reagan administration engaged in covert arms sales to Iran to fund Contra rebels in Nicaragua that were fighting to overthrow their nation&#x27;s socialist government. The resulting Iran–Contra affair led to the conviction or resignation of several administration officials. During Reagan&#x27;s second term, he worked with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev to sign a major arms control agreement. In 1986, Congress overrode Reagan&#x27;s veto of a bill intended to implement economic sanctions against South Africa&#x27;s apartheid regime.

Historians and political scientists generally rank Reagan in the upper tier of American presidents, and consider him to be one of the most important presidents since Franklin D. Roosevelt. Supporters of Reagan&#x27;s presidency have pointed to his contributions to the economic recovery of the 1980s, the peaceful end of the Cold War, and a broader restoration of American confidence. Reagan&#x27;s presidency has also received criticism for rising budget deficits and wealth inequality during and after his presidency. Due to Reagan&#x27;s popularity with the public and advocacy of American conservatism, some historians have described the period during and after his presidency as the Reagan era.

==Background==
===Conservative shift in politics===

Even prior to becoming president, Reagan was the leader of a dramatic conservative shift that undercut many of the domestic and foreign policies that had dominated the national agenda for decades. A major factor in the rise of conservatism was the growing distrust of government in the aftermath of the Watergate scandal. While distrust of high officials had been an American characteristic for two centuries, Watergate engendered heightened levels of suspicion and encouraged the media to engage in a vigorous search for scandals. An unexpected new factor was the emergence of the religious right as a cohesive political force that gave strong support to conservatism.

Other factors in the rise of the conservative movement were the emergence of a &quot;culture war&quot; as a triangular battle among conservatives, traditional liberals, and the New Left, involving such issues as individual freedom, divorce, sexual freedom, abortion, and homosexuality. A mass movement of population from the cities to the suburbs led to the creation of a new group of voters less attached to New Deal economic policies and machine politics. Meanwhile, it became socially acceptable for conservative Southern whites, especially well-educated suburbanites, to vote Republican. Though the civil rights legislation of the 1960s had been a triumphal issue for liberalism and had created a new, pro-Democratic black electorate, it had also destroyed the argument that whites had to vote Democratic to protect segregation in the South. Responding to these various trends, Reagan and other conservatives successfully presented conservative ideas as an alternative to a public that had grown disillusioned with New Deal liberalism and the Democratic Party. Reagan&#x27;s charisma and speaking skills helped him frame conservatism as an optimistic, forward-looking vision for the country.

===1980 election===


Reagan, who had served as Governor of California from 1967 to 1975, narrowly lost the 1976 Republican presidential primaries to incumbent president Gerald Ford. With the defeat of Ford by Democrat Jimmy Carter in the 1976 election, Reagan immediately became the front-runner for the 1980 Republican presidential nomination. A darling of the conservative movement, Reagan faced more moderate Republicans such as George H. W. Bush, Howard Baker, and Bob Dole in the 1980 Republican presidential primaries. After Bush won the Iowa caucuses, he became Reagan&#x27;s primary challenger, but Reagan won the New Hampshire primary and most of the following primaries, gaining an insurmountable delegate lead by the end of March 1980. Ford was Reagan&#x27;s first choice for his running mate, but Reagan backed away from the idea out of the fear of a &quot;co-presidency&quot; in which Ford would exercise an unusual degree of power. Reagan instead chose Bush, and the Reagan-Bush ticket was nominated at the 1980 Republican National Convention. Meanwhile, Carter won the Democratic nomination, defeating a primary challenge by Senator Ted Kennedy. Polls taken after the party conventions showed a tied race between Reagan and Carter, while independent candidate John B. Anderson had the support of many moderates.

The 1980 general campaign between Reagan and Carter was conducted amid a multitude of domestic concerns and the ongoing Iran hostage crisis. After winning the Republican nomination, Reagan pivoted to the center. Though he continued to champion a major tax cut, Reagan backed off of his support for free trade and the privatization of Social Security, and promised to consider arms control treaties with the Soviet Union. He instead sought to focus the race on Carter&#x27;s handling of the economy. Mired with an approval rating in the low 30s, Carter also waged a negative campaign, focusing on the supposed risk of war if Reagan took office.

Reagan and Carter met in one presidential debate, held just one week before election day. Reagan delivered an effective performance, asking voters, &quot;Are you better off today than you were four years ago?&quot; In response to a characterization by Carter of his record regarding Medicare, Reagan replied with a phrase that helped define the election and endure in the political lexicon: &quot;There you go again.&quot;

Though the race had been widely regarded as a close contest, Reagan won over the large majority of undecided voters. Reagan took 50.7% of the popular vote and 489 of the 538 electoral votes. Carter won 41% of the popular vote and 49 electoral votes, while Anderson won 6.6% of the popular vote. In the concurrent congressional elections, Republicans took control of the Senate for the first time since the 1950s, while Democrats retained control of the House of Representatives.

==Administration==


Reagan tapped James Baker, who had run Bush&#x27;s 1980 campaign, as his first chief of staff. Baker, Deputy Chief of Staff Michael Deaver, and Counselor Edwin Meese formed the &quot;troika&quot;, the key White House staffers early in Reagan&#x27;s presidency. Baker quickly established himself as the most powerful member of the troika and the overseer of day-to-day operations, while Meese had nominal leadership of policy development and Deaver orchestrated Reagan&#x27;s public appearances. Aside from the troika, other important White House staffers included Richard Darman and David Gergen.

Reagan chose Alexander Haig, a former general who had served as chief of staff to Richard Nixon, as his first secretary of state. Other major Cabinet appointees included Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, a former Nixon cabinet official who would preside over an increase in defense spending, and Secretary of the Treasury Donald Regan, a bank executive. Reagan selected David Stockman, a young congressman from Michigan, as the director of the Office of Management and Budget. CIA director William J. Casey emerged as an important figure in the administration, as the CIA would figure prominently into Reagan&#x27;s Cold War initiatives. Reagan downgraded the importance of the national security advisor, and six different individuals held that position during Reagan&#x27;s presidency.

Haig left the cabinet in 1982 after clashing with other members of the Reagan administration, and was replaced by another former Nixon administration official, George P. Shultz. By 1982, National Security Advisor William P. Clark Jr., Ambassador to the United Nations Jeane Kirkpatrick, and CIA Director Casey had established themselves as the major figures in the formulation of the administration&#x27;s foreign policy. Shultz eventually emerged as the administration&#x27;s most influential foreign policy figure, moving the administration towards a less confrontational policy with the Soviet Union.

Baker and Treasury Secretary Regan switched positions at the beginning of Reagan&#x27;s second term. Regan centralized power within his office, and he took on the responsibilities that had been held by Baker, Deaver, and Meese, the latter of whom succeeded William French Smith as attorney general in 1985. Regan frequently clashed with First Lady Nancy Reagan, and he left the administration in the wake of the Iran–Contra affair and Republican losses in the 1986 mid-term elections. Regan was replaced by former Senate Majority Leader Howard Baker.

==Judicial appointments==
===Supreme Court===

Reagan made four successful appointments to the Supreme Court during his eight years in office. In 1981, he successfully nominated Sandra Day O&#x27;Connor to succeed Associate Justice Potter Stewart, fulfilling a campaign promise to name the first woman to the Supreme Court. Democrats, who had planned to vigorously oppose Reagan&#x27;s nominations to the Supreme Court, approved of the nomination of O&#x27;Connor. However, the Christian right was astonished and dismayed with O&#x27;Connor, who they feared would not overturn the Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Roe v. Wade&quot;, which had established abortion as protected from government interference via the Constitution. O&#x27;Connor served on the Supreme Court until 2006, and was generally considered to be a centrist conservative.

In 1986, Reagan elevated Associate Justice William Rehnquist to the position of Chief Justice of the United States after Warren Burger chose to retire. Rehnquist, a member of the conservative wing of the court, was the third sitting associate justice to be elevated to chief justice, after Edward Douglass White and Harlan F. Stone. Reagan successfully nominated Antonin Scalia to fill Rehnquist&#x27;s position as an associate justice of the Supreme Court. Scalia became a member of the court&#x27;s conservative wing.

Reagan faced greater difficulties in filling the final Supreme Court vacancy, which arose due to the retirement of Lewis F. Powell Jr. Reagan nominated Robert Bork in July 1987, but the nomination was rejected by the Senate in October 1987. Later that month, Reagan announced the nomination of Douglas H. Ginsburg, but Ginsburg withdrew from consideration in November 1987. Finally, Reagan nominated Anthony Kennedy, who won Senate confirmation in February 1988. Along with O&#x27;Connor, Kennedy served as the key swing vote on the Supreme Court in the decades after Reagan left office.

===Other courts===

Reagan appointed a combined total of 368 judges to the United States courts of appeals and the United States district courts, more than any other president. The vast majority of his judicial appointees were conservative, and many of the appointees were affiliated with the conservative Federalist Society. Partly because Congress passed a law creating new federal judicial positions in 1984, Reagan had appointed nearly half of the federal judiciary by the time he left office in 1989.

==Assassination attempt==

On March 30, 1981, only 69 days into the new administration, Reagan, his press secretary James Brady, Washington police officer Thomas Delahanty, and Secret Service agent Tim McCarthy were struck by gunfire from would-be assassin John Hinckley Jr. outside the Washington Hilton Hotel. Although Reagan was initially reported to be &quot;close to death&quot; upon arrival at George Washington University Hospital, he underwent surgery and recovered quickly from a broken rib, a punctured lung, and internal bleeding. Reagan was released from the hospital on April 11, becoming the first serving president to survive being wounded in an assassination attempt. The failed assassination attempt had great influence on Reagan&#x27;s popularity; polls indicated his approval rating to be around 73%. Many pundits and journalists later described the failed assassination as a critical moment in Reagan&#x27;s presidency, as his newfound popularity provided critical momentum in passing his domestic agenda.

==Domestic affairs==

Reagan used his White House staff to shape major domestic policies. His chief of staff made heavy use of the Office of Policy Development in supervising cabinet action on the Reagan initiatives.

===&quot;Reaganomics&quot; and taxation===
====Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981====
Reagan implemented neoliberal economic policies based on supply-side economics, advocating a &quot;laissez-faire&quot; philosophy and free-market fiscal policy. Reagan&#x27;s taxation policies resembled those instituted by President Calvin Coolidge and Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon in the 1920s. Reagan&#x27;s team was also strongly influenced by contemporary economists such as Arthur Laffer, who rejected the then-dominant views of Keynesian economists. Reagan relied on Laffer and other economists to argue that tax cuts would reduce inflation, which went against the prevailing Keynesian view. Supply-side advocates also asserted that cutting taxes would ultimately lead to higher government revenue due to economic growth, a proposition that was challenged by many economists.
Republican congressman Jack Kemp and Republican senator William Roth had nearly won passage of a major tax cut during Carter&#x27;s presidency, but Carter had prevented passage of the bill due to concerns about the deficit. Reagan made passage of the Kemp–Roth bill his top domestic priority upon taking office. As Democrats controlled the House of Representatives, passage of any bill would require the support of some House Democrats in addition to the support of congressional Republicans. Reagan&#x27;s victory in the 1980 presidential campaign had united Republicans around his leadership, while conservative Democrats like Phil Gramm of Texas (who later became a Republican) were eager to back some of Reagan&#x27;s conservative policies. Throughout 1981, Reagan frequently met with members of Congress, focusing especially on winning support from conservative Southern Democrats. Reagan also benefited from a conservative majority in the House during his first two years as president, with an estimated 230 votes during the 97th Congress, although this changed after the Democratic gains in the 1982 election, with House control switching to liberals within the Democratic caucus.

In July 1981, the Senate voted 89–11 in favor of the tax cut bill favored by Reagan, and the House subsequently approved the bill in a 238–195 vote. The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 cut the top marginal tax rate from 70% to 50%, lowered the capital gains tax from 28% to 20%, more than tripled the amount of inherited money exempt from the estate tax, and cut the corporate tax. Reagan&#x27;s success in passing a major tax bill and cutting the federal budget was hailed as the &quot;Reagan Revolution&quot; by some reporters; one columnist wrote that the Reagan&#x27;s legislative success represented the &quot;most formidable domestic initiative any president has driven through since the Hundred Days of Franklin Roosevelt&quot;.

====Later tax acts====
Faced with concerns about the mounting federal debt, Reagan agreed to raise taxes, signing the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982 (TEFRA). Many of Reagan&#x27;s conservative supporters condemned TEFRA, but Reagan argued that his administration would be unable to win further budget cuts without the tax hike. Among other provisions, TEFRA doubled the federal cigarette tax and rescinded a portion of the corporate tax cuts from the 1981 tax bill. By 1983, the amount of federal tax had fallen for all or almost all American taxpayers, but most strongly affected the wealthy; the proportion of income paid in taxes by the richest one percent fell from 29.8 percent to 24.8 percent. Partly due to the poor economy, Reagan&#x27;s legislative momentum dissipated after his first year in office, and his party lost several seats in the House in the 1982 congressional elections. Compared to other midterm elections, the losses were relatively small for the party holding the presidency, but conservative Democrats were less open to Reagan&#x27;s initiatives after 1982. As deficits continued to be an issue, Reagan signed another bill that raised taxes, the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984.

With Donald Regan taking over as chief of staff in 1985, the Reagan administration made simplification of the tax code the central focus of its second term domestic agenda. Working with Speaker of the House Tip O&#x27;Neill, a Democrat who also favored tax reform, Reagan overcame significant opposition from members of Congress in both parties to pass the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The act simplified the tax code by reducing the number of tax brackets to four and slashing a number of tax breaks. The top rate was dropped to 28%, but capital gains taxes were increased on those with the highest incomes from 20% to 28%. The increase of the lowest tax bracket from 11% to 15% was more than offset by expansion of the personal exemption, standard deduction, and earned income tax credit. The net result was the removal of six million poor Americans from the income tax roll and a reduction of income tax liability at all income levels. The net effect of Reagan&#x27;s tax bills was that overall tax burden held steady at roughly 19 percent of gross national product.

===Government spending===
Reagan prioritized tax cuts over spending cuts, arguing that lower revenue would eventually require lower spending. Nonetheless, Reagan was determined to decrease government spending and roll back or dismantle Great Society programs such as Medicaid and the Office of Economic Opportunity. In August 1981, Reagan signed the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, which cut federal funding for social programs like food stamps, school lunch programs, and Medicaid. The Comprehensive Employment and Training Act, which had provided for the employment of 300,000 workers in 1980, was also repealed, and the administration tightened eligibility for unemployment benefits. Notably absent from the budget cuts was the Department of Defense, which saw its budget bolstered.

Reagan experienced several legislative successes in his first year in office, but his attempts to cut federal domestic spending after 1981 met increasing congressional resistance. Spending on programs like Supplemental Security Income, Medicaid, the earned income tax credit, and Aid to Families with Dependent Children all increased after 1982. The number of federal civilian employees rose during Reagan&#x27;s tenure, from 2.9 million to 3.1 million. Reagan&#x27;s policy of New Federalism, which sought to shift the responsibility for most social programs to state governments, found little support in Congress.

In 1981, OMB Director David Stockman won Reagan&#x27;s approval to seek cuts to Social Security in 1981, but this plan was poorly received in Congress. In 1982, Reagan established the bipartisan National Commission on Social Security Reform to make recommendations to secure the long-term integrity of Social Security. The commission rejected Social Security privatization and other major changes to the program, but recommended expanding the Social Security base (by including exempt federal and nonprofit employees), raising Social Security taxes, and reducing some payments. These recommendations were enacted in the Social Security Amendments of 1983, which received bipartisan support. While Reagan avoided cuts to Social Security and Medicare for most individuals, his administration attempted to purge many people from the Social Security disability rolls. Reagan&#x27;s inability to implement major cuts to Social Security solidified its status as the &quot;third rail&quot; of U.S. politics, and future administrations would be reluctant to propose cuts to the popular program.

===Deficits===

As Reagan was unwilling to match his tax cuts with cuts to defense spending or Social Security, rising deficits became an issue. These deficits were exacerbated by the early 1980s recession, which cut into federal revenue. Unable to win further domestic spending cuts, and pressured to address the deficit, Reagan was forced to raise taxes after 1981. Nonetheless, the national debt more than tripled between fiscal year 1980 and fiscal year 1989, going from $914 billion to $2.7 trillion, while national debt as a percentage of GDP rose from 33 percent in 1981 to 53 percent in 1989. Reagan never submitted a balanced budget during his time in office.

In an effort to lower the national debt, Congress passed the Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Balanced Budget Act, which called for automatic spending cuts if Congress was unable to eliminate deficits through the regular budget-making process. However, Congress found ways around the automatic cuts and deficits continued to rise, ultimately leading to the passage of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990.

===Economy===

Reagan took office in the midst of poor economic conditions, as the country experienced stagflation, a phenomenon in which both inflation and unemployment were high. The economy experienced a brief period of growth early in Reagan&#x27;s first year in office, but plunged into a recession in July 1981. As the recession continued in the first two years of Reagan&#x27;s presidency, many within Reagan&#x27;s administration blamed the policies of Paul Volcker, the chair of the Federal Reserve. But Reagan himself never criticized Volcker. Volcker sought to fight inflation by pursuing a policy of &quot;tight money&quot; in which interest rates were set at a high level. High interest rates would restrict lending and investment, which would in turn lower inflation, raise unemployment and, at least in the short term, reduce economic growth. Unemployment reached a high of nearly 11% in 1982, poverty rate rose from 11.7 percent to 15 percent. The country emerged from recession in 1983, but not all shared equally in the economic recovery, and economic inequality and the number of homeless individuals both increased during the 1980s. Fearful of damaging confidence in the economic recovery, Reagan nominated Volcker to a second term in 1983, and Volcker remained in office until 1987. Inflation dropped to approximately 3.5% in 1985, while the unemployment rate fell to about 5% in 1988. In 1987, Reagan appointed conservative economist Alan Greenspan to succeed Volcker, and Greenspan would lead the Federal Reserve until 2006. Greenspan raised interest rates in another attempt to curb inflation, setting off a stock market crash in October 1987 known as &quot;Black Monday&quot;, but the markets stabilized and recovered in the following weeks.

===Labor===

In August 1981, the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (PATCO), which consisted of federal employees, voted to go on a labor strike in hopes of receiving better pay and benefits. After the vote, Reagan announced that the strikers would be fired if they did not return to work within forty-eight hours. Federal law forbid government employees from striking. After the deadline passed, Reagan fired over 10,000 air traffic controllers, while approximately 40 percent of the union members returned to work. Reagan&#x27;s handling of the strike was strongly criticized by union leaders, but it won the approval of his conservative base of voters and others in the public. The breaking of the PATCO strike demoralized organized labor, and the number of strikes fell dramatically in the 1980s. Many of the strikes that did occur, including the Arizona copper mine strike of 1983, the 1983 Greyhound bus driver strike, and the 1985–86 Hormel strike, ended with dismissal of the strikers. With the assent of Reagan&#x27;s sympathetic National Labor Relations Board appointees, many companies also won wage and benefit cutbacks from unions, especially in the manufacturing sector. During Reagan&#x27;s time in office, the share of employees who were part of a labor union dropped from approximately one-fourth of the total workforce to approximately one-sixth of the total workforce.

===Deregulation===

Reagan sought to loosen federal regulation of economic activities, and he appointed key officials who shared this agenda. According to historian William Leuchtenburg, by 1986, the Reagan administration eliminated almost half of the federal regulations that had existed in 1981. The Federal Communications Commission aggressively deregulated the broadcasting industry, eliminating the Fairness Doctrine and other restrictions. The 1982 Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act deregulated savings and loan associations and allowed banks to provide adjustable-rate mortgages. Reagan also eliminated numerous government positions and dismissed numerous federal employees, including the entire staff of the Employment and Training Administration. Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt implemented policies designed to open up federal territories to oil drilling and surface mining. Under EPA Director Anne Gorsuch, the EPA&#x27;s budget was dramatically reduced and the EPA loosely enforced environmental regulations.

====Savings and loan crisis====

After the passage of the Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act, savings and loans associations engaged in riskier activities, and the leaders of some institutions embezzled funds. In what became known as the Savings and loan crisis, a total of 747 financial institutions failed and needed to be rescued with $160 billion in taxpayer dollars. As an indication of this scandal&#x27;s size, Martin Mayer wrote at the time, &quot;The theft from the taxpayer by the community that fattened on the growth of the savings and loan (S&amp;L) industry in the 1980s is the worst public scandal in American history...Measuring by money, [or] by the misallocation of national resources...the S&amp;L outrage makes Teapot Dome and Credit Mobilier seem minor episodes.&quot;

===Immigration===
The 1980s saw the highest rate of immigration to the United States since the 1910s, and the proportion of the foreign-born population reached its highest level since the 1940s. Reagan did not make immigration a focus of his administration, but he came to support a package of reforms sponsored by Republican senator Alan Simpson and Democratic congressman Romano Mazzoli, which he signed into law as the Immigration Reform and Control Act in November 1986. The act made it illegal to knowingly hire or recruit illegal immigrants, required employers to attest to their employees&#x27; immigration status, and granted amnesty to approximately three million illegal immigrants who had entered the United States before January 1, 1982, and had lived in the country continuously. The bill was also contained provisions designed to enhance security measures at the Mexico–United States border. Upon signing the act at a ceremony held beside the newly refurbished Statue of Liberty, Reagan said, &quot;The legalization provisions in this act will go far to improve the lives of a class of individuals who now must hide in the shadows, without access to many of the benefits of a free and open society. Very soon many of these men and women will be able to step into the sunlight and, ultimately, if they choose, they may become Americans.&quot; The bill was largely unsuccessful at halting illegal immigration, and the population of illegal immigrants rose from 5 million in 1986 to 11.1 million in 2013.

===Criminal and anti-drug policy===

Not long after being sworn into office, Reagan declared more militant policies in the &quot;War on Drugs&quot;. He promised a &quot;planned, concerted campaign&quot; against all drugs, in hopes of decreasing drug use, particularly among adolescents. The &quot;crack epidemic&quot;, which saw a large number of individuals become addicted to crack cocaine and may have played a role in numerous murders, emerged as a major area of public concern. First Lady Nancy Reagan made the War on Drugs her main cause as First Lady, founding the &quot;Just Say No&quot; drug awareness campaign.

Concerns about drug use prompted Congress to pass legislation such as the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984 and the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, the latter of which granted $1.7 billion to fight drugs and established a mandatory minimum penalties for drug offenses. Reagan also signed the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988, which further increased criminal penalties for drug use and established the Office of National Drug Control Policy. Critics charged that Reagan&#x27;s policies promoted significant racial disparities in the prison population, were ineffective in reducing the availability of drugs or crime on the street, and came at a great financial and human cost for American society. Supporters argued that the numbers for adolescent drug users declined during Reagan&#x27;s years in office.

On May 19, 1986, President Reagan signed the Firearm Owners Protection Act, which amended the Gun Control Act of 1968, prohibiting the transfer or possession of machine guns. In 1989, Reagan said &quot;I do not believe in taking away the right of the citizen to own guns for sporting, for hunting and so forth, or for home defense; but I do believe that an AK-47, a machine gun, is not a sporting weapon or needed for defense of a home.&quot;

===Social policies and civil rights===

Reagan was largely unable to enact his ambitious social policy agenda, which included a federal ban on abortions and an end to desegregation busing. Despite the lack of major social policy legislation, Reagan was able to influence social policy through regulations and the appointment of conservative Supreme Court Justices.

With Reagan&#x27;s support, conservative Republican senator Jesse Helms led an effort to prevent the Supreme Court from reviewing state and local laws mandating school prayer, but Republican senators like Lowell Weicker and Barry Goldwater blocked passage of Helms&#x27; bill. Reagan campaigned vigorously to restore organized prayer to the schools, first as a moment of prayer and later as a moment of silence. His election reflected an opposition to &quot;Engel v. Vitale&quot;, which prohibited state officials from composing an official state prayer and requiring that it be recited in the public schools. In 1981, he proposed a constitutional amendment on school prayer, which stated: &quot;Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to prohibit individual or group prayer in public schools or other public institutions. No person shall be required by the United States or by any state to participate in prayer.&quot; In 1984, he again raised the issue to Congress. In 1985, he expressed his disappointment that the Supreme Court ruling still banned a moment of silence for public schools, and said that efforts to reinstitute prayer in public schools were &quot;an uphill battle&quot;. In 1987, he renewed his call for Congress to support voluntary prayer in schools.

In 1982, Reagan signed a bill extending the Voting Rights Act for 25 years after a grass-roots lobbying and legislative campaign forced him to abandon his plan to ease that law&#x27;s restrictions. He also reluctantly accepted the continuation of affirmative action programs and the establishment of Martin Luther King Jr. Day as a federal holiday. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and the Justice Department both prosecuted far fewer civil rights cases per year than they had under Carter. In 1988, Reagan vetoed the Civil Rights Restoration Act, but his veto was overridden by Congress. Reagan had argued that the legislation infringed on states&#x27; rights and the rights of churches and business owners.

No civil rights legislation for gay individuals passed during Reagan&#x27;s tenure. Many in the Reagan administration, including Communications Director Pat Buchanan, were hostile to the gay community, as were many religious leaders who were important allies to the administration. Gay rights and the growing HIV/AIDS emerged as an important matter of public concern in 1985 after it was disclosed that actor Rock Hudson, a personal friend of President Reagan, was receiving treatment for AIDS. As public anxiety over AIDS rose, the Supreme Court upheld a state law that criminalized homosexuality in the case of &quot;Bowers v. Hardwick&quot;. Though Surgeon General C. Everett Koop advocated for a public health campaign designed to reduce the spread of AIDS by raising awareness and promoting the use of condoms, Reagan rejected Koop&#x27;s proposals in favor of abstinence-only sex education. By 1989, approximately 60,000 Americans had died of AIDS, and liberals strongly criticized Reagan&#x27;s response to the HIV/AIDS crisis. On the 1980 campaign trail, Reagan spoke of the gay rights movement:
===Environmental policy===
Reagan&#x27;s strong preferences for limited federal involvement and deregulation extended to the environment. His main goal was to lessen the burden of regulation on businesses to promote more economic activity in the United States. Because of this policy, Reagan refused to renew the Clean Air Act during his administration. Reagan lessened existing regulations on pollution, cut funding to government environmental agencies, and appointed known anti-environmentalist individuals to key positions presiding over these organizations.

When Reagan took office in 1981, he &quot;attempted to reduce&quot; money that was directed towards studying the burgeoning field of global warming and human-driven climate change. In the early 1980s, the study of the intersection between human activity and climate change was still in its infancy and scientists were far from a consensus on the topic.

In 1987, the Reagan administration signed the Montreal Protocol in an effort to reduce emissions that damage the ozone layer.

===Mass surveillance===
Citing national security concerns, the president&#x27;s national security team pressed for more surveillance power early during Reagan&#x27;s first term. Their recommendations were based upon the premise that the federal government&#x27;s intelligence and counterintelligence capabilities had been weakened by presidents Carter and Ford. On December 4, 1981, Reagan signed Executive Order 12333. This presidential directive broadened the power of the government&#x27;s intelligence community; mandated rules for spying on United States citizens, permanent residents, and on anyone within the United States; and also directed the attorney general and others to create further policies and procedures for what information intelligence agencies can collect, retain, and share.

==Foreign affairs==
===Escalation of the Cold War===

Reagan escalated the Cold War, accelerating a reversal from the policy of détente which had begun in 1979 after the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. Reagan feared that the Soviet Union had gained a military advantage over the United States, and the Reagan administration hoped that heightened military spending would grant the U.S. military superiority and weaken the Soviet economy. Reagan ordered a massive buildup of the United States Armed Forces, directing funding to the B-1 Lancer bomber, the B-2 Spirit bomber, cruise missiles, the MX missile, and the 600-ship Navy. In response to Soviet deployment of the SS-20, Reagan oversaw NATO&#x27;s deployment of the Pershing missile in West Germany. The president also strongly denounced the Soviet Union and Communism in moral terms, describing the Soviet Union as an &quot;evil empire&quot;. Despite this heavy rhetoric, the Reagan administration continued arms control talks with the Soviet Union in the form of &quot;START&quot;. Unlike the &quot;SALT&quot; treaties of the 1970s, which set upper limits on the size of nuclear arsenals, the proposed START treaty would require both sides to reduce their existing nuclear arsenals.

====Strategic Defense Initiative====
In March 1983, Reagan introduced the Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI), a defense project that would have used ground- and space-based systems to protect the United States from attack by strategic nuclear ballistic missiles. Reagan believed that this defense shield could make nuclear war impossible. Many scientists and national security experts criticized the project as costly and technologically infeasible, and critics dubbed SDI as &quot;Star Wars&quot; in reference to a popular film series of the same name. Ultimately, the SDI would be canceled in 1993 due to concerns about its cost and effectiveness as well as a changing international situation. However, the Soviets became concerned about the possible effects SDI would have and viewed its development as a violation of the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. In protest of SDI, the Soviet Union broke off arms control talks, and U.S.-Soviet relations descended to their lowest point since the early 1960s. The Cold War tensions influenced works of popular culture such as the films &quot;The Day After&quot; and &quot;WarGames&quot; (both 1983), and the song &quot;99 Luftballons&quot; (1983) by Nena, each of which exhibited the rising public anxiety for the possibility of a nuclear war.

===Reagan Doctrine===


Under a policy that came to be known as the Reagan Doctrine, the Reagan administration provided overt and covert aid to anti-communist resistance movements in an effort to &quot;rollback&quot; Soviet-backed communist governments in Africa, Asia, and Latin America. In Eastern Europe, the CIA provided support to the Polish opposition group, Solidarity, ensuring that it stayed afloat during a period of martial law. Reagan deployed the CIA&#x27;s Special Activities Division to Afghanistan and Pakistan, and the CIA was instrumental in training, equipping, and leading Mujahideen forces against the Soviet Army in the Soviet–Afghan War. By 1987, the United States was sending over $600 million a year, as well as weapons, intelligence, and combat expertise to Afghanistan. The Soviet Union announced it would withdraw from Afghanistan in 1987, but the U.S. was subjected to blowback in the form of the Taliban and al-Qaeda, two groups that arose out of the Mujahideen and that would oppose the United States in future conflicts.

Although leading conservatives argued that Reagan&#x27;s foreign policy strategy was essential to protecting their security interests, critics labeled the initiatives as aggressive and imperialistic, and chided them as &quot;warmongering&quot;. Reagan was also heavily criticized for backing anti-communist leaders accused of severe human rights violations, such as Hissène Habré and Efraín Ríos Montt. Montt was the president of Guatemala and the Guatemalan military was accused of genocide for massacres of members of the Ixil people and other indigenous groups. Reagan had said that Montt was getting a &quot;bum rap&quot;, and described him as &quot;a man of great personal integrity&quot;. Previous human rights violations had prompted the United States to cut off aid to the Guatemalan government, but the Reagan administration unsuccessfully appealed to Congress to restart military aid. However, the administration successfully provided nonmilitary assistance such as the United States Agency for International Development.

===Central America and the Caribbean===


The Reagan administration placed a high priority on the Central America and the Caribbean Sea, which it saw as a key front in the Cold War. Reagan and his foreign policy team were particularly concerned about the potential influence of Cuba on countries such as Grenada, Nicaragua, and El Salvador. To counter the influence of Cuba and the Soviet Union, Reagan launched the Caribbean Basin Initiative, an economic program designed to aid countries opposed to Communism. He also authorized covert measures, such as the arming of Nicaragua&#x27;s Contras, to minimize Cuban and Soviet influence in the region. The administration provided support to right-wing governments throughout Latin America, disregarding humans rights abuses in countries like Argentina and El Salvador.

====Invasion of Grenada====
Tensions rose between the left-wing Grenadan government of Maurice Bishop and the U.S. because Cuban construction workers were building an airfield on the island. On October 16, 1983, pro-Communist forces of Hudson Austin led a coup against Bishop, who was subsequently arrested and executed. Reagan dispatched approximately 5,000 U.S. soldiers to invade Grenada nine days after. After two days of fighting that resulted in the deaths of 19 Americans, 45 Grenadans, and 24 Cubans, Austin&#x27;s government was overthrown. Reagan then declared, &quot;Our days of weakness are over. Our military forces are back on their feet and standing tall.&quot; While the invasion enjoyed public support in the United States and Grenada, it was criticized by the United Kingdom, Canada and the United Nations General Assembly as &quot;a flagrant violation of international law&quot;.

===Iran–Contra affair===


In 1979, a group of left-wing rebels in Nicaragua known as the Sandinistas overthrew the president of Nicaragua and installed Daniel Ortega as the country&#x27;s leader. Fearing that Communists would take over Nicaragua if it remained under the leadership of the Sandinistas, the Reagan administration authorized CIA Director William J. Casey to arm the right-wing Contras. Congress, which favored negotiations between the Contras and Sandinista, passed the 1982 Boland Amendment, prohibiting the CIA and Defense Department from using their budgets to provide aid to the Contras. Still intent on supporting the Contras, the Reagan administration raised funds for the Contras from private donors and foreign governments. When Congress learned that the CIA had secretly placed naval mines in Nicaraguan harbors, Congress passed a second Boland Amendment that barred granting any assistance to the Contras.

During his second term, Reagan sought to find a way procure the release of seven American hostages held by Hezbollah, a Lebanese paramilitary group supported by Iran. The Reagan administration decided to sell American arms to Iran, then engaged in the Iran–Iraq War, in hopes that Iran would pressure Hezbollah to release the hostages. Secretary of Defense Weinberger and Secretary of State Shultz both opposed the arrangement, so it was handled by National Security Advisor Robert McFarlane and McFarlane&#x27;s successor, John Poindexter. The Reagan administration sold over 2000 missiles to Iran without informing Congress; Hezbollah released four hostages but captured an additional six Americans. On the initiative of Oliver North, an aide on the National Security Council, the Reagan administration redirected the proceeds from the missile sales to the Contras. The transactions became public knowledge by early November 1986. Reagan initially denied any wrongdoing, but on November 25 he announced that Poindexter and North had left the administration and that he would form the Tower Commission to investigate the transactions. A few weeks later, Reagan asked a panel of federal judges to appoint a special prosecutor who would conduct a separate investigation, and the panel chose Lawrence Walsh.

The Tower Commission, chaired by former Republican senator John Tower, released a report in February 1987 that confirmed that the administration had traded arms for hostages and sent the proceeds of the weapons sales to the Contras. The report laid most of the blame for the operation on North, Poindexter, and McFarlane, but it was also critical of Regan and other White House staffers. In response to the Tower Commission report, Reagan stated, &quot;Its findings are honest, convincing and highly critical...As angry as I may be about activities undertaken without my knowledge, I am still accountable for those activities.&quot; The Iran–Contra scandal, as it became known, did serious damage to the Reagan presidency, raising questions about Reagan&#x27;s competency and the wisdom of conservative policies. A poll taken in March 1987 showed that 85 percent of respondents believed that the Reagan administration had engaged in an organized cover-up, and half of the respondents believed that Reagan had been personally involved. The administration&#x27;s credibility was also badly damaged on the international stage, as it had violated its own arms embargo on Iran. Congressional Democrats considered impeaching, but decided that it would be an unwise use of political capital against a weakened president; Democrats were also somewhat mollified by Reagan&#x27;s decision to replace Chief of Staff Regan with Howard Baker.

The investigations into the Iran–Contra scandal continued after Reagan left office, but were effectively halted when President George H. W. Bush pardoned Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger before his trial began. Investigators did not find conclusive proof that Reagan had known about the aid provided to the Contras, but Walsh&#x27;s report noted that Reagan had &quot;created the conditions which made possible the crimes committed by others&quot; and had &quot;knowingly participated or acquiesced in covering up the scandal&quot;.

===End of the Cold War===

Three different Soviet leaders died between 1982 and 1985, leaving the Soviets with an unstable leadership until Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in 1985. Although the Soviet Union had not accelerated military spending during Reagan&#x27;s military buildup, their large military expenses, in combination with collectivized agriculture and inefficient planned manufacturing, were a heavy burden for the Soviet economy. Gorbachev was less ideologically rigid than his predecessors, and he believed that the Soviet Union urgently needed economic and political reforms. In 1986, he introduced his twin reforms of perestroika and glasnost, which would change the political and economic conditions of the Soviet Union. Seeking to reduce military expenditures and minimize the possibility of nuclear war, he also sought to re-open negotiations with the United States over arms control.

As his influence on domestic affairs waned during his second term, Reagan increasingly focused on relations with the Soviet Union. Reagan recognized the change in the direction of the Soviet leadership under Gorbachev, and shifted to diplomacy, with a view to encourage the Soviet leader to pursue substantial arms agreements. Reagan&#x27;s personal mission was to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons, which according to Jack F. Matlock Jr., Reagan&#x27;s ambassador to Moscow, he regarded as &quot;totally irrational, totally inhumane, good for nothing but killing, possibly destructive of life on earth and civilization&quot;. Gorbachev and Reagan agreed to meet at the 1985 Geneva Summit, where they issued a joint statement indicating that neither the U.S. nor the Soviet Union would &quot;seek to achieve military superiority&quot;. The two leaders began a private correspondence after the summit, and each became increasingly optimistic about arms control negotiations. Reagan&#x27;s willingness to negotiate with the Soviets was opposed by many conservatives, including Weinberger; conservative columnist George Will wrote that Reagan was &quot;elevating wishful thinking to the status of a political philosophy&quot;.

Various issues, including intelligence operations performed by both countries and tensions in Germany and Afghanistan, threatened to forestall the possibility of an agreement between the United States and the Soviet Union. Nonetheless, both Gorbachev and Reagan agreed to continue arms control negotiations at the October 1986 Reykjavík Summit. At the summit, Gorbachev and Reagan closed in on an agreement to greatly reduce or eliminate the nuclear stockpiles of both the U.S. and the Soviet Union over a ten-year period, but the deal collapsed due to disagreements regarding SDI development. Reagan attacked Gorbachev in a 1987 speech delivered in West Berlin, but negotiations continued. Gorbachev and Reagan broke the impasse by agreeing to negotiate separate treaties on intermediate nuclear forces (such as intermediate-range ballistic missiles) and strategic arms (such as intercontinental ballistic missiles).

With the framework for an agreement in place, Reagan and Gorbachev met at the 1987 Washington Summit. They signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty (INF Treaty), which committed both signatories to the total abolition of their respective short-range and medium-range missile stockpiles. The agreement marked the first time that the United States and the Soviet Union had committed to the elimination of a type of nuclear weapon, though it provided for the dismantlement of only about one-twentieth of the worldwide nuclear weapon arsenal. The treaty also established an inspections regime designed to ensure that both parties honored the agreement. In addition to the INF Treaty, Reagan and Gorbachev discussed a potential strategic arms treaty, known as START, but SDI continued to be a major point of contention. In May 1988, the Senate voted 93-to-5 in favor of ratifying the INF Treaty.
Though it was attacked by conservatives like Jesse Helms, the INF Treaty provided a major boost to Reagan&#x27;s popularity in the aftermath of the Iran–Contra Affair. A new era of trade and openness between the two powers commenced, and the U.S. and the Soviet Union cooperated on international issues such as the Iran–Iraq War. When Reagan visited Moscow for a fourth summit with Gorbachev in 1988, he was viewed as a celebrity by the Soviets. A journalist asked the president if he still considered the Soviet Union the evil empire. &quot;No,&quot; he replied, &quot;I was talking about another time, another era.&quot; At Gorbachev&#x27;s request, Reagan gave a speech on free markets at the Moscow State University. In December 1988, Gorbachev effectively renounced the Brezhnev Doctrine, paving the way for democratization in Eastern Europe. In November 1989, ten months after Reagan left office, the Berlin Wall fell. The Cold War was unofficially declared over at the Malta Summit the following month.

===Honoring German war dead at Bitburg, Germany===
Reagan came under much criticism in 1985 when he was accused of honoring Nazi war criminals at a cemetery in West Germany. In February 1985, the administration accepted an invitation for Reagan to visit a German military cemetery in Bitburg and to place a wreath alongside West German chancellor Helmut Kohl. Deaver was given assurances by a German head of protocol that no war criminals were buried there. It was later determined that the cemetery held the graves of 49 members of the Waffen-SS. What neither Deaver nor other administration officials initially realized was that many Germans distinguished the regular SS, who typically were composed of Nazi true believers, and the Waffen-SS which were attached to military units and composed of conscripted soldiers.

As the controversy brewed in April 1985, Reagan issued a statement that called the Nazi soldiers buried in that cemetery as themselves &quot;victims&quot;, a designation which ignited a stir over whether Reagan had equated the SS men to victims of the Holocaust. Pat Buchanan, Reagan&#x27;s director of communications, argued that the president did not equate the SS members with the actual Holocaust, but as victims of the ideology of Nazism. Now strongly urged to cancel the visit, the president responded that it would be wrong to back down on a promise he had made to Chancellor Kohl. On May 5, 1985, President Reagan and Chancellor Kohl first visited the site of the former Nazi Bergen-Belsen concentration camp and then the Bitburg cemetery where, along with two military generals, they did place a wreath.

===Middle East===
====Lebanon====

A civil war had broken out in Lebanon in 1975, and both Israel and Syria undertook military action within Lebanon in 1982. After Israel invaded Southern Lebanon, Reagan faced domestic and international pressure to oppose the Israeli invasion, but Reagan was reluctant to openly break Israel. Reagan sympathized with Israeli&#x27;s desire to defeat PLO forces that had struck Israel from Lebanon, but he pressured Israel to end its invasion as casualties mounted and Israeli forces approached the Lebanese capital of Beirut. American diplomat Philip Habib arranged a cease-fire in which Israel, Syria, and the PLO, all agreed to evacuate their forces from Lebanon. As Israel delayed a full withdrawal and violence continued in Lebanon, Reagan arranged for a multinational force, including U.S. Marines, to serve as peacekeepers in Lebanon. In October 1983, two nearly-simultaneous bombings in Beirut killed 241 American Marines and 58 French soldiers. The international peacekeeping force was withdrawn from Lebanon in 1984. In reaction to the role Israel and the United States played in the Lebanese Civil War, a Shia militant group known as Hezbollah began to take American hostages, holding eight Americans by the middle of 1985. The Reagan administration&#x27;s attempts to release these hostages would be a major component of the Iran-Contra Scandal. In response to the U.S. intervention in Lebanon, the Defense Department developed the &quot;Powell Doctrine&quot;, which stated that the U.S. should intervene militarily as a last resort and should set clear and limited goals in such interventions. Though termed the Powell doctrine, the policy was originally developed by Secretary of Defense Weinberger, who was influenced not only by Lebanon but also by the experience of the Vietnam War.

====Libya bombing====

Relations between Libya and the United States under President Reagan were continually contentious, beginning with the Gulf of Sidra incident in 1981; by 1982, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi was considered by the CIA to be, along with USSR leader Leonid Brezhnev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro, part of a group known as the &quot;unholy trinity&quot; and was also labeled as &quot;our international public enemy number one&quot; by a CIA official. These tensions were later revived in early April 1986, when a bomb exploded in a West Berlin discothèque, resulting in the injury of 63 American military personnel and death of one serviceman. Stating that there was &quot;irrefutable proof&quot; that Libya had directed the &quot;terrorist bombing&quot;, Reagan authorized the use of force against the country. In the late evening of April 15, 1986, the United States launched a series of airstrikes on ground targets in Libya.

Britain&#x27;s prime minister, Margaret Thatcher, allowed the U.S. Air Force to use Britain&#x27;s air bases to launch the attack, on the justification that the UK was supporting America&#x27;s right to self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter. The attack was designed to halt Gaddafi&#x27;s &quot;ability to export terrorism&quot;, offering him &quot;incentives and reasons to alter his criminal behavior&quot;. The president addressed the nation from the Oval Office after the attacks had commenced, stating, &quot;When our citizens are attacked or abused anywhere in the world on the direct orders of hostile regimes, we will respond so long as I&#x27;m in this office.&quot; The attack was condemned by many countries. By a vote of 79 in favor to 28 against with 33 abstentions, the United Nations General Assembly adopted resolution 41/38 which &quot;condemns the military attack perpetrated against the Socialist People&#x27;s Libyan Arab Jamahiriya on April 15, 1986, which constitutes a violation of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law&quot;.

===South Africa===

During Ronald Reagan&#x27;s presidency South Africa continued to use a non-democratic system of government based on racial discrimination, known as apartheid, in which the minority of white South Africans exerted nearly complete legal control over the lives of the non-white majority of the citizens. In the early 1980s the issue had moved to the center of international attention as a result of events in the townships and outcry at the death of Stephen Biko. Reagan administration policy called for &quot;constructive engagement&quot; with the apartheid government of South Africa. In opposition to the condemnations issued by the U.S. Congress and public demands for diplomatic or economic sanctions, Reagan made relatively minor criticisms of the regime, which was otherwise internationally isolated, and the U.S. granted recognition to the government. South Africa&#x27;s military was then engaged in an occupation of Namibia and proxy wars in several neighboring countries, in alliance with Savimbi&#x27;s UNITA. Reagan administration officials saw the apartheid government as a key anti-communist ally.

Finding the Reagan Administration unresponsive to its calls for more stringent economic sanctions, anti-apartheid activists undertook a divestment campaign, aimed at moving individuals and institutions to sell their holdings in companies doing business in South Africa. By late 1985, facing escalating public and congressional opposition to his administration&#x27;s tolerant attitude toward the South African government&#x27;s policy of apartheid, Reagan made an &quot;abrupt reversal&quot; on the issue and proposed sanctions on the South African government, including an arms embargo. However, these sanctions were seen as weak by anti-apartheid activists, and as insufficient by the president&#x27;s opponents in Congress, including 81 House Republicans. In August 1986, Congress approved the Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act, which included tougher sanctions. Reagan vetoed the act, but this was overridden by a bipartisan effort in Congress. By 1990, under Reagan&#x27;s successor George H. W. Bush, the new South African government of F. W. de Klerk was introducing widespread reforms, though the Bush administration argued that this was not a result of the tougher sanctions.

===Free trade===
During his 1980 presidential campaign, Reagan proposed the creation of a common market in North America. Once in office, Reagan signed the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984, which granted the president &quot;fast track&quot; authority in negotiating free trade agreements. In 1985, Reagan signed the Israel–United States Free Trade Agreement, the first bilateral free trade agreement in U.S. history. In 1988, Reagan and Canadian prime minister Brian Mulroney signed the Canada–United States Free Trade Agreement, which greatly reduced trade barriers between the United States and Canada. This trade pact would serve as the foundation for the North American Free Trade Agreement among the United States, Canada, and Mexico.

==Age and health==
At the time, Reagan was the oldest person to have served as U.S. president. Reagan&#x27;s health became a concern at times during his presidency.

Early in his presidency, Reagan started wearing a custom-made, technologically advanced hearing aid, first in his right ear and later in his left ear as well. His decision to go public in 1983 regarding his wearing the small, audio-amplifying device boosted their sales.

On July 13, 1985, Reagan underwent surgery to remove a section of his colon due to colorectal cancer. He relinquished presidential power to the vice president for eight hours in a similar procedure as outlined in the 25th Amendment, which he specifically avoided invoking. The surgery lasted just under three hours and was successful. Reagan resumed the powers of the presidency later that day. In August of that year, he underwent an operation to remove skin cancer cells from his nose. In October, more skin cancer cells were detected on his nose and removed.

Former White House correspondent Lesley Stahl later wrote that in 1986, she and other reporters noticed what might have been early symptoms of Reagan&#x27;s later Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. She said that on her last day on the beat, Reagan spoke to her for a few moments and did not seem to know who she was before returning to his normal behavior. However, Reagan&#x27;s primary physician, John Hutton, has said that Reagan &quot;absolutely&quot; did not &quot;show any signs of dementia or Alzheimer&#x27;s&quot; during his presidency. His doctors have noted that he began exhibiting Alzheimer&#x27;s symptoms only after he left the White House.

In January 1987, Reagan underwent surgery for an enlarged prostate that caused further worries about his health. No cancerous growths were found, and he was not sedated during the operation. In July of that year, he underwent a third skin cancer operation on his nose.

On January 7, 1989, Reagan underwent surgery to repair a Dupuytren&#x27;s contracture of the ring finger of his left hand.

==Elections during the Reagan presidency==


===1982 mid-term elections===
In the 1982 mid-term elections, Democrats retained a majority of the House while Republicans retained control of the Senate. Democratic gains in the House put a check on Reagan&#x27;s policies, as the incoming Congress was significantly less open to Reagan&#x27;s conservative policies. Despite the Democratic electoral gains, the election represented the first time since the 1930 elections that the Republican Party successfully defended a majority in either chamber of Congress.

===1984 re-election campaign===


Reagan&#x27;s approval ratings fell after his first year in office, but they bounced back when the United States began to emerge from recession in 1983. The leading candidates in the 1984 Democratic presidential primaries were former vice president Walter Mondale, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, and African-American civil rights activist Jesse Jackson. Though Hart won several primaries, Mondale ultimately won the nomination. Down in the polls, Mondale selected Congresswoman Geraldine Ferraro as his running mate in hopes of galvanizing support for his campaign, thus making Ferraro the first female major party vice presidential nominee in U.S. history. In accepting the Democratic nomination, Mondale attacked Reagan&#x27;s policies regarding the environment, Social Security, nuclear arms, civil rights, and other issues, stating that the Reagan administration was &quot;of the rich, by the rich, and for the rich&quot;. He also criticized the federal debt accumulated under Reagan, stating, &quot;...The budget will be squeezed. Taxes will go up. And anyone who says they won&#x27;t is not telling the truth to the American people.&quot;

Reagan, meanwhile, generally declined to offer new legislative proposals for his re-election campaign, instead focusing on events like the U.S.-hosted 1984 Summer Olympics and the 40th anniversary of the Normandy landings. Reagan&#x27;s ability to perform the duties of president for another term was questioned by some observers, especially after a weak performance in the first presidential debate. His apparent confused and forgetful behavior was evident to his supporters; they had previously known him clever and witty. Rumors began to circulate that he had Alzheimer&#x27;s disease. Reagan rebounded in the second debate, and confronted questions about his age, quipping, &quot;I will not make age an issue of this campaign. I am not going to exploit, for political purposes, my opponent&#x27;s youth and inexperience,&quot; which generated applause and laughter, even from Mondale himself.

Public opinion polling consistently showed a Reagan lead in the 1984 campaign, and Mondale was unable to shake up the race. In the end, Reagan won re-election, winning 49 of 50 states. Mondale carried only his home state of Minnesota and the District of Columbia. Reagan won a record 525 electoral votes, and received 59% of the popular vote to Mondale&#x27;s 41%. Compared to 1980, Reagan&#x27;s strongest gains came among white Southern voters, and he also performed particularly well among Catholic voters, voters between the ages of eighteen and twenty-nine, and voters over the age of sixty. In the concurrent congressional elections, Republicans retained control of the Senate and Democrats retained control of the House of Representatives.

===1986 mid-term elections===
In the 1986 mid-term elections, Democrats retained a majority of the House and won control of the Senate for the first time since the 1980 elections. Reagan campaigned hard for congressional Republicans, and an October 1986 New York Times/CBS News Poll had found that Reagan had a 67% approval rating. However, Senate Republicans faced a difficult map that year, as they had to defend 22 of the 34 seats up for election. Republican losses in the Senate were concentrated in the South and in the farm states. The Republican loss of the Senate precluded the possibility of further major conservative legislation during the Reagan administration.

===1988 elections and transition period===

Reagan remained publicly neutral in the 1988 Republican presidential primaries, but privately supported Vice President George H. W. Bush over Senator Bob Dole. The 1988 Republican National Convention, which nominated Bush for president, also acted as a celebration of Reagan&#x27;s presidency. Democrats nominated Michael Dukakis, the liberal Governor of Massachusetts. Following the 1988 Democratic National Convention, Dukakis led the polls by seventeen points, but Bush, aided by the INF Treaty and the strong economy, closed the gap as the election neared. Democrats tried to link Bush to the Iran–Contra Scandal, but Bush claimed that he had not been involved. The GOP effectively cast Dukakis as &quot;soft&quot; on crime and foreign policy issues, seizing on Dukakis&#x27;s pardon of Willie Horton and his dispassionate response to a question regarding the death penalty. 

In the 1988 presidential election, Bush soundly defeated Dukakis, taking 53.4 percent of the popular vote and 426 electoral votes. The election saw the lowest turnout of eligible voters in any presidential election since 1948. In the concurrent congressional elections, Democrats retained control of the House of Representatives and the Senate. In large part due to his handling of relations with the Soviet Union, Reagan left office with an approval rating of sixty-eight percent, matching the approval ratings of Franklin Roosevelt and later Bill Clinton as the highest rating for a departing president in the modern era.

==Evaluation and legacy==

Since Reagan left office in 1989, substantial debate has occurred among scholars, historians, and the general public surrounding his legacy. Supporters have pointed to a more efficient and prosperous economy as a result of Reagan&#x27;s economic policies, foreign policy triumphs including a peaceful end to the Cold War, and a restoration of American pride and morale. Proponents also argue Reagan restored faith in the American Dream after a decline in American confidence and self-respect under Jimmy Carter&#x27;s perceived weak leadership, particularly during the Iran hostage crisis. Reagan remains an important symbol of American conservatism, much in the same way that Franklin Roosevelt continued to serve as a symbol of liberalism long after his own death.

Critics contend that Reagan&#x27;s economic policies resulted in rising budget deficits, a wider gap in wealth, and an increase in homelessness. Liberals especially disapproved of Reagan&#x27;s simultaneous tax cuts for the wealthy and benefit cuts for the poor. Some critics assert that the Iran–Contra affair lowered American credibility. In his popular book, &quot;The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers&quot;, historian Paul Kennedy argued that Reagan&#x27;s high level of defense would eventually lead to the decline of the United States as a great power. Reagan&#x27;s leadership and understanding of issues has also been questioned, and even some members of the administration criticized Reagan&#x27;s passive demeanor during meetings with staff and cabinet members. Richard Pipes, a member of the National Security Council, criticized Reagan as &quot;really lost, out of his depth, uncomfortable&quot; at NSC meetings. Another NSC member, Colin Powell, criticized Reagan&#x27;s &quot;passive management style [that] placed a tremendous burden on us&quot;.

Despite the continuing debate surrounding his legacy, many conservative and liberal scholars agree that Reagan has been one of the most influential presidents since Franklin Roosevelt, leaving his imprint on American politics, diplomacy, culture, and economics through his effective communication, dedicated patriotism, and pragmatic compromising. Since he left office, historians have reached a consensus, as summarized by British historian M. J. Heale, who finds that scholars now concur that Reagan rehabilitated conservatism, turned the nation to the right, practiced a considerably pragmatic conservatism that balanced ideology and the constraints of politics, revived faith in the presidency and in American exceptionalism, and contributed to victory in the Cold War. Hugh Heclo argues that Reagan himself failed to roll back the welfare state, but that he contributed to a shift in attitudes that led to the defeat of efforts to further expand the welfare state. Heclo further argues that Reagan&#x27;s presidency made American voters and political leaders more tolerant of deficits and more opposed to taxation.

In 2017, a C-SPAN survey of scholars ranked Reagan as the ninth greatest president. A 2018 poll of the American Political Science Association&#x27;s presidents and Executive Politics section also ranked Reagan as the ninth greatest president. In terms of the worst mistake made by a sitting president, a 2006 poll of historians ranked the Iran-Contra affair as the ninth worst.

==See also==

* History of the United States (1980–1991)
* Premiership of Margaret Thatcher
* Ronald Reagan Presidential Library, Simi Valley, California

== Explanatory notes ==
==References==
=== Citations ===
===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

* Brandt, Karl Gerard. &quot;Ronald Reagan and the House Democrats: Gridlock, Partisanship, and the Fiscal Crisis&quot; (University of Missouri Press, 2009).
* Brownlee, W. Elliot and Hugh Davis Graham, eds. &quot;The Reagan Presidency: Pragmatic Conservatism and Its Legacies&quot; (2003)
* Coleman, Bradley Lynn and Kyle Longley, eds. &quot;Reagan and the World: Leadership and National Security, 1981–1989&quot; (University Press of Kentucky, 2017), 319 pp. essays by scholars
* Ehrman, John. &quot;The Eighties: America in the Age of Reagan.&quot; (2005)
* Graff, Henry F., ed. &quot;The presidents: A Reference History&quot; (3rd ed. 2002)
* Hertsgaard, Mark. (1988) &quot;On Bended Knee: The Press and the Reagan Presidency&quot;. New York, New York: Farrar Straus and Giroux.
* Hill, Dilys M. and Raymond A. Moore, eds. &quot;The Reagan Presidency&quot; (Palgrave Macmillan, 1990) essays by scholars; 252pp.
* Holzer, Harold. &quot;The Presidents Vs. the Press: The Endless Battle Between the White House and the Media—from the Founding Fathers to Fake News&quot; (Dutton, 2020) pp. 304–325. online 
* Inboden, William. &quot;The Peacemaker: Ronald Reagan, the Cold War, and the World on the Brink&quot; (Penguin Random House, 2022) two scholarly book reviews online

* La Barca, Giuseppe. &quot;International Trade under President Reagan: US Trade Policy in the 1980s&quot; (Bloomsbury, 2023). 
* Levy, Peter, ed. &quot;Encyclopedia of the Reagan-Bush years&quot; (1996) online
* Reagan, Nancy. &quot;My Turn: The Memoirs of Nancy Reagan&quot; (1989), with William Novak. H. W. Brands in &quot;Reagan: The Life&quot; (2015) on p. 743 says &quot;she wrote one of the most candid and at times self-critical memoirs in recent American political history.&quot;
* Shultz, George P. &quot;Turmoil and Triumph: My Years as Secretary of State&quot; (1993), covers 1982–1989.
* Service, Robert. &quot;The End of the Cold War: 1985–1991&quot; (2015) 
* Spitz, Bob. &quot;Reagan: An American Journey&quot; (2018), 880pp; detailed biography. 
* Thompson, Kenneth W., ed. &quot;Foreign policy in the Reagan presidency: nine intimate perspectives&quot; (1993)


===Historiography===
* Johns, Andrew L., ed. &quot;A Companion to Ronald Reagan&quot; (Wiley-Blackwell, 2015). xiv, 682 pp.; topical essays by scholars emphasizing historiography; contents free at many libraries
* Kengor, Paul. &quot;Reagan Among the Professors: His Surprising Reputation&quot;. &quot;Policy Review&quot; 98 (1999): 15+. Reports that &quot;many articles in the top journals have been fair, as have a number of influential books...from respected historians, presidential scholars, and political scientists – people who were not Reagan supporters and are certainly not right-wingers.&quot;

==External links==

* Reagan Library
* in-depth coverage by Miller Center at University Virginia
* Reagan Era study guide, timeline, quotes, trivia, teacher resources</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="0" end="13" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35073" start="35" end="70" title="List of presidents of the United States" label="40th president of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3401697" start="82" end="104" title="First inauguration of Ronald Reagan" label="his first inauguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="167" end="177" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="183" end="193" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="244" end="252" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="273" end="285" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="290" end="301" title="Independent politicians in the United States" label="independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q936548" start="314" end="330" title="John B. Anderson" label="John B. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="338" end="364" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q699744" start="390" end="416" title="1984 United States presidential election" label="1984 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="463" end="477" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="585" end="602" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="616" end="642" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="707" end="738" title="Conservatism in the United States" label="conservative shift to the right"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152203" start="795" end="802" title="Modern liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="804" end="812" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="818" end="831" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333403" start="963" end="976" title="Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981" label="major tax cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q608537" start="1111" end="1122" title="Reaganomics" label="Reaganomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="1147" end="1168" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-side economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138777" start="1266" end="1278" title="National debt of the United States" label="federal debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16326070" start="1350" end="1372" title="Tax Reform Act of 1986" label="Tax Reform Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184858" start="1458" end="1500" title="Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986" label="Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="1594" end="1612" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="illegal immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="1641" end="1655" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="federal judges"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="1697" end="1710" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468451" start="1736" end="1750" title="Foreign policy of the Ronald Reagan administration" label="foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="1773" end="1787" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="1822" end="1837" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="Reagan Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678782" start="1849" end="1858" title="rollback" label="roll back"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1887" end="1899" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="2124" end="2143" title="United States invasion of Grenada" label="invasion of Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="2213" end="2224" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513784" start="2282" end="2308" title="United States and state-sponsored terrorism" label="aid to paramilitary forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="2396" end="2407" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="2481" end="2485" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="2494" end="2500" title="Contras" label="Contra"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="2609" end="2627" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="2765" end="2782" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="2793" end="2821" title="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty" label="major arms control agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050835" start="2872" end="2878" title="Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act" label="a bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="2948" end="2957" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243931" start="3013" end="3017" title="Historical rankings of presidents of the United States" label="rank"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="3133" end="3154" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978032" start="3436" end="3453" title="Wealth inequality in the United States" label="wealth inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300744" start="3655" end="3665" title="Reagan era" label="Reagan era"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="4024" end="4041" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="4303" end="4318" title="Christian right" label="religious right"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480226" start="4477" end="4488" title="culture war" label="culture war"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="4569" end="4577" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="4801" end="4809" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218690" start="4832" end="4848" title="political machine" label="machine politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q887010" start="5637" end="5659" title="Governor of California" label="Governor of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314681" start="5697" end="5735" title="1976 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1976 Republican presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="5759" end="5770" title="Gerald Ford" label="Gerald Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="5808" end="5820" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699693" start="5828" end="5841" title="1976 United States presidential election" label="1976 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="6022" end="6039" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337643" start="6041" end="6053" title="Howard Baker" label="Howard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="6059" end="6067" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314682" start="6075" end="6113" title="1980 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1980 Republican presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579378" start="6611" end="6646" title="1980 Republican National Convention" label="1980 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q134549" start="6738" end="6749" title="Ted Kennedy" label="Ted Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q936548" start="6865" end="6881" title="John B. Anderson" label="John B. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="7038" end="7057" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="7252" end="7267" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q364056" start="7294" end="7306" title="arms control" label="arms control"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="7325" end="7337" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7782825" start="7960" end="7978" title="There you go again" label="There you go again"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892446" start="8300" end="8323" title="1980 United States elections" label="congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="8357" end="8363" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="8440" end="8464" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q223151" start="8502" end="8513" title="James Baker" label="James Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q786242" start="8567" end="8581" title="White House Chief of Staff" label="chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994871" start="8590" end="8611" title="White House Deputy Chief of Staff" label="Deputy Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619033" start="8612" end="8626" title="Michael Deaver" label="Michael Deaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q732029" start="8632" end="8641" title="Counselor to the President" label="Counselor"/>
<link wikidata="Q709641" start="8642" end="8653" title="Edwin Meese" label="Edwin Meese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299336" start="9052" end="9066" title="Richard Darman" label="Richard Darman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701575" start="9071" end="9083" title="David Gergen" label="David Gergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q107957" start="9099" end="9113" title="Alexander Haig" label="Alexander Haig"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="9168" end="9181" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q434142" start="9277" end="9294" title="Caspar Weinberger" label="Caspar Weinberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240286" start="9414" end="9426" title="Donald Regan" label="Donald Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176745" start="9462" end="9476" title="David Stockman" label="David Stockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="9503" end="9511" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q284392" start="9536" end="9567" title="Office of Management and Budget" label="Office of Management and Budget"/>
<link wikidata="Q27656" start="9569" end="9581" title="Director of the Central Intelligence Agency" label="CIA director"/>
<link wikidata="Q983721" start="9582" end="9598" title="William J. Casey" label="William J. Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414246" start="9770" end="9795" title="National Security Advisor (United States)" label="national security advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q313411" start="10040" end="10056" title="George P. Shultz" label="George P. Shultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q446647" start="10093" end="10113" title="William P. Clark Jr." label="William P. Clark Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q112177529" start="10115" end="10147" title="United States Ambassador to the United Nations" label="Ambassador to the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q240534" start="10148" end="10165" title="Jeane Kirkpatrick" label="Jeane Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q351294" start="10742" end="10762" title="William French Smith" label="William French Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="10833" end="10845" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Nancy Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="10897" end="10915" title="Iran–Contra affair" label="Iran–Contra affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892450" start="10945" end="10968" title="1986 United States elections" label="1986 mid-term elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337643" start="11022" end="11034" title="Howard Baker" label="Howard Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="11132" end="11145" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q11132" start="11215" end="11239" title="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Sandra Day O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11144" start="11251" end="11268" title="Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States" label="Associate Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359993" start="11269" end="11283" title="Potter Stewart" label="Potter Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="11515" end="11530" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q300950" start="11657" end="11668" title="Roe v. Wade" label="Roe v. Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="11698" end="11706" title="abortion in the United States" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q311562" start="11929" end="11946" title="William Rehnquist" label="William Rehnquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q11147" start="11966" end="12000" title="Chief Justice of the United States" label="Chief Justice of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q346685" start="12007" end="12020" title="Warren Burger" label="Warren Burger"/>
<link wikidata="Q706463" start="12176" end="12197" title="Edward Douglass White" label="Edward Douglass White"/>
<link wikidata="Q942386" start="12202" end="12217" title="Harlan F. Stone" label="Harlan F. Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q11156" start="12249" end="12263" title="Antonin Scalia" label="Antonin Scalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q252739" start="12522" end="12541" title="Lewis F. Powell Jr." label="Lewis F. Powell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1365780" start="12559" end="12570" title="Robert Bork" label="Robert Bork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342219" start="12608" end="12630" title="Robert Bork Supreme Court nomination" label="rejected by the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301550" start="12701" end="12720" title="Douglas H. Ginsburg" label="Douglas H. Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11171" start="12807" end="12822" title="Anthony Kennedy" label="Anthony Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="13071" end="13102" title="United States courts of appeals" label="United States courts of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="13111" end="13139" title="United States district court" label="United States district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6594913" start="13142" end="13171" title="List of presidents of the United States by judicial appointments" label="more than any other president"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440666" start="13302" end="13320" title="Federalist Society" label="Federalist Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387214" start="13619" end="13630" title="James Brady" label="James Brady"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788924" start="13658" end="13674" title="Thomas Delahanty" label="Thomas Delahanty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435266" start="13701" end="13713" title="Tim McCarthy" label="Tim McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q343960" start="13760" end="13777" title="John Hinckley Jr." label="John Hinckley Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4260660" start="13790" end="13813" title="Hilton Washington" label="Washington Hilton Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5546034" start="13903" end="13940" title="George Washington University Hospital" label="George Washington University Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361887" start="14026" end="14043" title="internal bleeding" label="internal bleeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="14852" end="14862" title="neoliberal" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q531186" start="14890" end="14911" title="supply-side economics" label="supply-side economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="14932" end="14945" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q179522" start="14967" end="14978" title="free market economy" label="free-market"/>
<link wikidata="Q29109910" start="15066" end="15081" title="Presidency of Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q446858" start="15105" end="15118" title="Andrew Mellon" label="Andrew Mellon"/>
<link wikidata="Q708520" start="15216" end="15229" title="Arthur Laffer" label="Arthur Laffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q83937" start="15271" end="15291" title="Keynesian economics" label="Keynesian economists"/>
<link wikidata="Q357676" start="15642" end="15651" title="Jack Kemp" label="Jack Kemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400609" start="15675" end="15687" title="William Roth" label="William Roth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613704" start="16248" end="16258" title="Phil Gramm" label="Phil Gramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333403" start="16961" end="16994" title="Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981" label="Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q5035701" start="17054" end="17071" title="Capital gains tax in the United States" label="capital gains tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5400691" start="17153" end="17163" title="Estate tax in the United States" label="estate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149559" start="17177" end="17190" title="Corporate tax in the United States" label="corporate tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836896" start="17504" end="17516" title="First 100 days of Franklin D. Roosevelt&amp;#x27;s presidency" label="Hundred Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="17520" end="17538" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689374" start="17665" end="17713" title="Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982" label="Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1982"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892447" start="18428" end="18456" title="United States elections, 1982" label="1982 congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570656" start="18476" end="18492" title="United States midterm election" label="midterm election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251554" start="18737" end="18766" title="Deficit Reduction Act of 1984" label="Deficit Reduction Act of 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094491" start="18976" end="18992" title="Tip O&amp;#x27;Neill" label="Tip O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16326070" start="19126" end="19148" title="Tax Reform Act of 1986" label="Tax Reform Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598340" start="19505" end="19523" title="standard deduction" label="standard deduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="19529" end="19553" title="earned income tax credit" label="earned income tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6803767" start="19810" end="19832" title="gross national product" label="gross national product"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="20071" end="20084" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141363" start="20102" end="20110" title="Medicaid" label="Medicaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079208" start="20119" end="20149" title="Office of Economic Opportunity" label="Office of Economic Opportunity"/>
<link wikidata="Q556318" start="20279" end="20290" title="Food Stamp Program" label="food stamps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432371" start="20292" end="20313" title="School meal programs in the United States" label="school lunch programs"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950756" start="20333" end="20374" title="Comprehensive Employment and Training Act" label="Comprehensive Employment and Training Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q311255" start="20510" end="20531" title="unemployment benefits" label="unemployment benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="20577" end="20598" title="United States Department of Defense" label="Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q1572938" start="20839" end="20867" title="Supplemental Security Income" label="Supplemental Security Income"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036463" start="20883" end="20907" title="earned income tax credit" label="earned income tax credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4696621" start="20913" end="20952" title="Aid to Families with Dependent Children" label="Aid to Families with Dependent Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q113368579" start="21111" end="21125" title="New Federalism" label="New Federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="21330" end="21345" title="Social Security (United States)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604553" start="21445" end="21490" title="Greenspan Commission" label="National Commission on Social Security Reform"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21870" end="21904" title="History of Social Security in the United States#1983 Amendments" label="Social Security Amendments of 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q559392" start="21990" end="21998" title="Medicare (United States)" label="Medicare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139875" start="22216" end="22226" title="third rail of politics" label="third rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326569" start="22522" end="22543" title="early 1980s recession" label="early 1980s recession"/>
<link wikidata="Q3258192" start="23069" end="23110" title="Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Balanced Budget Act" label="Gramm–Rudman–Hollings Balanced Budget Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985036" start="23129" end="23152" title="Budget sequestration" label="automatic spending cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931243" start="23369" end="23410" title="Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990" label="Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="23516" end="23527" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q349785" start="23874" end="23886" title="Paul Volcker" label="Paul Volcker"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="23905" end="23920" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3372903" start="24322" end="24329" title="Poverty in the United States" label="poverty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="24474" end="24493" title="economic inequality" label="economic inequality"/>
<link wikidata="Q15708691" start="24512" end="24520" title="Homelessness in the United States" label="homeless"/>
<link wikidata="Q193635" start="24869" end="24883" title="Alan Greenspan" label="Alan Greenspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020018" start="25045" end="25063" title="stock market crash" label="stock market crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q868261" start="25095" end="25107" title="Black Monday (1987)" label="Black Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774478" start="25214" end="25263" title="Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization (1968)" label="Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="25328" end="25340" title="Strike action" label="labor strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791281" start="26047" end="26081" title="Arizona copper mine strike of 1983" label="Arizona copper mine strike of 1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q755309" start="26092" end="26101" title="Greyhound Lines" label="Greyhound"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078652" start="26129" end="26150" title="1985–86 Hormel strike" label="1985–86 Hormel strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024155" start="26235" end="26265" title="National Labor Relations Board" label="National Labor Relations Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578571" start="26750" end="26770" title="William Leuchtenburg" label="William Leuchtenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="26887" end="26920" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="Federal Communications Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393367" start="26989" end="27006" title="Fairness Doctrine" label="Fairness Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523715" start="27040" end="27084" title="Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act" label="Garn–St. Germain Depository Institutions Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091703" start="27097" end="27125" title="savings and loan association" label="savings and loan association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683193" start="27156" end="27180" title="adjustable-rate mortgage" label="adjustable-rate mortgage"/>
<link wikidata="Q28129963" start="27312" end="27350" title="Employment and Training Administration" label="Employment and Training Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q710501" start="27378" end="27391" title="James G. Watt" label="James G. Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q756944" start="27473" end="27487" title="surface mining" label="surface mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="27495" end="27498" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q565342" start="27508" end="27520" title="Anne Gorsuch" label="Anne Gorsuch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326489" start="27874" end="27897" title="Savings and loan crisis" label="Savings and loan crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6776146" start="28054" end="28066" title="Martin Mayer" label="Martin Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236296" start="28367" end="28378" title="Teapot Dome Scandal" label="Teapot Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191474" start="28383" end="28398" title="Crédit Mobilier of America scandal" label="Credit Mobilier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2636748" start="28761" end="28773" title="Alan Simpson (American politician)" label="Alan Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164923" start="28801" end="28815" title="Romano Mazzoli" label="Romano Mazzoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q4184858" start="28849" end="28883" title="Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986" label="Immigration Reform and Control Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q185367" start="28955" end="28973" title="Illegal immigration to the United States" label="illegal immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057263" start="29304" end="29331" title="Mexico–United States border" label="Mexico–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q9202" start="29402" end="29419" title="Statue of Liberty" label="Statue of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185517" start="30073" end="30085" title="War on Drugs" label="War on Drugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758527" start="30241" end="30255" title="crack epidemic" label="crack epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q330694" start="30322" end="30335" title="crack cocaine" label="crack cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7166256" start="30427" end="30437" title="First Lady of the United States" label="First Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320886" start="30522" end="30533" title="Just Say No" label="Just Say No"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156963" start="30640" end="30679" title="Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984" label="Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774158" start="30688" end="30715" title="Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986" label="Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774159" start="30861" end="30888" title="Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988" label="Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988"/>
<link wikidata="Q3370543" start="30966" end="31004" title="Office of National Drug Control Policy" label="Office of National Drug Control Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451681" start="31416" end="31445" title="Firearm Owners Protection Act" label="Firearm Owners Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618296" start="31465" end="31488" title="Gun Control Act of 1968" label="Gun Control Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="31532" end="31544" title="machine guns" label="machine guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q37116" start="31728" end="31733" title="AK-47" label="AK-47"/>
<link wikidata="Q283681" start="31958" end="31967" title="abortions in the United States" label="abortions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="31982" end="32002" title="desegregation busing" label="desegregation busing"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="32241" end="32252" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2251200" start="32342" end="32355" title="school prayer" label="school prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q881318" start="32386" end="32400" title="Lowell Weicker" label="Lowell Weicker"/>
<link wikidata="Q319129" start="32405" end="32420" title="Barry Goldwater" label="Barry Goldwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377485" start="32639" end="32654" title="Engel v. Vitale" label="Engel v. Vitale"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089835" start="32839" end="32855" title="School prayer in the United States" label="on school prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="33505" end="33522" title="Voting Rights Act" label="Voting Rights Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q356112" start="33708" end="33726" title="Affirmative action in the United States" label="affirmative action"/>
<link wikidata="Q751738" start="33761" end="33787" title="Martin Luther King Jr. Day" label="Martin Luther King Jr. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440532" start="33793" end="33808" title="Federal holidays in the United States" label="federal holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673184" start="33814" end="33853" title="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission" label="Equal Employment Opportunity Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124547" start="33990" end="34018" title="Civil Rights Restoration Act" label="Civil Rights Restoration Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q48527" start="34113" end="34132" title="states&amp;#x27; rights" label="states&amp;#x27; rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="34214" end="34217" title="homosexuality" label="gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708975" start="34311" end="34334" title="White House Communications Director" label="Communications Director"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="34335" end="34347" title="Pat Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="34491" end="34499" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q184378" start="34591" end="34602" title="Rock Hudson" label="Rock Hudson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907274" start="34801" end="34819" title="Bowers v. Hardwick" label="Bowers v. Hardwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306168" start="34850" end="34865" title="C. Everett Koop" label="C. Everett Koop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4370501" start="35048" end="35077" title="abstinence-only sex education" label="abstinence-only sex education"/>
<link wikidata="Q219438" start="36249" end="36266" title="Montreal Protocol" label="Montreal Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q79995" start="36316" end="36327" title="ozone layer" label="ozone layer"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="36361" end="36378" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q334401" start="36450" end="36462" title="surveillance" label="surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q321703" start="36550" end="36557" title="premise" label="premise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4488757" start="36593" end="36605" title="Intelligence assessment" label="intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q501700" start="36610" end="36629" title="counterintelligence" label="counterintelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419865" start="36727" end="36748" title="Executive Order 12333" label="Executive Order 12333"/>
<link wikidata="Q48976586" start="36755" end="36777" title="presidential directive" label="presidential directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="36805" end="36845" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="government&amp;#x27;s intelligence community"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="37299" end="37314" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q476757" start="37318" end="37329" title="Democratic Republic of Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="37606" end="37632" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q218636" start="37659" end="37669" title="B-1 Lancer" label="B-1 Lancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q180285" start="37682" end="37699" title="Northrop Grumman B-2 Spirit" label="B-2 Spirit bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q181860" start="37701" end="37715" title="cruise missile" label="cruise missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q907752" start="37722" end="37732" title="LGM-118 Peacekeeper" label="MX missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596125" start="37742" end="37755" title="600-ship Navy" label="600-ship Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q54287" start="37797" end="37802" title="SS-20" label="SS-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="37819" end="37823" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q626810" start="37849" end="37865" title="Pershing missile" label="Pershing missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q604988" start="38008" end="38019" title="Evil Empire speech" label="evil empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q931492" start="38154" end="38159" title="START I" label="START"/>
<link wikidata="Q623994" start="38184" end="38188" title="Strategic Arms Limitation Talks" label="SALT"/>
<link wikidata="Q211031" start="38443" end="38471" title="Strategic Defense Initiative" label="Strategic Defense Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q201424" start="38684" end="38695" title="nuclear war" label="nuclear war"/>
<link wikidata="Q462" start="38885" end="38921" title="Star Wars" label="popular film series of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q287422" start="39194" end="39223" title="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty" label="Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q738462" start="39454" end="39467" title="The Day After" label="The Day After"/>
<link wikidata="Q504697" start="39484" end="39492" title="WarGames" label="WarGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q277342" start="39531" end="39545" title="99 Luftballons" label="99 Luftballons"/>
<link wikidata="Q739570" start="39562" end="39566" title="Nena (band)" label="Nena"/>
<link wikidata="Q599227" start="39725" end="39740" title="Reagan Doctrine" label="Reagan Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="39816" end="39836" title="Guerrilla warfare" label="resistance movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1678782" start="39859" end="39867" title="rollback" label="rollback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003" start="40022" end="40032" title="Solidarity (Polish trade union)" label="Solidarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q718605" start="40074" end="40095" title="Martial law in Poland" label="period of martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974176" start="40128" end="40155" title="Special Activities Division" label="Special Activities Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360256" start="40250" end="40260" title="Islamic Unity of Afghanistan Mujahideen" label="Mujahideen"/>
<link wikidata="Q83085" start="40299" end="40316" title="Soviet–Afghan War" label="Soviet–Afghan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q136786" start="40555" end="40563" title="blowback (intelligence)" label="blowback"/>
<link wikidata="Q42418" start="40583" end="40590" title="Taliban" label="Taliban"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="40595" end="40603" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="41003" end="41017" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="41044" end="41067" title="human rights violations" label="human rights violations"/>
<link wikidata="Q310886" start="41077" end="41090" title="Hissène Habré" label="Hissène Habré"/>
<link wikidata="Q467077" start="41095" end="41112" title="Efraín Ríos Montt" label="Efraín Ríos Montt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6085537" start="41128" end="41150" title="president of Guatemala" label="president of Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q897546" start="41159" end="41178" title="Guatemalan military" label="Guatemalan military"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789344" start="41191" end="41202" title="Guatemalan genocide" label="of genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275920" start="41235" end="41246" title="Ixil people" label="Ixil people"/>
<link wikidata="Q217072" start="41691" end="41741" title="United States Agency for International Development" label="United States Agency for International Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247" start="41866" end="41879" title="Caribbean Sea" label="Caribbean Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="42022" end="42026" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="42048" end="42055" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="42057" end="42066" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="42072" end="42083" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q612165" start="42160" end="42186" title="Caribbean Basin Initiative" label="Caribbean Basin Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="42331" end="42338" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="42534" end="42543" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q769" start="42626" end="42633" title="Grenada" label="Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q468234" start="42649" end="42663" title="Maurice Bishop" label="Maurice Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q953795" start="42798" end="42811" title="Hudson Austin" label="Hudson Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="42938" end="42952" title="United States invasion of Grenada" label="invade Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="43371" end="43402" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="43436" end="43453" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q27389" start="43552" end="43563" title="Sandinistas" label="Sandinistas"/>
<link wikidata="Q57402" start="43615" end="43628" title="Daniel Ortega" label="Daniel Ortega"/>
<link wikidata="Q286810" start="43854" end="43861" title="Contras" label="Contras"/>
<link wikidata="Q891252" start="43952" end="43968" title="Boland Amendment" label="Boland Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="44264" end="44274" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156347" start="44469" end="44492" title="Lebanon hostage crisis" label="seven American hostages"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="44501" end="44510" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="44646" end="44659" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q332413" start="44869" end="44885" title="Robert McFarlane (American politician)" label="Robert McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q348163" start="44918" end="44933" title="John Poindexter" label="John Poindexter"/>
<link wikidata="Q431223" start="45117" end="45129" title="Oliver North" label="Oliver North"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829657" start="45480" end="45496" title="Tower Commission" label="Tower Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863164" start="45601" end="45619" title="United States Office of the Independent Counsel" label="special prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q521032" start="45684" end="45698" title="Lawrence Walsh" label="Lawrence Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658030" start="45760" end="45770" title="John Tower" label="John Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q273659" start="46338" end="46357" title="Iran–Contra scandal" label="Iran–Contra scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q115705182" start="46909" end="46919" title="Federal impeachment in the United States" label="impeaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q839920" start="47715" end="47729" title="List of leaders of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="47812" end="47829" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="48007" end="48032" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivized agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="48049" end="48070" title="planned economy" label="planned manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994254" start="48100" end="48114" title="Economy of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="48307" end="48318" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="48323" end="48331" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309932" start="49003" end="49022" title="Jack F. Matlock Jr." label="Jack F. Matlock Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5533037" start="49259" end="49272" title="Geneva Summit (1985)" label="Geneva Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1270178" start="49694" end="49705" title="George Will" label="George Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036702" start="50136" end="50152" title="Reykjavík Summit" label="Reykjavík Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994106" start="50434" end="50445" title="Tear down this wall!" label="1987 speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q56036" start="50459" end="50470" title="West Berlin" label="West Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q392893" start="50622" end="50658" title="intermediate-range ballistic missile" label="intermediate-range ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="50689" end="50723" title="intercontinental ballistic missile" label="intercontinental ballistic missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972334" start="50811" end="50828" title="Washington Summit (1987)" label="Washington Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q169401" start="50846" end="50886" title="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty" label="Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q82664" start="51945" end="51958" title="Iran–Iraq War" label="Iran–Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6915535" start="51993" end="52006" title="Moscow Summit (1988)" label="fourth summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13164" start="52326" end="52349" title="Moscow State University" label="Moscow State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q223777" start="52405" end="52422" title="Brezhnev Doctrine" label="Brezhnev Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="52537" end="52548" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q69163529" start="52549" end="52553" title="Fall of the Berlin Wall" label="fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157030" start="52606" end="52618" title="Malta Summit" label="Malta Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q258974" start="52925" end="52932" title="Bitburg" label="Bitburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518" start="52988" end="52999" title="Helmut Kohl" label="Helmut Kohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="53178" end="53187" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="53710" end="53723" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q149127" start="53725" end="53737" title="Pat Buchanan" label="Pat Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q208484" start="54313" end="54322" title="Lebanese Civil War" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="54341" end="54348" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="54367" end="54373" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="54378" end="54383" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q49103" start="54447" end="54454" title="1982 Lebanon War" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480109" start="54455" end="54471" title="Southern Lebanon" label="Southern Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26683" start="54659" end="54662" title="Palestine Liberation Organization" label="PLO"/>
<link wikidata="Q3820" start="54827" end="54833" title="Beirut" label="Beirut"/>
<link wikidata="Q972052" start="54853" end="54865" title="Philip Habib" label="Philip Habib"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655595" start="55068" end="55087" title="Multinational Force in Lebanon" label="multinational force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="55099" end="55111" title="United States Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q518303" start="55167" end="55199" title="1983 Beirut barracks bombings" label="two nearly-simultaneous bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="55424" end="55428" title="Shia Islam" label="Shia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="55453" end="55462" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754174" start="55758" end="55773" title="Powell Doctrine" label="Powell Doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604253" start="56250" end="56272" title="Gulf of Sidra incident (1981)" label="Gulf of Sidra incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="56305" end="56320" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="56377" end="56392" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="56410" end="56422" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q536935" start="56637" end="56681" title="1986 Berlin discotheque bombing" label="a bomb exploded in a West Berlin discothèque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380335" start="57016" end="57025" title="airstrike" label="airstrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="57087" end="57104" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q171328" start="57296" end="57318" title="United Nations Charter" label="United Nations Charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q338067" start="57532" end="57543" title="Oval Office" label="Oval Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q47423" start="57862" end="57893" title="United Nations General Assembly" label="United Nations General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q11409" start="58318" end="58327" title="apartheid" label="apartheid"/>
<link wikidata="Q214473" start="58617" end="58629" title="Stephen Biko" label="Stephen Biko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995306" start="58677" end="58700" title="constructive engagement" label="constructive engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030" start="59093" end="59100" title="Namibia" label="Namibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="59105" end="59114" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282253" start="59417" end="59436" title="Disinvestment from South Africa" label="divestment campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793859" start="59855" end="59867" title="arms embargo" label="arms embargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17050835" start="60078" end="60110" title="Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act" label="Comprehensive Anti-Apartheid Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q151813" start="60323" end="60337" title="F. W. de Klerk" label="F. W. de Klerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327750" start="60556" end="60569" title="Single market" label="common market"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832024" start="60622" end="60650" title="Trade and Tariff Act of 1984" label="Trade and Tariff Act of 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437054" start="60686" end="60696" title="fast track (trade)" label="fast track"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892492" start="60728" end="60749" title="United States free-trade agreements" label="free trade agreements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6087836" start="60778" end="60819" title="Israel–United States Free Trade Agreement" label="Israel–United States Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="60923" end="60937" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665587" start="60949" end="60990" title="Canada–United States Free Trade Agreement" label="Canada–United States Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="61121" end="61156" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q323808" start="61457" end="61468" title="hearing aid" label="hearing aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188874" start="61724" end="61741" title="colorectal cancer" label="colorectal cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q217797" start="61858" end="61872" title="Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="25th Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q451695" start="62237" end="62249" title="Lesley Stahl" label="Lesley Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="62367" end="62391" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q9625" start="62910" end="62918" title="prostate" label="prostate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330254" start="63179" end="63207" title="Dupuytren&amp;#x27;s contracture" label="Dupuytren&amp;#x27;s contracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892421" start="63698" end="63712" title="1930 United States elections" label="1930 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="63722" end="63738" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255748" start="64021" end="64059" title="1984 Democratic Party presidential primaries" label="1984 Democratic presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="64087" end="64101" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q919448" start="64111" end="64120" title="Gary Hart" label="Gary Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q310586" start="64177" end="64190" title="Jesse Jackson" label="Jesse Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25046235" start="64293" end="64301" title="Democratic Party vice presidential candidate selection, 1984" label="selected"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="64316" end="64333" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q8456" start="65135" end="65155" title="1984 Summer Olympics" label="1984 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="65188" end="65205" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q11081" start="65547" end="65571" title="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Alzheimer&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892448" start="66497" end="66520" title="1984 United States elections" label="congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="66558" end="66564" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="66603" end="66627" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314684" start="67389" end="67427" title="1988 Republican Party presidential primaries" label="1988 Republican presidential primaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="67468" end="67485" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q319079" start="67499" end="67507" title="Bob Dole" label="Bob Dole"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584668" start="67513" end="67548" title="1988 Republican National Convention" label="1988 Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q319099" start="67663" end="67678" title="Michael Dukakis" label="Michael Dukakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584413" start="67733" end="67768" title="1988 Democratic National Convention" label="1988 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021572" start="68140" end="68153" title="Willie Horton" label="Willie Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q643015" start="68237" end="68263" title="1988 United States presidential election" label="1988 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="68451" end="68455" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892452" start="68475" end="68498" title="1988 United States elections" label="congressional elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="68534" end="68558" title="United States House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="68567" end="68573" title="United States Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="68774" end="68786" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q589673" start="69451" end="69470" title="Iran hostage crisis" label="Iran hostage crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978032" start="69747" end="69760" title="Wealth inequality in the United States" label="gap in wealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q131327" start="69781" end="69793" title="homelessness" label="homelessness"/>
<link wikidata="Q712123" start="70073" end="70085" title="Paul Kennedy" label="Paul Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="70197" end="70208" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q449064" start="70423" end="70436" title="Richard Pipes" label="Richard Pipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="70596" end="70608" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q464148" start="71419" end="71442" title="American exceptionalism" label="American exceptionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225621" start="71488" end="71498" title="Hugh Heclo" label="Hugh Heclo"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="71550" end="71563" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q433211" start="71938" end="71976" title="American Political Science Association" label="American Political Science Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633338" start="72230" end="72270" title="History of the United States (1980–1991)" label="History of the United States (1980–1991)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240397" start="72273" end="72305" title="Premiership of Margaret Thatcher" label="Premiership of Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432360" start="72308" end="72342" title="Ronald Reagan Presidential Library" label="Ronald Reagan Presidential Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q193426" start="73977" end="73990" title="Nancy Reagan" label="Reagan, Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q24565876" start="74054" end="74067" title="William Novak" label="William Novak"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871557" wikidata="Q610368" url="?curid=871557" title="Civil Guard (Israel)">
<text>The Civil Guard (), abbreviated in Hebrew as Mash&#x27;az (משא&quot;ז) is a volunteer organization of Israeli citizens which assists in daily police work. It is a subdivision of the Israel Police.

==Organization==

The Civil Guard is a division in the &quot;Police and Community&quot; branch of the Israel Police. The Civil Guard is managed and supported by the police which provide weapons, equipment, training and police officers who command local Civil Guard bases (each community has one or more Civil Guard bases). Although the Civil Guard is operated by the police, its manpower consists mainly of civilian volunteers. Members are trained to provide the initial response to a security situation until regular police forces arrive. Most Civil Guard volunteers are armed with M1 carbines, or more recently, CAR-15 carbines, and personal handguns (if the member has a civilian gun license). The Civil Guard is composed mainly of volunteers who do patrols (in car or on foot). They go through basic training and have limited police powers while on duty. They may apprehend a suspected person or make an arrest if necessary. 

Most volunteers manage about one shift a week (2 to 4+ hours), while the minimum requirement is 12 hours a month.

The Civil Guard&#x27;s equipment generally consists of a fluorescent yellow police vest, flashlight, radio, firearm, handcuffs and whatever else may be required particular to the assignment. Equipment is returned at the end of the shift. 

Within the Civil Guard there are two classifications who serve more often, the Matmid (מתמי&quot;ד) volunteers give more of their time. Yatam (ית&quot;מ) volunteers are mainly involved in traffic control. Both are more like volunteer police officers. They receive advanced training and wear police uniforms.

The Civil Guard also has specialized units such as bicycle-riders, search-and-rescue teams, divers, translators, and drivers, whose members have to go through additional training and have a higher level of commitment. The Civil Guard has disbanded its sniper, dune buggy, and mounted units.

==History==

The Civil Guard was established on July 10, 1974 as a group of civilians volunteered to do night patrols in near-border neighborhoods, which were exposed to Palestinian terror attacks, and in particular following the Ma&#x27;alot massacre of May 15, 1974. Later, the focus was shifted from counter terror patrols to assist daily police work such as fighting crime and neighborhood violence. In 2004, the Civil Guard reportedly had some 70,000 volunteers, 28% of them women. 20,000 new volunteers joined that year and 17,000 left the service. The typical volunteer profile is a 40- to 55-year-old upper-middle-class male, married with children. Due to the high level of required commitment, 20% of all volunteers quit during their first year of service. Between 1974–2004, over half a million citizens volunteered for the Civil Guard .

==See also==
*Shomrim
*Town Watch
*Neighborhood Watch
*Nightwatch
*Israeli Security Forces
*Mishmeret Yesha

==References==
==External links==
*Civil Guard website(as part of the Israel Police website)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q610368" start="4" end="15" title="Civil Guard (Israel)" label="Civil Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q610368" start="45" end="57" title="Civil Guard (Israel)" label="Mash&amp;#x27;az"/>
<link wikidata="Q188844" start="76" end="85" title="Volunteering" label="volunteer"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="102" end="108" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42138" start="110" end="117" title="citizen" label="citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="142" end="148" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q594444" start="182" end="195" title="Israel Police" label="Israel Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q245016" start="463" end="467" title="military base" label="base"/>
<link wikidata="Q695988" start="781" end="791" title="M1 carbine" label="M1 carbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q646667" start="812" end="818" title="CAR-15" label="CAR-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874635" start="1672" end="1687" title="traffic police" label="traffic control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8100696" start="1708" end="1724" title="special police" label="volunteer police"/>
<link wikidata="Q201948" start="2045" end="2051" title="sniper" label="sniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q936066" start="2053" end="2063" title="dune buggy" label="dune buggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342867" start="2255" end="2273" title="Palestinian terrorism and militancy" label="Palestinian terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638587" start="2315" end="2336" title="Ma&amp;#x27;alot massacre" label="Ma&amp;#x27;alot massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q909459" start="2388" end="2402" title="counter terror" label="counter terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895792" start="2948" end="2955" title="Shomrim (volunteers)" label="Shomrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q127930" start="2957" end="2967" title="Town Watch" label="Town Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q127930" start="2969" end="2987" title="Neighborhood Watch" label="Neighborhood Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973168" start="2989" end="2999" title="Watchman (law enforcement)" label="Nightwatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447722" start="3001" end="3024" title="Israeli Security Forces" label="Israeli Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875595" start="3026" end="3041" title="Mishmeret Yesha" label="Mishmeret Yesha"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871562" wikidata="Q264900" url="?curid=871562" title="Giacomo F. Maraldi">
<text>Giacomo Filippo Maraldi (21 August 1665 – 1 December 1729) was a French-Italian astronomer and mathematician. His name is also given as Jacques Philippe Maraldi.
Born in Perinaldo (modern Liguria) he was the nephew of Giovanni Cassini, and worked most of his life at the Paris Observatory (1687 – 1718). He also is the uncle of Jean-Dominique Maraldi.

From 1700 until 1718 he worked on a catalog of fixed stars, and from 1672 until 1719 he studied Mars extensively.
His most famous astronomical discovery was that the ice caps on Mars are not exactly on the rotational poles of that body. He also recognized (in May 1724) that the corona visible during a solar eclipse belongs to the Sun not to the Moon, and he discovered R Hydrae as a variable star. He also helped with the survey based on the Paris Meridian.

In 1723 he also confirmed earlier (1715) discovery of his pupil Joseph-Nicolas Delisle of what is usually referred to as Poisson&#x27;s spot, an observation that was unrecognized until its rediscovery in the early 19th century by Dominique Arago. At the time of Arago&#x27;s discovery, Poisson&#x27;s spot gave convincing evidence for the contested wave nature of light.

In mathematics he is most known for obtaining the angle in the rhombic dodecahedron shape in 1712, which is still called the Maraldi angle. 

Craters on the Moon and Mars were named in his and his nephew&#x27;s honor. 

==References==
==External links==
*History of Mars Observations
*Short biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q264900" start="0" end="23" title="Giacomo F. Maraldi" label="Giacomo Filippo Maraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="65" end="71" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="72" end="79" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="80" end="90" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q170790" start="95" end="108" title="mathematician" label="mathematician"/>
<link wikidata="Q264900" start="136" end="160" title="Giacomo F. Maraldi" label="Jacques Philippe Maraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q269476" start="170" end="179" title="Perinaldo" label="Perinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256" start="188" end="195" title="Liguria" label="Liguria"/>
<link wikidata="Q14279" start="218" end="234" title="Giovanni Domenico Cassini" label="Giovanni Cassini"/>
<link wikidata="Q461340" start="271" end="288" title="Paris Observatory" label="Paris Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q722528" start="328" end="350" title="Jean-Dominique Maraldi" label="Jean-Dominique Maraldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q430297" start="400" end="410" title="fixed star" label="fixed star"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="449" end="453" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q113000019" start="632" end="638" title="solar corona" label="corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="656" end="669" title="solar eclipse" label="solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="685" end="688" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="700" end="704" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2124823" start="724" end="732" title="R Hydrae" label="R Hydrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="738" end="751" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q147796" start="797" end="811" title="Paris Meridian" label="Paris Meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q431485" start="878" end="900" title="Joseph-Nicolas Delisle" label="Joseph-Nicolas Delisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807778" start="935" end="954" title="Poisson&amp;#x27;s spot" label="Poisson&amp;#x27;s spot"/>
<link wikidata="Q154353" start="1044" end="1059" title="Dominique Arago" label="Dominique Arago"/>
<link wikidata="Q395" start="1189" end="1200" title="mathematics" label="mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="1236" end="1241" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132285" start="1249" end="1269" title="rhombic dodecahedron" label="rhombic dodecahedron"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="1328" end="1334" title="Impact crater" label="Crater"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871569" wikidata="Q548205" url="?curid=871569" title="Hubert Robert">
<text>Hubert Robert (; 22 May 1733 – 15 April 1808) was a French painter in the school of Romanticism, noted especially for his landscape paintings and capricci, or semi-fictitious picturesque depictions of ruins in Italy and of France.

==Biography==

===Early years===
Hubert Robert was born in Paris in 1733. His father, Nicolas Robert, was in the service of François-Joseph de Choiseul, marquis de Stainville a leading diplomat from Lorraine. Young Robert finished his studies with the Jesuits at the Collège de Navarre in 1751 and entered the atelier of the sculptor Michel-Ange Slodtz who taught him design and perspective but encouraged him to turn to painting. In 1754 he left for Rome in the train of Étienne-François de Choiseul, son of his father&#x27;s employer, who had been named French ambassador and would become a Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs to Louis XV in 1758.

===In Rome===

He spent fully eleven years in Rome, a remarkable length of time; after the young artist&#x27;s official residence at the French Academy in Rome ran out, he supported himself by works he produced for visiting connoisseurs like the abbé de Saint-Non, who took Robert to Naples in April 1760 to visit the ruins of Pompeii. The marquis de Marigny, director of the &quot;Bâtiments du Roi&quot; kept abreast of his development in correspondence with Natoire, director of the French Academy, who urged the &quot;pensionnaires&quot; to sketch out-of-doors, from nature: Robert needed no urging; drawings from his sketchbooks document his travels: Villa d&#x27;Este, Caprarola.

The contrast between the ruins of ancient Rome and the life of his time excited his keenest interest. He worked for a time in the studio of Giovanni Paolo Panini, whose influence can be seen in the &quot;Vue imaginaire de la galerie du Louvre en ruine&quot; (&quot;illustration&quot;). Robert spent his time in the company of young artists in the circle of Piranesi, whose &quot;capricci&quot; of romantically overgrown ruins influenced him so greatly that he gained the nickname &quot;Robert des ruines&quot;. The albums of sketches and drawings he assembled in Rome supplied him with motifs that he worked into paintings throughout his career.

He is reported to have carved his name into the walls of the Colosseum in 1767.

===In Paris===

His success on his return to Paris in 1765 was rapid: the following year he was received by the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture, with a Roman capriccio, &quot;The Port of Rome, ornamented with different Monuments of Architecture, Ancient and Modern.&quot; Robert&#x27;s first exhibition at the Salon of 1767, consisting of thirteen paintings and a number of drawings, prompted Denis Diderot to write: &quot;The ideas which the ruins awake in me are grand.&quot; Robert subsequently showed work at every Salon until 1802. He was successively appointed &quot;Designer of the King&#x27;s Gardens&quot;, &quot;Keeper of the King&#x27;s Pictures&quot; and &quot;Keeper of the Museum and Councilor to the Academy&quot;.

Robert was arrested in October 1793, during the French Revolution. During the ten months of his detention at Sainte-Pélagie and Saint-Lazare he made many drawings, painted at least 53 canvases, and painted numerous vignettes of prison life on plates. He was freed one week after the fall of Robespierre. Robert narrowly escaped the guillotine when through error another prisoner with a similar name was guillotined in his place.

Subsequently, he was placed on the committee of five in charge of the new national museum at the Palais du Louvre.

The Revolution also resulted in the destruction of some of Robert&#x27;s work; his painting &quot;Péché Cardinal&quot; (ca.1799) is one that is thought to be lost or destroyed in a fire. Robert had designed the decorations for a little theatre in the new wing at the location of the current staircase Gabriel in the Palace of Versailles. Designed to seat about 500, this theatre was built from the summer of 1785 and opened in early 1786. It was intended to serve as an ordinary court theatre, replacing the Theatre of the Princes Court which was too old and too small, but was destroyed during the time of Louis Philippe. A watercolour of Robert&#x27;s design is in the National Archives in Paris.

Robert died of a stroke on 15 April 1808.

==Style and legacy==

The quantity of his work is immense, comprising perhaps one thousand paintings and ten thousand drawings. The Louvre alone contains nine paintings by his hand and specimens are frequently to be met with in provincial museums and private collections. Robert&#x27;s work has more or less of that scenic character which justified his selection by Voltaire to paint the decorations of his theatre at Ferney.

His work was much engraved by the abbé de Saint-Non, with whom he had visited Naples in the company of Fragonard during his early days; in Italy his work has also been frequently reproduced by Chatelain, Linard, Le Veau, and others.

He is noted for the liveliness and point with which he treated the subjects he painted. Equally at ease painting small easel pictures or huge decorations, he worked quickly using an &quot;alla prima&quot; technique. Along with this incessant activity as an artist, his daring character and many adventures attracted general admiration and sympathy. In the fourth canto of his &quot;L&#x27;Imagination&quot; Jacques Delille celebrated Robert&#x27;s miraculous escape when lost in the catacombs.

===Robert and picturesque gardens===
Enterprising and prolific, Robert also acted in a role similar to that of a modern-day art director, conceptualizing fashionably dilapidated gardens for several aristocratic clients, summarized by his possible intervention at Ermenonville; there he would have been working with the architect Jean-Marie Morel for the marquis de Girardin, who was the author of &quot;Compositions des paysages&quot; (1777) and had distinct views of his own. In 1786 he began his better documented collaboration at Méréville, with his most significant patron, the financier Jean-Joseph de Laborde, who found François-Joseph Bélanger&#x27;s plans too expensive and perhaps too formal.

Though documents are again lacking, Hubert Robert&#x27;s name is invariably invoked in connection with Marie Antoinette&#x27;s &#x27;premier architecte&#x27; Richard Mique through several phases of the creation of an informal landscape garden at the Petit Trianon, and the setting of the &quot;petit hameau&quot;. Robert&#x27;s contribution to garden design was not in making practical ground plans for improvements but in providing atmospheric inspiration for the proposed effect. At Ermenonville and at Méréville &quot;Hubert Robert&#x27;s paintings both recorded and inspired&quot;, according to W.H. Adams: Robert&#x27;s four large ruin fantasies, painted in 1787 for Méréville may be searched in vain for direct connections with the garden. Hubert&#x27;s paintings of the Moulin Joly of his friend Claude-Henri Watelet render the fully-grown atmosphere of a garden that had been under way since 1754. His set of six Italianate landscape panels painted for Bagatelle were not the inspiration for the formal turfed parterre set in the thinned woodlands, designed by Bélanger; the later picturesque extensions of Bagatelle were carried out by its Scottish gardener, William Blaikie. Robert&#x27;s commissioned painting of the long-delayed rejuvenation of the park at Versailles, begun in 1774 with the cutting down of the trees for sale as firewood, is a record of the event, resonant with allegorical meaning. Robert was more certainly responsible for the conception of the grotto and cascades of the &#x27;Baths of Apollo,&#x27; tucked within a grove of the chateau&#x27;s park and built to house François Girardon&#x27;s celebrated sculpture group &quot;Apollo Attended by Nymphs&quot;.

==Gallery==
===Works on paper===
===Oil paintings===
==References, notes and sources==
;References and notes

;Sources


* Adams, William Howard, &quot;The French Garden 1500–1800&quot; (New York: Braziller) 1979.
* Huisman, Philippe,&quot; French Watercolours of the 18th Century&quot; (1969) London, Thames and Hudson 
* Wiebenson, Dora, &quot;The Picturesque Garden in France&quot; (Princeton University Press) 1978.
*Sarah Catala. &quot;Les Hubert Robert de Besançon&quot;. Milan: Silvana Editoriale, 2013 [catalogue raisonné of drawings from public library and fine art museum of Besançon].

==External links==

*Joconde - Catalogue des Collections des Musées de France www.culture.gouv.fr (Ministère de la culture et de la communication) — List of the work of Robert (315 entries), French.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q548205" start="0" end="13" title="Hubert Robert" label="Hubert Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="59" end="66" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q27301872" start="84" end="95" title="Romanticism in France" label="Romanticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278308" start="146" end="154" title="Capriccio (art)" label="capricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5493304" start="356" end="406" title="François Joseph de Choiseul, marquis de Stainville" label="François-Joseph de Choiseul, marquis de Stainville"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="417" end="425" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q155019" start="431" end="439" title="Duchy of Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="484" end="491" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110010" start="499" end="517" title="Collège de Navarre" label="Collège de Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308753" start="566" end="584" title="Michel-Ange Slodtz" label="Michel-Ange Slodtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q289149" start="704" end="732" title="Étienne François, duc de Choiseul" label="Étienne-François de Choiseul"/>
<link wikidata="Q337494" start="1023" end="1045" title="French Academy in Rome" label="French Academy in Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305074" start="1132" end="1149" title="Jean-Claude Richard" label="abbé de Saint-Non"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="1213" end="1220" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258999" start="1226" end="1244" title="marquis de Marigny" label="marquis de Marigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q788022" start="1268" end="1284" title="Bâtiments du Roi" label="Bâtiments du Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q860154" start="1346" end="1353" title="Natoire" label="Natoire"/>
<link wikidata="Q746063" start="1541" end="1558" title="Villa d&amp;#x27;Este" label="Villa d&amp;#x27;Este"/>
<link wikidata="Q160262" start="1560" end="1569" title="Caprarola" label="Caprarola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1606" end="1618" title="ancient Rome" label="ancient Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q286670" start="1712" end="1733" title="Giovanni Paolo Panini" label="Giovanni Paolo Panini"/>
<link wikidata="Q316307" start="1929" end="1937" title="Giovanni Battista Piranesi" label="Piranesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2278308" start="1951" end="1959" title="Capriccio (painting)" label="capricci"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="2280" end="2289" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q337579" start="2412" end="2455" title="Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture" label="Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q59331744" start="2622" end="2635" title="Salon of 1767" label="Salon of 1767"/>
<link wikidata="Q448" start="2705" end="2718" title="Denis Diderot" label="Denis Diderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q15725788" start="2843" end="2847" title="Salon of 1802" label="1802"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="3091" end="3108" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="3334" end="3345" title="Robespierre" label="Robespierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="3375" end="3385" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075988" start="3570" end="3586" title="Palais du Louvre" label="Palais du Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="3905" end="3925" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Palace of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="4196" end="4210" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Louis Philippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q50030" start="4214" end="4225" title="watercolour" label="watercolour"/>
<link wikidata="Q19675" start="4464" end="4470" title="Louvre" label="Louvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="4698" end="4706" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305074" start="4793" end="4810" title="Jean-Claude Richard" label="abbé de Saint-Non"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634" start="4837" end="4843" title="Naples" label="Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q127171" start="4862" end="4871" title="Jean-Honoré Fragonard" label="Fragonard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4971" end="4978" title="Le Veau" label="Le Veau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856046" start="5181" end="5191" title="alla prima" label="alla prima"/>
<link wikidata="Q981922" start="5400" end="5415" title="Jacques Delille" label="Jacques Delille"/>
<link wikidata="Q391953" start="5751" end="5763" title="Ermenonville" label="Ermenonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535197" start="5817" end="5833" title="Jean-Marie Morel" label="Jean-Marie Morel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970099" start="6021" end="6030" title="Château de Méréville" label="Méréville"/>
<link wikidata="Q327715" start="6114" end="6138" title="François-Joseph Bélanger" label="François-Joseph Bélanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q47365" start="6294" end="6310" title="Marie Antoinette" label="Marie Antoinette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860756" start="6349" end="6362" title="Richard Mique" label="Richard Mique"/>
<link wikidata="Q8044" start="6441" end="6454" title="Petit Trianon" label="Petit Trianon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8051" start="6485" end="6497" title="petit hameau" label="petit hameau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392588" start="6994" end="7014" title="Claude-Henri Watelet" label="Claude-Henri Watelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="7460" end="7470" title="Palace of Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q712497" start="7792" end="7809" title="François Girardon" label="François Girardon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871573" wikidata="Q1107757" url="?curid=871573" title="Baron Russell of Killowen">
<text>Baron Russell of Killowen can refer to three law lords, father, son and grandson:

*Charles Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen (1832–1900), Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales and father of Frank Russell
*Frank Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen (1867–1946), Lord of Appeal in Ordinary and father of Charles Ritchie Russell
*Charles Ritchie Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen (1908–1986), Lord of Appeal in Ordinary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q334027" start="84" end="126" title="Charles Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen" label="Charles Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119859" start="209" end="249" title="Frank Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen" label="Frank Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065907" start="329" end="379" title="Charles Ritchie Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen" label="Charles Ritchie Russell, Baron Russell of Killowen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871575" wikidata="Q790112" url="?curid=871575" title="Avalon (2001 film)">
<text>, also known as Gate to Avalon, is a 2001 Polish-language science fiction drama film directed by Mamoru Oshii and written by Kazunori Itō. An international co-production of Japan and Poland, the film stars Małgorzata Foremniak as Ash, a player in an illegal virtual reality video game whose sense of reality is challenged as she attempts to unravel the true nature and purpose of the game. 

&quot;Avalon&quot; was filmed in Wrocław, Nowa Huta, the Modlin Fortress and Warsaw. The 2009 film &quot;Assault Girls&quot;, which was written and directed by Oshii, is a stand-alone sequel set in the same fictional universe as &quot;Avalon&quot;.

== Plot ==
In a near future, many are addicted to Avalon, a virtual reality shooter. In Avalon, solo players or parties raid levels populated with AI-controlled enemies and opposing players. Winners are rewarded with experience points and in-game money, which can be exchanged for cash, allowing skilled players to make a living. As their brains interact with Avalon directly, it places mental strains on players, and sometimes rendered them catatonic.

Ash, a famous player, plays solo since her party disbanded. After a Class A mission, the GM (Game Master) warns her of the next level&#x27;s danger, and suggests that she join a party. The next day, a Bishop-class character break Ash&#x27;s record time on the same mission. Ash tries but fails to learn about him or his avatar. As she leaves the game terminal, the Bishop player watches her.

Ash runs into former teammate Stunner. Murphy, their former leader, went after a hidden NPC in Avalon, a young girl nicknamed &quot;ghost,&quot; and became comatose. The girl is allegedly the only gateway into the rumored &quot;Special A&quot;, a mission where players cannot &quot;reset&quot; (a mechanic allowing people to abort mission without their avatars being killed). Players who went after &quot;ghost&quot; never woke up from the game and became &quot;Unreturned&quot;. Ash and Stunner visit Murphy at a hospital, where someone looking similar to &quot;ghost&quot; watches her.

At home, Ash searches for words regarding Avalon, and the ghost. The search leads her to the &quot;Nine Sisters&quot;, another Arthurian legend reference. Upon entering Avalon, Ash receives an invitation to a meeting, and is ambushed by griefers. They lured Ash there to rob her equipment. After she overpowers a player, the griefers&#x27; leader reveals that only the real &quot;Nine Sisters&quot; – Avalon&#x27;s creators – know how to access &quot;Special A&quot;. They are interrupted by an attack helicopter which kills most of the players. Due to a lag, its missiles teleport in front of Ash. She &quot;resets&quot; and leaves Avalon, saving her avatar. Returning home, Ash notices that people around her are immobile, with the exception of a dog. At home, after preparing a meal for her dog, she realizes that it disappeared. She hears the helicopter flying pass.

The next day, Stunner meets Ash. He mentions a high-level Bishop player who can make the ghost appear, and is sought out by parties seeking to enter &quot;Special A&quot;. Before becoming an Unreturned, Murphy was a Bishop player. At her house, Ash is visited by the Bishop player. He offers to form a party with her and she accepts. Ash arrives at the game terminal and tells the receptionist that she plans to enter &quot;Special A&quot; to look for Murphy. Despite warnings from the receptionist and the GM, she enters the game.

There, Ash meets the Bishop player, whom she suspects is working for the &quot;Nine Sisters&quot;. Stunner arrives, revealing that he was helping Bishop recruit Ash all along. The party confronts the Citadel, a boss. Stunner, Bishop and his summoned dummy players distract the Citadel, while Ash attacks its weak point. After the Citadel is destroyed, Stunner spots the ghost. He is then shot by an enemy. Before being forced out of Avalon, Stunner mentions the only way to kill the ghost. Ash kills the ghost, turning it into a gateway. Ash steps into the gateway and disappears.

Ash &quot;wakes up&quot; from the game booth, which is put in her apartment, wearing civilian clothing and without equipment. Bishop contacts her, saying that she is in &quot;Class Real&quot;. The only way to exit Avalon is to complete the objective: defeat the Unreturned staying there. Ash takes a provided gun and proceeds to her destination, an Avalon-themed concert by the Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra. En route, she moves through a bustling world, unlike the previous levels and the real world. At the concert hall, Ash sees Murphy, and they walk outside to talk. As she confronts Murphy about his decision to stay in the game, he states that he prefers the &quot;reality&quot; within Avalon. Ash mortally wounds Murphy, who urges her to stay, then disappears. Ash enters the now empty concert hall, and sees the ghost on the stage. Ash trains her gun on the ghost, who smiles.

== Cast ==
* Małgorzata Foremniak as Ash
* Władysław Kowalski as Game Master
* as Murphy
* as Bishop
* Bartek Świderski as Stunner
* as Receptionist
* as Jill
* as Murphy of Nine Sisters
* Zuzanna Kasz as Ghost
* as Cooper (voiceover)
* as Cusinart (voiceover)
* Beszamel as Ash&#x27;s Dog

== Production ==
Even though the film was produced and directed by a Japanese crew, it is a half European, half Asian work since &quot;Avalon&quot; was co-produced by a Polish film company, starred Polish actors and was filmed mostly in Warsaw and Modlin Fortress, Poland with Polish dialogue. A Japanese dub was created, however, for the film&#x27;s original Japanese release and is available on the Japanese region 2 DVD.

&quot;Shooting it in Japan was impossible,&quot; Oshii advised interviewer Andrez Bergen in a major article that appeared in Japan&#x27;s &quot;Daily Yomiuri&quot; newspaper in 2004. &quot;I didn&#x27;t think of using a Japanese cast. I considered shooting in the UK or Ireland, but the towns and scenery in Poland matched my image for the movie.&quot;

According to Oshii, one of the advantages of shooting the film in Poland was that Polish Armed Forces were willing to lend their equipment (T-72 tanks and Mi-24 attack helicopters, among others) to the film makers without any additional fees.

In Europe, &quot;Avalon&quot; was screened out of competition at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival and won awards at other European festivals: in Spain, it was awarded &quot;Best Cinematography&quot; at the Catalan International Film Festival (2001), and in the United Kingdom, it won the &quot;Best Film&quot; award at Sci-Fi-London (2002).

However, the film received only limited release in North America (with most of its fanbase created via the circulation of bootleg DVDs imported from Asia) until Miramax released it on DVD in late 2003. The North American version has added narration to make it easier for the audience to understand the plot; although the option to view the film without the English overdubbing is provided, the subtitles still display the added dialogue. The British region-free DVD has literal English subtitles which explain the King Arthur connection better and does not display added dialogue.

Such viewer help was not used in European countries, like France, where local editions only feature optional subtitles about the Polish sung opera piece, in the Polish spoken original version only.

== Video game ==

In an unspecified era there is a forbidden online virtual reality video game. Players fight with modern, medieval and fantasy weapons in a world marked by war. In-game earned credits can be exchanged in real life for currency. Sometimes, usually with higher level players, a player&#x27;s spirit may stay inside the game, and the body stays vegetating in hospitals in the real world.

Oshii describes his game as a &quot;military RPG&quot;. However, it mixes elements of role-playing games (such as character classes and experience points) and first-person shooters (FPS) (utilizing real firearms such as semi-auto pistols (Walther PPK and Mauser C96), sniper rifle (Dragunov SVD) and rocket launcher (RPG-7)); and it also borrows from the &quot;Wizardry&quot; series Oshii played extensively during three years in which he was unemployed in the 1980s.

With these two genres, it shares the common principle of player hierarchy. In Avalon, players are ranked after three levels, Class C, Class B, Class A. Elite Class A players are rumored to be able to play a hidden extra mode featuring different rules and named Class SA (for &quot;Special A&quot;).

To complete levels within the game, players must defeat powerful end-of-level bosses similar to those found in classic video games.

Players wear headsets which immerse their senses in the game world. The design of the headset and chair installation are influenced by the cult French science fiction short film &quot;La jetée&quot;. The headless statues also appear in this 1962 film.

As an interesting first, this film features the appearance of lag, a gameplay error due to network transfer slowdown often encountered in online games. Oshii displays lag as an ailment that causes physical convulsions in the player during these slowdowns.

The scene with Ash in the tramway is a live action recreation of a similar scene appearing in the 1999 anime feature film &quot;Jin-Roh&quot;, which Oshii wrote but did not direct. This scene is based on Oshii&#x27;s own teenage experience, when he used to spend entire days spinning in loop in the Yamanote Line.

== See also ==
* Simulated reality

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* Nine Sisters: Avalon, a UK perspective
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q471839" start="58" end="73" title="Science fiction film" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="74" end="84" title="Drama (film and television)" label="drama film"/>
<link wikidata="Q285084" start="97" end="109" title="Mamoru Oshii" label="Mamoru Oshii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3814183" start="125" end="137" title="Kazunori Itō" label="Kazunori Itō"/>
<link wikidata="Q166271" start="206" end="226" title="Małgorzata Foremniak" label="Małgorzata Foremniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="258" end="273" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799" start="425" end="432" title="Wrocław" label="Wrocław"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433149" start="434" end="443" title="Nowa Huta" label="Nowa Huta"/>
<link wikidata="Q47796" start="449" end="464" title="Modlin Fortress" label="Modlin Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="469" end="475" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808575" start="497" end="510" title="Assault Girls" label="Assault Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q261636" start="564" end="582" title="stand-alone sequel" label="stand-alone sequel"/>
<link wikidata="Q559618" start="599" end="617" title="fictional universe" label="fictional universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q216901" start="692" end="698" title="Avalon" label="Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7140888" start="754" end="761" title="Party (role-playing games)" label="parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046315" start="767" end="773" title="Level (video gaming)" label="levels"/>
<link wikidata="Q604973" start="859" end="875" title="experience point" label="experience point"/>
<link wikidata="Q897410" start="988" end="1017" title="Brain–computer interface" label="interact with Avalon directly"/>
<link wikidata="Q501571" start="1084" end="1093" title="catatonic" label="catatonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q152402" start="1416" end="1422" title="Avatar (computing)" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169279" start="1836" end="1862" title="Permanent death" label="their avatars being killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q7038466" start="2171" end="2195" title="Nine maidens (mythology)" label="&amp;quot;Nine Sisters&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q444316" start="2315" end="2322" title="griefer" label="griefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347898" start="2633" end="2636" title="Lag (video games)" label="lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q468388" start="3694" end="3698" title="Boss (video gaming)" label="boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154089" start="4443" end="4472" title="Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Warsaw Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q166271" start="4964" end="4984" title="Małgorzata Foremniak" label="Małgorzata Foremniak"/>
<link wikidata="Q9381978" start="4994" end="5012" title="Władysław Kowalski (actor)" label="Władysław Kowalski"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="5479" end="5485" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q47796" start="5490" end="5505" title="Modlin Fortress" label="Modlin Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="5507" end="5513" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6651179" start="5742" end="5755" title="Andrez Bergen" label="Andrez Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q645218" start="5811" end="5824" title="Daily Yomiuri" label="Daily Yomiuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q282696" start="6103" end="6122" title="Polish Armed Forces" label="Polish Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q155658" start="6161" end="6165" title="T-72" label="T-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="6176" end="6181" title="Mil Mi-24" label="Mi-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q538736" start="6334" end="6359" title="2001 Cannes Film Festival" label="2001 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q975945" start="6468" end="6503" title="Festival de Cine de Sitges" label="Catalan International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433372" start="6581" end="6594" title="Sci-Fi-London" label="Sci-Fi-London"/>
<link wikidata="Q647578" start="6726" end="6733" title="Copyright infringement" label="bootleg"/>
<link wikidata="Q465449" start="6765" end="6772" title="Miramax" label="Miramax"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="6788" end="6791" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q170519" start="7453" end="7468" title="virtual reality" label="virtual reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="7824" end="7832" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="7874" end="7891" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="7947" end="7967" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q311237" start="8027" end="8038" title="Walther PPK" label="Walther PPK"/>
<link wikidata="Q159527" start="8043" end="8053" title="Mauser C96" label="Mauser C96"/>
<link wikidata="Q159509" start="8070" end="8082" title="Dragunov SVD" label="Dragunov SVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q322660" start="8105" end="8110" title="RPG-7" label="RPG-7"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296879" start="8149" end="8157" title="Wizardry (video game series)" label="Wizardry"/>
<link wikidata="Q451434" start="8874" end="8882" title="La jetée" label="La jetée"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347898" start="9005" end="9008" title="Lag (video games)" label="lag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689499" start="9328" end="9335" title="Jin-Roh" label="Jin-Roh"/>
<link wikidata="Q693036" start="9499" end="9512" title="Yamanote Line" label="Yamanote Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q125547326" start="9532" end="9549" title="Simulated reality" label="Simulated reality"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871577" wikidata="Q3651146" url="?curid=871577" title="Camas prairie">
<text>Camas prairies are found in several different geographical areas in the western United States, and are named for the native perennial camas (&quot;Camassia&quot;). The culturally and scientifically significant of these areas lie within Idaho and Montana. Camas bulbs are an important food source for Native Americans.

==Idaho==
===History===
Named for the blue flowering camas—an important food source for all Native Americans in the interior Northwest—the Camas prairie is a traditional Nez Perce gathering place in north central Idaho.

From the Nez Perce National Historical Park: Camas prairie is interpreted at a highway pullout on the north side of U.S. Highway 95, about six miles (10 km) south of Grangeville. This large prairie was a Nez Perce gathering place, where camas roots were harvested for thousands of years. Several nontreaty bands gathered at Tolo Lake in early June 1877 in anticipation of moving to the Nez Perce reservation. In response to the forced move and other hostile actions, several young Nez Perce people took actions that precipitated the Nez Perce War.

Camas prairies are found over a large area, mostly privately owned, that extends many miles between the Salmon and Clearwater River drainages. Most of the area is agricultural and the northern section is within the Nez Perce Indian Reservation. Similar to the opening of lands in Oklahoma, the U.S. government opened the reservation for white settlement on November 18, 1895. The proclamation had been signed less than two weeks earlier by President Cleveland.

The area was home to the second subdivision of the Camas Prairie Railroad, known as the &quot;railroad on stilts&quot; due to its numerous trestles, most of which were timber. &quot;Breakheart Pass&quot;, a 1975 film starring Charles Bronson, was filmed on portions of the railroad on the Camas prairie. The railroad ceased operations in the late 1990s.

===Communities===

* Cottonwood
* Craigmont
* Fenn
* Ferdinand
* Grangeville
* Greencreek
* Reubens
* Winchester
===Counties===
* Camas County—In southern Idaho
* Idaho County
* Lewis County

===Southern Idaho===
In southern Idaho, east of Mountain Home, the high plain of Camas County around Fairfield is locally called the &quot;Camas Prairie&quot;.

===Protected Areas===
* Camas Prairie Centennial Marsh Wildlife Management Area

==Montana==
The Camas Prairie covers the floor of the Camas Prairie Basin in Sanders County. This basin is a distinct north–south oriented elliptical basin that is drained by Camas Creek into the Flathead River at Perma, Montana. Both the prairie and basin are surrounded by north–south trending mountain ranges except where Camas Creek drains into the Flathead River. The basin is about in dimensions with an area of about . The center of this relatively flat basin lies at elevations just below . The basin is bordered by the Salish Mountains on its eastern side and northern end and bordered by the Cabinet Mountains on its western side. These mountains rise above elevations of .

The Camas prairie region is sparsely populated and lies within the Flathead Indian Reservation. The two main populated places within this region are Camas (Ktunaxa: &quot;ya·qa·kmumaǂki&quot;) and Perma (Ktunaxa: &quot;kxunamaʔnam&quot;)

===Bedrock geology===
The basin in which the Camas prairie lies is a low-relief valley surrounded by mountains composed of metasedimentary strata that belong to the Prichard Formation of the Belt Supergroup. These strata are intensively folded and thrust faulted. The basin is filled with undifferentiated Cenozoic red, greenish, and bluish siltstone and mudstone and volcanic rock. A few sandy and gravelly beds are also present. These strata outcrop at the surface around the perimeter of the basin. Within the basin, they are cover by of Quaternary deposits that accumulated within glacial Lake Missoula.

===Quaternary geology===
The Camas prairie is well known for the large fields of Late Pleistocene giant current ripples that cover a substantial part of its surface. They were created during one of the many times when glacial Lake Missoula drained when its ice dam failed. From the northern edge of the Camas Basin, the fields of giant current ripples extend south (downcurrent) from four mountain passes that were once submerge inlets into the flooded Camas Basin. Southward, these fields of giant current ripples spread out and merge on the basin floor. These sedimentary bedforms are best seen in aerial images and at low sun angles.

These giant current ripples are large-to-very-large subaqueous gravel dunes and antidunes. Although they once covered a significantly larger area, they cover about of the Camas prairie basin. The wavelength of these dunes and antidunes ranges from and their height ranges from . They are all two-dimensional, flow transverse, sinuous, sedimentary bedforms. The wavelength and height of these giant current ripples decrease away (downcurrent) from the former inlets. Correspondingly, the size of the gravels comprising them decreases south (downcurrent) from boulder and cobble gravels to pebble gravels. Their foreset bedding is poorly defined and their dip varies from 14 to 23 degrees. In addition to the gravel dunes and antidunes, delta-like, expansion bars accumulated below each of the former subaqueous inlets. They consist of foreset beds that consist of boulder-cobble-pebble gravels.

The Pleistocene deposits and bedforms in the basin have not been dated using radiometric dating methods. The lack of absolute dates prevents the construction of a reliable geochronology for Lake Missoula lake drainage events in the Camas prairie basin and correlation of the giant current ripples with bedforms and sedimentary deposits outside of it.

The exposed gravel deposits underlying the giant current ripples at Camas prairie exhibit at least two beds of gravelly deposits that are indicative of deposition by separate Missoula floods. They are separated by an erosional unconformity with a buried and dismembered calcrete, carbonate soil horizon. The calcrete is thick. It provides empirical evidence of at least two separate periods of giant current ripple activity and associated with separate Missoula Floods that occurred thousands of years apart based the thickness and development of the calcrete.

The giant current ripples of the Camas prairie are analogous to similar giant Pleistocene bedforms described form Channeled Scablands of Washington. They are identical to the giant subaqueous bedrooms that formed on the bottom of Lake Kuray-Chuya during the Altai flood in Siberia, Russia. These giant bedforms, which are rare or unknown outside of theoretical and experimental studies, preserved a unique record of the paleohydraulology of a Missoula Flood associated with the catastrophic emptying of Lake Missoula.

==See also==
* Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trail
* Palouse prairie

==References==
==External links==
* Visit North Central Idaho – Camas Prairie
* Eye of Idaho – Around Camas Prairie
* Idaho Public TV – Camas Prairie Railroad
* Historical Museum at St. Gertrude
* Monastery of St. Gertrude
* Glacial Lake Missoula.org – Camas prairie ripple marks in Montana
* National Park Service—Nez Perce
* U.S. Forest Service—Nez Perce</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3651146" start="0" end="14" title="Camas prairie" label="Camas prairies"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="124" end="133" title="Perennial plant" label="perennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1810294" start="147" end="155" title="Camassia" label="Camassia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="236" end="241" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="246" end="253" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q188748" start="261" end="266" title="bulbs" label="bulbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123923" start="489" end="498" title="Nez Perce people" label="Nez Perce"/>
<link wikidata="Q7054746" start="518" end="537" title="North Central Idaho" label="north central Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983993" start="549" end="583" title="Nez Perce National Historical Park" label="Nez Perce National Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q843302" start="656" end="671" title="U.S. Route 95 in Idaho" label="U.S. Highway 95"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516646" start="706" end="717" title="Grangeville, Idaho" label="Grangeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456086" start="1073" end="1086" title="Nez Perce War" label="Nez Perce War"/>
<link wikidata="Q601853" start="1193" end="1199" title="Salmon River (Idaho)" label="Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099574" start="1204" end="1220" title="Clearwater River (Idaho)" label="Clearwater River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1304" end="1332" title="Nez Perce people#Nez Perce Indian Reservation" label="Nez Perce Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="1369" end="1377" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q35171" start="1539" end="1548" title="Grover Cleveland" label="Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024998" start="1602" end="1624" title="Camas Prairie Railroad" label="Camas Prairie Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q653401" start="1690" end="1698" title="Trestle bridge" label="trestles"/>
<link wikidata="Q940186" start="1733" end="1748" title="Breakheart Pass (1975 film)" label="Breakheart Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q167006" start="1758" end="1762" title="1975 in film" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q36105" start="1777" end="1792" title="Charles Bronson" label="Charles Bronson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517328" start="1927" end="1937" title="Cottonwood, Idaho" label="Cottonwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q588273" start="1940" end="1949" title="Craigmont, Idaho" label="Craigmont"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443513" start="1952" end="1956" title="Fenn, Idaho" label="Fenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512033" start="1959" end="1968" title="Ferdinand, Idaho" label="Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516646" start="1971" end="1982" title="Grangeville, Idaho" label="Grangeville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603799" start="1985" end="1995" title="Greencreek, Idaho" label="Greencreek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509854" start="1998" end="2005" title="Reubens, Idaho" label="Reubens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511332" start="2008" end="2018" title="Winchester, Idaho" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q486054" start="2036" end="2048" title="Camas County, Idaho" label="Camas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q494480" start="2069" end="2081" title="Idaho County, Idaho" label="Idaho County"/>
<link wikidata="Q491073" start="2084" end="2096" title="Lewis County, Idaho" label="Lewis County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519589" start="2146" end="2159" title="Mountain Home, Idaho" label="Mountain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q486054" start="2179" end="2191" title="Camas County, Idaho" label="Camas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516625" start="2199" end="2208" title="Fairfield, Idaho" label="Fairfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5024997" start="2283" end="2338" title="Camas Prairie Centennial Marsh Wildlife Management Area" label="Camas Prairie Centennial Marsh Wildlife Management Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q490734" start="2417" end="2431" title="Sanders County, Montana" label="Sanders County"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="2438" end="2443" title="Drainage basin" label="basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q268532" start="2536" end="2550" title="Flathead River" label="Flathead River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404845" start="2868" end="2884" title="Salish Mountains" label="Salish Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015465" start="2942" end="2959" title="Cabinet Mountains" label="Cabinet Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q503543" start="3092" end="3119" title="Flathead Indian Reservation" label="Flathead Indian Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5741753" start="3174" end="3179" title="Camas, Montana" label="Camas"/>
<link wikidata="Q33434" start="3181" end="3188" title="Kutenai language" label="Ktunaxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q490734" start="3222" end="3227" title="Perma, Montana" label="Perma"/>
<link wikidata="Q33434" start="3229" end="3236" title="Kutenai language" label="Ktunaxa"/>
<link wikidata="Q99731758" start="3387" end="3402" title="Metasedimentary rock" label="metasedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q12758989" start="3403" end="3409" title="strata" label="strata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4884706" start="3455" end="3470" title="Belt Supergroup" label="Belt Supergroup"/>
<link wikidata="Q81659" start="3501" end="3507" title="Fold (geology)" label="folded"/>
<link wikidata="Q47089" start="3519" end="3526" title="Fault (geology)" label="faulted"/>
<link wikidata="Q102416" start="3570" end="3578" title="Cenozoic" label="Cenozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q565731" start="3605" end="3614" title="siltstone" label="siltstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642424" start="3619" end="3627" title="mudstone" label="mudstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="3632" end="3645" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="3653" end="3657" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="3663" end="3669" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q531953" start="3708" end="3715" title="outcrop" label="outcrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="3805" end="3815" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q35666" start="3849" end="3856" title="glacial" label="glacial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801015" start="3857" end="3870" title="Lake Missoula" label="Lake Missoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="3959" end="3970" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4137986" start="3971" end="3992" title="giant current ripples" label="giant current ripples"/>
<link wikidata="Q133833" start="4574" end="4580" title="gravel" label="gravel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25391" start="4581" end="4585" title="dune" label="dune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774698" start="4591" end="4599" title="antidune" label="antidune"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="4846" end="4857" title="sedimentary" label="sedimentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879253" start="4858" end="4865" title="bedform" label="bedform"/>
<link wikidata="Q581776" start="5069" end="5076" title="boulder" label="boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527595" start="5081" end="5087" title="Cobble (geology)" label="cobble"/>
<link wikidata="Q806617" start="5129" end="5136" title="Bed (geology)" label="bedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5988006" start="5165" end="5168" title="Strike and dip" label="dip"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="5246" end="5256" title="River delta" label="delta-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q478251" start="5268" end="5272" title="Bar (river morphology)" label="bars"/>
<link wikidata="Q214753" start="5483" end="5501" title="radiometric dating" label="radiometric dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q332423" start="5523" end="5537" title="Absolute dating" label="absolute dates"/>
<link wikidata="Q213891" start="5578" end="5591" title="geochronology" label="geochronology"/>
<link wikidata="Q806617" start="5861" end="5865" title="Bed (geology)" label="beds"/>
<link wikidata="Q876798" start="5985" end="5997" title="unconformity" label="unconformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q558947" start="6028" end="6036" title="calcrete" label="calcrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985186" start="6854" end="6892" title="Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trail" label="Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q128038" start="6895" end="6902" title="Palouse" label="Palouse"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871579" wikidata="Q905049" url="?curid=871579" title="Shire (pharmaceutical company)">
<text>Shire plc was a UK-founded Jersey-registered specialty biopharmaceutical company. Originating in the United Kingdom with an operational base in the United States, its brands and products included Vyvanse, Lialda, and Adderall XR. Shire was acquired by Takeda Pharmaceutical Company on 8 January 2019.

Shire was a global biotechnology company focused on serving people with rare diseases and other highly specialized conditions. The company&#x27;s products were available in more than 100 countries across core therapeutic areas including Hematology, Immunology, Neuroscience, Lysosomal Storage Disorders, Gastrointestinal / Internal Medicine / Endocrine and Hereditary Angioedema; a growing franchise in Oncology; and an emerging, innovative pipeline in Ophthalmics.

The original corporate headquarters was located in Basingstoke, Hampshire, England. Main offices are located in Dublin, Ireland, the United States in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and Chicago, Illinois, and in Zug, Switzerland. In addition, Shire owns manufacturing sites in Lexington, Massachusetts, and Social Circle, Georgia. Shire&#x27;s headquarters in Lexington, Massachusetts, will be integrated with Takeda&#x27;s new U.S. headquarters, which is being relocated from Deerfield, Illinois, to the Boston area.

==History==
===Early history===

Shire was founded in 1986 in the UK by five entrepreneurs: Harry Stratford, Dennis Stephens, Peter Moriarty, Geoff Hall and Dr Jim Murray. Under the management of Rolf Stahel, Shire was first listed on the London Stock Exchange in 1996. Shire&#x27;s initial products were calcium supplements (Calcichew-D3) for patients seeking to treat or prevent osteoporosis. In 1997 the company acquired Pharmavene for £105 million in order to access Pharmavene&#x27;s drug delivery methods. Later in the same year Shire acquired Richwood Pharmaceutical Company, forming Shire-Richwood Inc.

===2000 to 2009===
In 2001 the company acquired Biochem Canada. Shire&#x27;s next acquisition didn&#x27;t come until 2005 when it acquired Transkaryotic Therapeutics and two years later – in 2007 – New River Pharmaceuticals Inc, for a then company record of $2.6 billion. With the purchase of New River, Shire gained access and ownership of Vyvanse. A year later the company acquired the German company Jerini, for $521 million. Jerini focused on treating hereditary angioedema.

In 2008, in reaction to new taxation measures announced by the UK government in the treatment of royalties on patents, the company moved its tax domicile to Dublin, Ireland.

=== 2010 onwards ===
2010 saw a change in company strategy, with the company seeking to expand through mergers and acquisitions - culminating in the company becoming one of the most acquisitive in the industry. In 2010 the company acquired Movetis, a Belgian company focusing on gastrointestinal products for $565 million, a year later it acquired regenerative medicine manufacturer Advanced BioHealing. In 2012 the company acquired FerroKin BioSciences for $325 million along with FerroKins lead iron chelator - FBS0701. 2013 saw the company complete its highest number of acquisitions with Lotus Tissue Repair, Inc. (lead compound, ABH001), SARcode Bioscience Inc., with the last being ViroPharma. Shire changed the name of ViroPharma to Shire Viropharma Inc. upon acquisition and on their final day of trading the company was valued at $3.3 billion. At $4.2 billion, ViroPharma set a new company record. In 2014 Shire acquired two rare disease drug companies: Fibrotech with its antifibrotic compounds for $75 million, and Lumena, a company researching rare gastro-intestinal and hepatic compounds, for $260 million.

In 2015, NPS Pharmaceuticals was acquired for $5.2 billion, bringing along its rare disease drugs Gattex and Natpara. On their final day of trading, NPS had a market capitalisation of $4.99 billion. The company also acquired, later in the same year, Meritage Pharma for $245 million, Foresight Biotherapeutics for $300 million and Dyax for $6.5 billion. The purchases bolstered Shires gastro-intestinal and rare disease sectors, with Phase-III-ready treatment - Budesonide - for the treatment of eosinophilic esophagitis. As well as expanding the company&#x27;s pipeline with a late-stage treatment candidate for infectious conjunctivitis with lead candidate FST-100 and increasing the company&#x27;s rare disease catalogue with Dyax&#x27;s portfolio of plasma kallikrein inhibitors against hereditary angioedema (led by the approved drug Kalbitor and the Phase III DX-2930). In January 2016, the company made its most significant purchase, with the $32 billion acquisition of Baxalta (which had been spun-off from Baxter the previous year), creating the largest global biotech company focused solely on rare diseases.

In April 2018, Shire agreed to sell its oncology business to French pharmaceutical company Servier
for £1.7billion.

====Aborted AbbVie takeover====
On 20 June 2014, Shire rejected a takeover attempt by AbbVie. AbbVie offered £46.11 per share (£27.3 billion or $46.5 billion in total). On 8 July, the offer was increased to $51.5 billion. On 18 July, it was announced that AbbVie would acquire Shire for $54.8 billion. On 15 October, news broke suggesting AbbVie was reconsidering their proposed takeover deal due to changes in US &quot;Tax Inversion&quot; law and on 16 October AbbVie&#x27;s board recommended that shareholders vote against the deal. This news sent Shire&#x27;s share price down over 27%; however, AbbVie would be subject to a $1.6 billion break-up fee, payable to Shire. On 21 October, the merger was called off.

====Takeda takeover====
In April 2018, reported that Takeda Pharmaceutical Company had an approach to acquire Shire. Days later Shire announced they had rejected all three Takeda bids. The first bid valued the business at £41 billion (£28 per Shire shares paid in Takeda shares plus £16 per share in cash), the second £43 billion (£28.75 per Shire shares paid in Takeda shares plus £16.75 per share in cash) and the third £44 billion (£28 per Shire shares paid in Takeda shares plus £17.75 per share in cash). Reuters also reported interest from Allergan however they ruled themselves out a day later. A day later Takeda increased their offer with a fourth bid, to £26 per Shire shares paid in Takeda shares plus £21 per share in cash - giving a total value of £44.3 billion ($62.1 billion). On 24 April, Takeda submitted an enhanced fifth bid for the company. On 25 April, Shire said that they will recommend the revised £45.8 billion ($64 billion) offer to their shareholders. The enhanced offer included a more generous cash component, with the deal offering £21.76 ($30.33) in cash for each Shire ordinary share. The same day, GlaxoSmithKline ruled out making any form of counter-bid. On 8 May 2018, an agreement was finally reached in which Shire was sold to Takeda in a $62 billion deal. Takeda&#x27;s acquisition of Shire closed on 8 January 2019.

==Acquisition history==
*Shire Plc 
**Pharmavene 
**Richwood Pharmaceutical Company 
**Biochem Canada 
**Transkaryotic Therapeutics 
**New River Pharmaceuticals Inc 
**Jerini 
**Movetis 
**Advanced BioHealing 
**FerroKin BioSciences 
**Lotus Tissue Repair, Inc 
**Premacure AB 
**SARcode Bioscience Inc 
**ViroPharma 
***Lev Pharmaceuticals 
**Fibrotech 
**Lumena 
**NPS Pharmaceuticals 
**Meritage Pharma 
**Foresight Biotherapeutics 
**Dyax 
**Baxalta 

==Products==
The Annual Revenue figures in the following table were drawn from the company&#x27;s 2015 preliminary results.


===Licences &amp; Royalties===
In July 2014, Shire licensed the rights to the investigational Hunter syndrome compound, AGT-182, from ArmaGen for up to $225 million.

The Annual Revenue figures in the following Table were drawn from the company&#x27;s 2015 preliminary results.
==Corporate leadership==
Flemming Ørnskov, was the company&#x27;s chief executive officer through 8 January 2019 with Takeda&#x27;s acquisition of Shire. Ginger Gregory as chief human resources officer, Jeffrey Poulton as CFO, and Philip Vickers as head of R&amp;D. James Bowling vacated his position as interim CFO in the aftermath of the collapse of the AbbVie inversion deal. The chair of Shire&#x27;s board of directors was Susan Kilsby.

==Legal issues==

===False Claims Act violations===
In September 2014, Shire reached a $56.5 million settlement with the U.S. Department of Justice for alleged violations of the False Claims Act. The Justice Department alleged that Shire had improperly marketed and promoted Adderall XR, Daytrana, Vyvane, Pentasa, and Lialda during various periods between 2004 and 2010. The allegations included claims that Shire had made exaggerated and false statements regarding product safety, promoted medications for non-FDA approved off-label use, and marketed products on unsubstantiated claims of beneficial side effects, including reductions in criminality, traffic accidents, sexually transmitted infections, and divorce rates.

===Illegal promotion of Dermagraft===
In August 2017, Shire reached a $350 million settlement with the Department of Justice for violations of the same act, regarding the unlawful promotion of Shire&#x27;s product Dermagraft.

==See also==

* Pharmaceutical industry in the United Kingdom
*Takeda Pharmaceuticals

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q905049" start="0" end="9" title="Shire (pharmaceutical company)" label="Shire plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="16" end="18" title="UK" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="27" end="33" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="101" end="115" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558704" start="196" end="203" title="Vyvanse" label="Vyvanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q412479" start="205" end="211" title="Lialda" label="Lialda"/>
<link wikidata="Q935761" start="217" end="228" title="Adderall XR" label="Adderall XR"/>
<link wikidata="Q899133" start="252" end="281" title="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company" label="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108" start="321" end="334" title="biotechnology" label="biotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q103824" start="539" end="549" title="Hematology" label="Hematology"/>
<link wikidata="Q101929" start="551" end="561" title="Immunology" label="Immunology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="563" end="575" title="Neuroscience" label="Neuroscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q675010" start="577" end="604" title="Lysosomal storage disorders" label="Lysosomal Storage Disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300099" start="606" end="622" title="Gastrointestinal disease" label="Gastrointestinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11180" start="625" end="642" title="Internal medicine" label="Internal Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q27724588" start="755" end="766" title="Ophthalmic Surgery, Lasers and Imaging Retina" label="Ophthalmics"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="820" end="831" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="881" end="887" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="919" end="928" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="949" end="956" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q68144" start="975" end="991" title="Zug" label="Zug, Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q929667" start="1040" end="1049" title="Lexington, Massachusetts" label="Lexington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852917" start="1070" end="1083" title="Social Circle, Georgia" label="Social Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q287895" start="1240" end="1259" title="Deerfield, Illinois" label="Deerfield, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5672654" start="1374" end="1389" title="Harry Stratford" label="Harry Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q905049" start="1478" end="1489" title="Rolf Stahel" label="Rolf Stahel"/>
<link wikidata="Q171240" start="1521" end="1542" title="London Stock Exchange" label="London Stock Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q24896686" start="1608" end="1620" title="Calcichew-D3" label="Calcichew-D3"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="1663" end="1675" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558704" start="2235" end="2242" title="Vyvanse" label="Vyvanse"/>
<link wikidata="Q319924" start="2297" end="2303" title="Jerini" label="Jerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096745" start="2350" end="2371" title="hereditary angioedema" label="hereditary angioedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="2531" end="2537" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079535" start="2789" end="2796" title="Movetis" label="Movetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377716" start="2800" end="2807" title="Belgians" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061415" start="2897" end="2918" title="regenerative medicine" label="regenerative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934840" start="3237" end="3247" title="ViroPharma" label="ViroPharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7694156" start="3768" end="3774" title="Gattex" label="Gattex"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059563" start="3779" end="3786" title="Natpara" label="Natpara"/>
<link wikidata="Q422212" start="4132" end="4142" title="Budesonide" label="Budesonide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2057356" start="4166" end="4190" title="eosinophilic esophagitis" label="eosinophilic esophagitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q423285" start="4431" end="4441" title="kallikrein" label="kallikrein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129007" start="4472" end="4482" title="angioedema" label="angioedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280166" start="4509" end="4517" title="Kalbitor" label="Kalbitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q21970569" start="4647" end="4654" title="Baxalta" label="Baxalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186164" start="4671" end="4679" title="Corporate spin-off" label="spun-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q761965" start="4685" end="4691" title="Baxter International" label="Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4851" end="4857" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q907487" start="4881" end="4888" title="Laboratoires Servier" label="Servier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14662364" start="4993" end="4999" title="AbbVie" label="AbbVie"/>
<link wikidata="Q899133" start="5676" end="5705" title="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company" label="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q906187" start="6169" end="6177" title="Allergan" label="Allergan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212322" start="6754" end="6769" title="GlaxoSmithKline" label="GlaxoSmithKline"/>
<link wikidata="Q899133" start="6887" end="6893" title="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company" label="Takeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q905049" start="7004" end="7013" title="Shire Plc" label="Shire Plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q319924" start="7147" end="7153" title="Jerini" label="Jerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7934840" start="7285" end="7295" title="ViroPharma" label="ViroPharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q21970569" start="7425" end="7432" title="Baxalta" label="Baxalta"/>
<link wikidata="Q16733839" start="7864" end="7880" title="Flemming Ørnskov" label="Flemming Ørnskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="7905" end="7928" title="chief executive officer" label="chief executive officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467169" start="8017" end="8032" title="human resources" label="human resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q623268" start="8061" end="8064" title="Chief financial officer" label="CFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="8096" end="8103" title="Research and development" label="R&amp;amp;D"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="8403" end="8429" title="U.S. Department of Justice" label="U.S. Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064815" start="8460" end="8476" title="False Claims Act" label="False Claims Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="8794" end="8797" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12198" start="8954" end="8985" title="sexually transmitted infections" label="sexually transmitted infections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7180755" start="9250" end="9295" title="Pharmaceutical industry in the United Kingdom" label="Pharmaceutical industry in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q899133" start="9297" end="9319" title="Takeda Pharmaceuticals" label="Takeda Pharmaceuticals"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="871584" wikidata="Q7113270" url="?curid=871584" title="Ovation Pharmaceuticals">
<text>Ovation Pharmaceuticals is an American manufacturer and distributor of pharmaceuticals products. It was founded in 2000 by Jeffrey Aronin and is headquartered in Deerfield, Illinois. A major office is also located near Lebanon, New Jersey. Ovation is a privately held corporation based on a business model of acquiring mature but under-promoted pharmaceuticals, as well as pharmaceutical candidates which are far along the development and FDA certification processes. Since 2009, the company has been wholly owned by the Danish pharmaceutical company Lundbeck.

In 2007, Ovation Pharmaceuticals was a recipient of the 2007 Chicago Innovation Awards.

==Products==
The company particularly focuses on niche drugs for small patient populations. Products include the ADHD medicine, Desoxyn (brand name for methamphetamine hydrochloride), and vigabatrin, an anticonvulsant that inhibits the catabolism of GABA and is indicated for epilepsy and substance abuse.

==Purchases==
In 2003, Sanofi sold its interests in stanozolol, Methylphenobarbital, and Dimercaptosuccinic acid to Ovation.

In March 2009, Lundbeck purchased Ovation for $600 million in cash, with further payments of up to $300 million based on regulatory approvals for vigabatrin (Sabril), which was under development at the time.

==Controversy==
In 2008, the Federal Trade Commission sued Ovation in Minnesota federal district court over its 2006 acquisition of NeoProfen, a treatment for a congenital heart defect in newborns known as patent ductus arteriosus. Ovation already owned Indocin IV, the only other drug used for this condition. Upon acquiring the only competitor for Indocin IV, Ovation raised the price of both drugs by 1,300 percent, from $36 per vial to nearly $500 per vial. The dramatic price increase was the subject of a 2008 Congressional hearing. In 2010, a district court judge ruled that the FTC had not proved its case.

==References==
==External links==
* Ovation Pharmaceuticals Web site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7113270" start="0" end="23" title="Ovation Pharmaceuticals" label="Ovation Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="71" end="85" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q17518811" start="123" end="137" title="Jeff Aronin" label="Jeffrey Aronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q287895" start="162" end="181" title="Deerfield, Illinois" label="Deerfield, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083772" start="219" end="238" title="Lebanon, New Jersey" label="Lebanon, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="439" end="442" title="Food and drug administration" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q902171" start="551" end="559" title="Lundbeck" label="Lundbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q181923" start="764" end="768" title="ADHD" label="ADHD"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="779" end="786" title="Desoxyn" label="Desoxyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="803" end="818" title="methamphetamine" label="methamphetamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q421663" start="839" end="849" title="vigabatrin" label="vigabatrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21130714" start="887" end="897" title="catabolism" label="catabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="901" end="905" title="GABA" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="927" end="935" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q158205" start="981" end="987" title="Sanofi" label="Sanofi"/>
<link wikidata="Q417219" start="1010" end="1020" title="stanozolol" label="stanozolol"/>
<link wikidata="Q411697" start="1022" end="1041" title="Methylphenobarbital" label="Methylphenobarbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q423814" start="1047" end="1070" title="Dimercaptosuccinic acid" label="Dimercaptosuccinic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q421663" start="1230" end="1240" title="vigabatrin" label="vigabatrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072063" start="1499" end="1523" title="patent ductus arteriosus" label="patent ductus arteriosus"/>
</links>
</doc>
